                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     COGNITIVE BIASES:
                                MISTAKES OR MISSING STAKES?

                                            Benjamin Enke
                                              Uri Gneezy
                                               Brian Hall
                                            David C. Martin
                                            Vadim Nelidov
                                             Theo Offerman
                                           Jeroen van de Ven

                                         Working Paper 28650
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28650


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2021




We thank three very constructive referees, Thomas Graeber and Florian Zimmermann for helpful comments.
The experiments in this paper received IRB approval from Harvard's IRB. This study was funded
using Hall's research funds from Harvard Business School. For excellent research assistance we are
grateful to Tiffany Chang, Davis Heniford, and Karim Sameh. We are also grateful to the staff at the
Busara Center for Behavioral Economics for dedicated support in implementing the experiments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Benjamin Enke, Uri Gneezy, Brian Hall, David C. Martin, Vadim Nelidov, Theo Offerman,
and Jeroen van de Ven. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cognitive Biases: Mistakes or Missing Stakes?
Benjamin Enke, Uri Gneezy, Brian Hall, David C. Martin, Vadim Nelidov, Theo Offerman, and
Jeroen van de Ven
NBER Working Paper No. 28650
April 2021
JEL No. D01,D03

                                          ABSTRACT

Despite decades of research on heuristics and biases, empirical evidence on the effect of large
incentives ­ as present in relevant economic decisions ­ on cognitive biases is scant. This paper
tests the effect of incentives on four widely documented biases: base rate neglect, anchoring,
failure of contingent thinking, and intuitive reasoning in the Cognitive Reflection Test. In
laboratory experiments with 1,236 college students in Nairobi, we implement three incentive
levels: no incentives, standard lab payments, and very high incentives that increase the stakes by
a factor of 100 to more than a monthly income. We find that response times ­ a proxy for
cognitive effort ­ increase by 40% with very high stakes. Performance, on the other hand,
improves very mildly or not at all as incentives increase, with the largest improvements due to a
reduced reliance on intuitions. In none of the tasks are very high stakes sufficient to de-bias
participants, or come even close to doing so.

Benjamin Enke                                   Vadim Nelidov
Department of Economics                         University of Amsterdam
Harvard University                              Amsterdam
Littauer M008                                   vadimnelidov@gmail.com
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                        Theo Offerman
enke@fas.harvard.edu                            University of Amsterdam
                                                Amsterdam
Uri Gneezy                                      t.j.s.offerman@uva.nl
Rady School of Management
University of California - San Diego            Jeroen van de Ven
Otterson Hall, Room 4S136                       University of Amsterdam
9500 Gilman Drive #0553                         Amsterdam
La Jolla, CA 92093-0553                         j.vandeven@uva.nl
ugneezy@ucsd.edu

Brian Hall
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 185
Boston, MA 02163
bhall@hbs.edu

David C. Martin
Harvard University
david_martin@fas.harvard.edu
1    Introduction

Starting with Tversky and Kahneman (1974), the "heuristics and biases" program has

occupied psychologists and behavioral economists for nearly half a century. In a nutshell,

this voluminous and influential line of work has documented the existence and robust-

ness of a large number of systematic errors ­ "cognitive biases" ­ in decision-making.

    In studying these biases, psychologists often use hypothetical scenarios. Experimen-

tal economists criticize the lack of incentives, and use payments that amount to a couple

of hours of wages for the students participating in order to motivate them to put effort

into the task. Yet, non-experimental economists often raise concerns in response to find-

ings based on such incentives, arguing that people will exert more effort in high-powered

decisions, so that cognitive biases may be irrelevant for understanding real-world behav-

ior. In other words, just like experimental economists criticize psychologists for not in-

centivizing at all, non-experimental economists often criticize experimental economists

for using fairly small incentives. As Thaler (1986) states in his discussion of ways in

which economists dismiss experimental findings: "If the stakes are large enough, people

will get it right. This comment is usually offered as a rebuttal. . . but is also, of course, an

empirical question. Do people tend to make better decisions when the stakes are high?"

    This empirical question is relevant for two reasons. First, as noted by Thaler, a rele-

vant issue is to understand whether systematic departures from the rational economic

model are likely to appear only in the many small-stakes decisions that we make, or

also in decisions with high-powered incentives and large financial implications. Such

understanding can inform our modeling of important real-life decisions. Second, it is

of interest to understand the mechanisms behind cognitive biases. For example, a very

active recent theoretical and experimental literature attempts to identify the extent to

which different biases are generated by micro-foundations such as incorrect mental mod-

els, memory imperfections, or limited attention, where low effort often features as one

of the prime candidates.

    Of course, documenting the relevance of the heuristics and biases program for high-


                                               1
powered real economic decisions has been on behavioral economists' to-do list for almost

40 years, and the empirical literature indeed contains many demonstrations that behav-

ioral insights matter under high incentives (see references below). At the same time,

perhaps somewhat surprisingly, systematic empirical evidence that carefully compares

the presence of cognitive biases under small and very large incentives is scant.

    The current paper targets this gap in the literature. We conduct systematic tests of

the effects of incentive size, and in particular the effects of very large incentives, on

four well-documented biases that are frequently studied by behavioral economists. Our

design has three pay levels: no incentives, relatively small incentives that amount to

standard laboratory pay, and very high incentives that are 100 times larger than the

standard stake size and equivalent to more than one month's income for our participants.

    We apply these stake-size variations to the following well-established biases: base

rate neglect (BRN); anchoring; failure of contingent thinking in the Wason selection

task; and intuitive reasoning in the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT). Our interest in this

paper is not so much in these biases per se, but rather in the effects of varying the stake

size. We therefore selected these particular biases subject to the following criteria: (i) the

tasks that underlie these biases have an objectively correct answer; (ii) the biases are cog-

nitive in nature, rather than preference-based; (iii) standard experimental instructions

to measure these biases are short and simple, which helps rule out confusion resulting

from complex instructions; and (iv) these biases all have received much attention and

ample experimental scrutiny in the literature. ¹ An added benefit of including the CRT in

our set of tasks is that it allows us to gauge the role of intuitions in generating cognitive

biases: if it were true that higher stakes and effort reduced biases in the CRT but not
     ¹ Base rate neglect is one of the most prominent and widely studied biases in belief updating (Grether,
1980, 1992; Camerer, 1987; Benjamin, 2019). Anchoring has likewise received much attention, with
widely cited papers such as Ariely et al. (2003); Epley and Gilovich (2006); Chapman and Johnson (2002).
Contingent reasoning has been studied in the psychology of judgment for many decades (e.g., Bazerman
and Samuelson, 1983; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Cheng and Holyoak, 1985; Cosmides, 1989) and is a very
active subject of study in the current literature, as it appears to manifest in different errors in statistical rea-
soning (Esponda and Vespa, 2014, 2016; Enke, 2020; Enke and Zimmermann, 2019; Martínez-Marquina
et al., 2019). Finally, intuitive reasoning in the CRT is a widely implemented cognitive test in behav-
ioral economics, at least partly because it is strongly correlated with many behavioral anomalies from the
heuristics and biases program (Frederick, 2005; Hoppe and Kusterer, 2011; Toplak et al., 2011; Oechssler
et al., 2009).


                                                        2
otherwise, then other biases are less likely to be primarily generated by intuitions and

a lack of deliberative thinking.

   Because there is a discussion in the literature about the frequency of cognitive biases

in abstractly vs. intuitively framed problems (Cheng and Holyoak, 1985; Gigerenzer

and Hoffrage, 1995), we implement two cognitive tasks (base rate neglect and the Wa-

son selection task aimed at studying contingent thinking) in both a relatively abstract

and a relatively intuitive frame. Entirely abstract frames present only the elements of a

problem that are necessary to solve it, without further context. More intuitive frames

present a problem with a context intended to help people to relate it to their daily life

experiences. In total, we implement our three incentive conditions with six types of

tasks: abstract base rate neglect, intuitive base rate neglect, anchoring, abstract Wason

selection task, intuitive Wason selection task, and the CRT.

   We run our experiments with a total of N = 1, 236 college students in the Busara

Center for Behavioral Economics in Nairobi, Kenya. We selected this lab to run our ex-

periments because of the lab's ability to recruit a large number of analytically capable

students for whom our large-stakes treatment is equal to more than a month's worth

of income. Participants are recruited among students of the University of Nairobi, the

largest and most prestigious public university in Kenya. While this sample is different

from the types of samples that are typically studied in laboratory experiments, the aver-

age CRT scores of these participants are similar to those reported in a large meta-study

with predominantly U.S. and European-based populations (Brañas-Garza et al., 2019).

   The focus of our paper is the comparison between high stakes and standard stakes.

At the same time, ideally we would also like to gather meaningful information on partic-

ipants' behavior without any financial incentives. To achieve this objective while at the

same time maintain high statistical power with a given budget, we implemented three

payment levels (no, standard and high stakes) but only two randomized treatment con-

ditions. In the first part of the experiment, each subject completes the questions for a

randomly selected bias without any incentives. Then, the possibility of earning a bonus



                                            3
in the second part of the experiment is mentioned. In this second part, subjects are ran-

domized into high or standard incentives for a cognitive bias that is different from the

one in the first part. Thus, treatment assignment between standard and high stakes is

random, yet we still have a meaningful benchmark for behavior without incentives from

the first part of the experiment.

   In the two financially incentivized conditions, the maximum bonus is 130 KSh ($1.30)

and 13,000 KSh ($130). Median monthly income and consumption in our sample are

in the range of 10,000­12,000 KSh, so that the high stakes condition offers a bonus of

more than 100% of monthly income and consumption. As a second point of compari-

son, note that our standard and high incentive levels correspond to about $23.50 and

$2,350 at purchasing power parity in the United States. We chose experimental pro-

cedures that make these incentive payments both salient and credible. We deliberately

selected the Busara lab for implementation of our experiments because the lab follows a

strict no-deception rule. In addition, both the written and the oral instructions highlight

that all information that is provided in the experimental instructions is true and that all

consequences of subjects' actions will happen as described. Finally, the computer screen

that immediately precedes the main decision tasks reminds subjects of the possibility of

earning a given bonus size.

   We find that, across all of our six tasks, response times ­ our proxy for cognitive

effort ­ are virtually identical with no incentives and standard lab incentives. On the

other hand, response times increase by about 40% in the very high incentive condition,

and this increase is similar across all tasks. Thus, there appears to be a significant effect of

incentives on cognitive effort that could in principle translate into substantial reductions

in the frequency of observed biases.

   There are at least two ex ante plausible hypotheses about the effect of financial in-

centives on biases. A first is that cognitive biases are largely driven by low motivation,

so that the increase in effort that we observe should go a long way towards debiasing

people. An alternative hypothesis is that cognitive biases reflect the high difficulty of



                                               4
rational reasoning and / or high cognitive effort costs, so that even very large incentives

will not dramatically improve performance.

    Looking at the frequency of biases across incentive levels, our headline result is that

cognitive biases are largely, and almost always entirely, unresponsive to stakes. In five

out of our six tasks, the frequency of errors is statistically indistinguishable between

standard and very large incentives, and in five tasks it is statistically indistinguishable

between standard and no incentives. Given our large sample size, these "null results"

are relatively precisely estimated: across the different tasks, we can statistically rule out

performance increases of more than 3­18 percentage points (based on 95% confidence

intervals). In none of the tasks did cognitive biases disappear, and even with very large

incentives the error rates range between 40% and 90%. We further document that high

incentives generally do not reduce the frequency of specific well-known decision heuris-

tics.

    The only task in which very large incentives produce statistically significant perfor-

mance improvements is the CRT. We also find some mildly suggestive evidence that

stakes matter more in the intuitive versions of base rate neglect and the Wason task.

A plausible interpretation of these patterns is that increased incentives reduce reliance

on intuitions, yet some problems are sufficiently complex for people that the binding

constraint is not low effort and reliance on intuitions but instead a lack of conceptual

problem solving skills. Our correlational follow-up analyses are in line with such an inter-

pretation: the within-treatment correlations between cognitive effort and performance

are always very small, suggesting that it is not only effort per se but at least partially

"the right way of looking at a problem" that matters for cognitive biases. In addition,

participants appear to exhibit some awareness that increased effort does not necessarily

translate into better performance: in non-incentivized confidence questions at the end

of the experiment, participants indicated almost identical levels of confidence across

treatment conditions.

    Our results contrast with the predictions of a sample of 68 researchers, drawn from



                                             5
professional experimental economists and Harvard students with exposure to graduate-

level experimental economics. These researchers predict that performance will improve

by an average of 25% going from no incentives to standard incentives, and by another

25% going from standard to very high incentives. While there is some variation in pro-

jected performance increases across tasks, these predictions are always more bullish

about the effect of incentives than our experimental data warrant.

   Our paper ties into the large lab experimental literature that has investigated the

role of the stake size for various types of economic decisions. In contrast to our focus on

very high stakes, prior work on cognitive biases has considered the difference between

no and "standard" (small) incentives, or between very small and small incentives. Early

experimental economists made a point of implementing financially incentivized designs

to replicate biases from the psychological literature that were previously studied using

hypothetical questions (e.g., Grether and Plott, 1979; Grether, 1980). In Appendix A, we

review papers that have studied the effect of (no vs. small) incentives in the tasks that

we implement here; while the results are a bit mixed, the bottom line is that introducing

small incentives generally did not affect the presence of biases. Indeed, more generally,

in an early survey of the literature, Camerer and Hogarth (1999) conclude that ". . . no

replicated study has made rationality violations disappear purely by raising incentives."

Yet despite the insights generated by this literature, it remains an open question whether

very large stakes ­ as present in many economically relevant decisions ­ eliminate or

significantly reduce biases.

   Investigating the effect of very large stakes on biases appears relevant also in light

of literatures that show that behavior in preferences-based tasks or strategic games

often dramatically changes in the presence of higher stakes (Binswanger, 1980; Holt

and Laury, 2002). For example, high-stakes behavior in the ultimatum game reverts

back close to predictions based on selfishness and rationality (Slonim and Roth, 1998;

Cameron, 1999; Andersen et al., 2011). Likewise, a literature in experimental game

theory highlights that raising the stakes often significantly increases the fraction of equi-



                                             6
librium play (Smith and Walker, 1993; Cooper et al., 1999; Rapoport et al., 2003; Par-

ravano and Poulsen, 2015). Ariely et al. (2009) study the effect of large incentives on

"choking under pressure" in creativity, motor skill and memory tasks such as fitting pieces

into frames, throwing darts, or memorizing sequences. An important difference between

our paper and theirs is that we focus on established tasks aimed at measuring cogni-

tive biases. In summary, existing experimental work on stake size variations has either

compared no (or very small) with "standard" incentives, or it has studied high-stakes

behavior in tasks and games that do not measure cognitive biases. ²

    Finally, a related literature investigates the effects of incentives on students' perfor-

mance on standardized tests and academic test performance. We review this literature

in detail in Appendix A, also see Gneezy et al. (2011) for an early review. In general, this

literature reports mixed or small positive results of explicit financial incentives on test

performance (e.g. Fryer Jr, 2011; Bettinger, 2012; Levitt et al., 2016; O'Neil et al., 1995,

2005; Baumert and Demmrich, 2001). In cases where the literature does identify pos-

itive effects on performance, the effect sizes correspond to performance improvements

of about 0.10­0.15 standard deviations (Levitt et al., 2016; Bettinger, 2012). While it is

difficult to directly compare this effect size to our study given differences in participant

pools, size of incentives and local purchasing power, a useful comparison may be that,

in our CRT task (the only task in which we observe a significant improvement in perfor-

mance), the score improves about 0.20 standard deviations when going from standard

stakes to very high stakes.




     ² Non-experimental work on behavior under high incentives includes a line of work on game shows
(Metrick, 1995; Berk et al., 1996; Levitt, 2004; Belot et al., 2010; Van den Assem et al., 2012) and a
line of work on biases in real market environments (e.g., Beggs and Graddy, 2009; Pope and Schweitzer,
2011; Graddy et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2016; Jetter and Walker, 2017). These studies generally document
the existence of cognitive biases under high incentives, but do not make a careful comparison between
standard and high incentives.


                                                   7
2     Experimental Design and Procedures

2.1     Tasks

2.1.1    Base Rate Neglect

A large number of studies document departures from Bayesian updating. A prominent

finding is that base rates are ignored or underweighted in making inferences (Kahneman

and Tversky, 1973; Grether, 1980; Camerer, 1987).

    In our experiments, we use two different questions about base rates: the well-known

"mammography" and "car accident" problems (Gigerenzer and Hoffrage, 1995). Moti-

vated by a long literature that has argued that people find information about base rates

more intuitive when it is presented in a frequentist rather than probabilistic format, we

implement both probabilistic ("abstract") and frequentist ("intuitive") versions of each

problem. The wording of the abstract and intuitive versions of the mammography prob-

lem is presented below, with the wording of the conceptually analogous car accidents

problems provided in Appendix B.


        Abstract mammography problem: 1% of women screened at age 40 have

        breast cancer. If a woman has breast cancer, the probability is 80% that she

        will get a positive mammography. If a woman does not have breast cancer, the

        probability is 9.6% that she will get a positive mammography. A 40-year-old

        woman had a positive mammography in a routine screening. What is the prob-

        ability that she actually has breast cancer?


    In the abstract version of the mammography problem, participants are asked to pro-

vide a scalar probability. The Bayesian posterior is approximately 7.8 percent, yet re-

search has consistently shown that people's subjective probabilities are too high, con-

sistent with neglecting the low base rate of having cancer. The intuitive version of the

base rate neglect task adds a figure to illustrate the task to subjects, and only works with

frequencies.


                                               8
     Intuitive mammography problem: 10 out of every 1,000 women at age 40

     who participate in routine screening have breast cancer. 8 of every 10 women

     with breast cancer will get a positive mammography. 95 out of every 990 women

     without breast cancer will get a positive mammography. A diagram presenting

     this information is below:




       Figure 1: Diagram used to illustrate the intuitive mammography base rate neglect task



         In a new representative sample of 100 women at age 40 who got a posi-

     tive mammography in routine screening, how many women do you expect to

     actually have breast cancer?


   Subjects who complete the base rate neglect portion of our study (see below for

details on randomization) work on two of the four problems described above. Each

participant completes one abstract and one intuitive problem, and one mammograpy

and one car accidents problem. We randomize which format (abstract or intuitive) is

presented first, and which problem is presented in the intuitive and which one in the

abstract frame.

   For each problem, participants can earn a fixed sum of money (that varies across

treatments) if their guess g is within g  [ x - 2, x + 2] for a Bayesian response x . To

keep the procedures as simple as possible, the instructions explain that subjects will

be rewarded relative to an expert forecast that relies on the same information as they

have. We implement a binary "all-or-nothing" payment rule rather than a more complex,


                                                9
continuous scoring rule such as the binarized scoring rule both to keep the payout pro-

cedures similar to the other tasks, and because of recent evidence that subjects appear

to understand simpler scoring rules better (Danz et al., 2019).


2.1.2    Contingent Reasoning: The Wason Selection Task

Contingent reasoning has been studied in the psychology of judgment for many decades

(e.g., Bazerman and Samuelson, 1983; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Cheng and Holyoak, 1985;

Cosmides, 1989) and more recently in behavioral economics (e.g. Giglio and Shue, 2014;

Esponda and Vespa, 2016; Enke, 2020; Barron et al., 2019). While the experimental

tasks in this literature differ across studies depending on the specific design objective,

they all share in common the need to think about hypothetical contingencies. The Wason

selection task is a well-known and particularly simple test of such contingent reasoning.

   In this task, a participant is presented with four cards and a rule of the form "if P

then Q." Each card has information on both sides ­ one side has either "P" or "not P" and

the other side has either "Q" or "not Q" ­ but only one side is visible. Participants are

asked to find out if the cards violate the rule by turning over some cards. Not all cards

are helpful in finding possible violations of the rule, and participants are instructed to

turn over only those cards that are helpful in determining whether the rule holds true.

Common mistakes are to turn over cards with "Q" on the visible side or to not turn over

cards with "not Q" on the visible side.

   We implement two versions of this task. One version is relatively abstract, and people

tend to perform poorly on it. The other version provides a more familiar context and is

more intuitive. As a result, people tend to perform better.


        Abstract Wason selection task: Suppose you have a friend who says he has a

        special deck of cards. His special deck of cards all have numbers (odd or even)

        on one side and colors (brown or green) on the other side. Suppose that the 4

        cards from his deck are shown below. Your friend also claims that in his special

        deck of cards, even numbered cards are never brown on the other side. He says:


                                              10
     "In my deck of cards, all of the cards with an even number on one side are green

      on the other."




                                  Figure 2: Abstract Wason task



         Unfortunately, your friend doesn't always tell the truth, and your job is to

      figure out whether he is telling the truth or lying about his statement. From

      the cards below, turn over only those card(s) that can be helpful in determining

      whether your friend is telling the truth or lying. Do not turn over those cards

      that cannot help you in determining whether he is telling the truth or lying.

      Select the card(s) you want to turn over.


   The correct actions are turning over the "8" and "brown" cards.


      Intuitive Wason selection task: You are in charge of enforcing alcohol laws at

      a bar. You will lose your job unless you enforce the following rule: If a person

      drinks an alcoholic drink, then they must be at least 18 years old. The cards

      below have information about four people sitting at a table in your bar. Each

      card represents one person. One side of a card tells what a person is drinking,

      and the other side of the card tells that person's age. In order to enforce the law,

      which of the card(s) below would you definitely need to turn over? Indicate only

      those card(s) you definitely need to turn over to see if any of these people are

      breaking the law.

         Select the card(s) you want to turn over.


   In this "social contract" version (adapted from Cosmides, 1989), the correct actions

are turning over the "Beer" and "16" cards. While this problem is logically the same as the

                                              11
                                Figure 3: Intuitive Wason task


abstract version, this version may prompt "cheater detection" and may help participants

to actually identify the correct solution more often.

   In our experiments, each subject in the Wason condition completes both of these

tasks in randomized order. For each task, subjects can win a fixed sum of money (that

varies across treatments) if they turn over (only) the two correct cards.


2.1.3   Cognitive Reflection Test

The CRT measures people's tendency to engage in reflective thinking (Frederick, 2005).

The test items have an intuitive, incorrect answer, and a correct answer that requires

effortful deliberation. Research has shown that people often settle on the answer that is

intuitive but wrong. We include the following two questions, both of which are widely

used in the literature:



        1. A bat and a ball cost 110 KSh in total. The bat costs 100 KSh more than

           the ball. How much does the ball cost? (Intuitive answer is 10, correct

           answer is 5).

        2. It takes 5 nurses 5 minutes to measure the blood pressure of 5 patients.

           How long would it take 10 nurses to measure the blood pressure of 10

           patients? (Intuitive answer is 10, correct answer is 5).


   Subjects in the CRT condition complete both of these questions in randomized order.

For each question, they can earn a fixed sum of money (that varies across treatments) if

they provide exactly the correct response.


                                             12
2.1.4    Anchoring

People have a tendency to use irrelevant information in making judgments. Substantial

research has shown that arbitrary initial information can become a starting point ("an-

chor") for subsequent decisions, with only partial adjustment (Tversky and Kahneman,

1974). This can have consequential effects in situations such as negotiations, real estate

appraisals, valuations of goods, or forecasts. ³

    To test for anchoring, we follow others in making use of a random anchor, since only

an obviously random number is genuinely uninformative. To generate a random anchor,

we ask participants for the last digit of their phone number. If this number is four or

lower, we ask them to enter the first two digits of their year of birth into the computer,

and otherwise to enter 100 minus the first two digits of their year of birth. Given that all

participants were either born in the 1900s or 2000s, this procedure creates either a low

anchor (19 or 20) or a high anchor (80 or 81). The experimental instructions clarify

that ". . . you will be asked to make estimates. Each time, you will be asked to assess

whether you think the quantity is greater than or less than the two digits that were just

generated from your year of birth." Given these experimental procedures, the difference

in anchors across subjects is transparently random.

    After creating the anchor, we ask participants to solve estimation tasks as described

below. Following standard procedures, in each task, we first ask subjects whether their

estimate is below or above the anchor. We then ask participants to provide their exact

estimate. An example sequence of questions is:



        A1 Is the time (in minutes) it takes for light to travel from the Sun to the

             planet Jupiter more than or less than [anchor] minutes?

        A2 How many minutes does it take light to travel from the Sun to the planet

             Jupiter?
    ³ The evidence for anchoring effects in valuation tasks is mixed (Ariely et al., 2003; Fudenberg et al.,
2012; Maniadis et al., 2014; Simonsohn et al., 2014; Yoon et al., 2019). Ioannidis et al. (2020) present
a meta-analysis that shows that anchoring has an effect when anchors are informative or perceived to be
informative. When anchors are uninformative, they find a null-effect of anchoring on valuations.


                                                    13
where [anchor] is replaced with the random number that is generated from a partici-

pant's phone number and year of birth. We also use three other sets of questions:



       B1 In 1911, pilot Calbraith Perry Rodgers completed the first airplane trip

           across the continental U.S., taking off from Long Island, New York and

           landing in Pasadena, California. Did the trip take more than or less than

           [anchor] days?

       B2 How many days did it take Rodgers to complete the trip?



       C1 Is the population of Uzbekistan as of 2018 greater than or less than [an-

           chor] million?

       C2 What is the population of Uzbekistan in millions of people as of 2018?



       D1 Is the weight (in hundreds of tons) of the Eiffel Tower's metal structure

           more than or less than [anchor] hundred tons?

       D2 What is the weight (in hundreds of tons) of the Eiffel Tower's metal struc-

           ture?


   Each of these problems has a correct solution that lies between 0 and 100. Sub-

jects are told that they can only state estimates between 0 and 100. Each participant

who takes part in the anchoring condition of our experiment completes two randomly

selected questions from the set above, in randomized order. For each question, partici-

pants can earn a fixed sum of money (that varies across treatments) if their guess g is

within g  [ x - 2, x + 2] for a correct response x .



2.2    Incentives and Treatment Conditions

Incentive Levels.   In order to offer very high incentives and still obtain a large sample

size within a feasible budget, we conduct the experiment in a low-income country: at the

                                            14
Busara Lab for Behavioral Economics in Nairobi, Kenya. For each bias, there are three

possible levels of incentives: a flat payment (no incentives), standard lab incentives, and

high incentives. With standard lab incentives, participants can earn a bonus of 130 KSh

(approx. 1.30 USD) for a correct answer. In the high incentive treatment, the size of the

bonus is multiplied by a factor of 100 to equal 13,000 KSh (approx. 130 USD).

   These incentives should be compared to local living standards. Kenya's GDP per

capita at purchasing power parity (PPP) in 2018 was $3,468, which is 18 times lower

than that of the United States. Our standard lab incentives of 130 KSh correspond to

about $23.50 at PPP in the U.S. Our high incentive condition corresponds to a potential

bonus of $2,350 at PPP in the U.S.

   As a second point of comparison, we ask our student participants to provide infor-

mation on their monthly consumption and their monthly income in a post-experiment

survey. The median participant reports spending 10,000 KSh (approx. 100 USD) and

earning income of 12,000 KSh (approx. 120 USD) per month. Thus, the bonus in our

high incentive condition corresponds to 130% of median consumption and 108% of me-

dian income in our sample.


Treatments.     In principle, our experiment requires three treatment conditions. How-

ever, because our primary interest is in the comparison between the standard incentive

and the high incentive conditions, we elected to implement only two treatment condi-

tions to increase statistical power.

   The main experiment consists of two parts. Each participant is randomly assigned

two of the four biases. In Part 1, all participants work on tasks for the first bias in the flat

payment condition. Thus, they cannot earn a bonus in Part 1. In Part 2, they are randomly

assigned to either standard lab incentives or high incentives and complete tasks for the

second bias. Participants only receive instructions for Part 2 after completing Part 1, and

the possibility of a bonus is never mentioned until Part 2.

   With this setup, we have twice as many observations in the flat payment condition

(N = 1, 236) as in the standard lab incentive (N = 636) and high incentive (N = 600)

                                              15
conditions. We keep the order of treatments constant (flat payments always followed by

standard lab incentives or high incentives), so that participants working under the flat

payment scheme are not influenced by the size of incentives in the first question.

   Readers may be concerned that the comparison between the flat payment condition

and the financially incentivized conditions is confounded by order effects. We deliber-

ately accept this shortcoming. Formally, this means that a skeptical reader may only

consider the treatment comparison between standard and high incentives valid, as this

is based on randomization. Throughout the paper, we nonetheless compare the three

incentive schemes side-by-side, with the implicit understanding that our main interest

is in the comparison between standard and high incentives.



2.3    Procedures

Questions and randomization.       In total, each participant works on two biases, where

for each bias they answer two questions. Thus, each participant answers four questions

in total: two in Part 1 (without any financial incentives) and two in Part 2 (with standard

or high incentives).

   As explained above, each bias consists of two questions. For some questions, we im-

plement minor variations across experimental sessions to lower the risk that participants

memorize the questions and spread knowledge outside the lab to other participants in

the pool. For example, in the Wason tasks, we change the colors of the cards from green

and brown to blue and brown. To take a different example, in the second CRT problem,

we change the information from "It takes 5 nurses 5 minutes to measure the blood pres-

sure of 5 patients" to "It takes 6 nurses 6 minutes to measure the blood pressure of 6

patients." Appendix B contains the full list of questions that we implement. We find no

evidence that participants in later sessions perform better than those in earlier sessions.

   Each participant completes two questions in the financially incentivized part of the

experiment (Part 2). One of these two questions is randomly selected and a bonus is

given for a correct answer to that question. As explained above, for the CRT and the


                                            16
Wason selection task, a participant has to give exactly the correct answer to be eligible

for a bonus. For base rate neglect and anchoring, the answer has to be within two of

the correct answer. Appendix F contains screenshots of the full experiment, including

experimental instructions and decision screens.

   The stake size is randomized at the session level, mainly because the Busara Lab

was worried about dissatisfaction resulting from participants comparing their payments

to others in the same session. The set and order of the biases are randomized at the

individual level. Within each bias, we also randomize the order of the two questions.


Salience and credibility of incentive levels. A key aspect of our design is that the stake

size is both salient and credible. We take various measures in this regard. To make the

stake size salient, the screen that introduces the second part of the experiment reads:

      Part 2. We will ask you two questions on the upcoming screens. Please answer

      them to the best of your ability. Please remember that you will earn a guaran-

      teed show-up fee of 450 KSh. While there was no opportunity to earn a bonus in

      the previous part, you will now have the opportunity to earn a bonus payment

      of X KSh if your answer is correct.

where X  {130; 13, 000}. The sentence about the opportunity to earn a bonus was

underlined and highlighted in red. The subsequent screen (which is the one that imme-

diately precedes the first incentivized question) reads:

      Remember, you will now have the opportunity to earn a bonus payment of X

      KSh if your answer is correct.

   To ensure credibility of the payments, we put in place three measures. First, we

deliberately select the Busara lab for implementation of our experiments because the

lab follows a strict no-deception rule. Second, the written instructions highlight that:

      The study you are participating in today is being conducted by economists, and

      our professional standards don't allow us to deceive research subjects. Thus,

                                            17
       whatever we tell you, whatever you will read in the instructions on your com-

       puter screen, and whatever you read in the paper instructions are all true. Ev-

       erything will actually happen as we describe.


Third, the verbal instructions by Busara's staff likewise emphasize that all information

that is provided by the experimental software is real.

    Our experimental data afford two analyses to investigate whether the increase in in-

centives was actually salient and credible. First, the post-experimental survey included

unincentivized questions that ask subjects to recall the possible bonus amounts in Parts

1 and 2 of the study. Figure 8 in Appendix D shows the distribution of responses. We

see that 2/3 of participants remember exactly the correct bonus amount. Moreover, the

distribution of responses exhibits a very clear shift across the three incentive schemes.

This provides a first piece of evidence that the incentives were salient to subjects.  Sec-

ond, as we will see below, observed response times increase significantly as the stake

size increases. This indicates that the incentives were not just salient but also credible ­

if participants had not trusted the experimenters to actually deliver on their promises,

participant effort arguably should not have increased. 


Timeline.      Participants are told that the experiment will last approximately one hour,

but have up to 100 minutes to complete it. This time limit was chosen based on pilots

such that it would not provide a binding constraint to participants; indeed no partici-

pants use all of the allotted time. The timeline of the experiment is as follows: (i) elec-

tronic consent procedure; (ii) general instructions; (iii) two unincentivized questions

in Part 1; (iv) screen announcing the possibility of earning a bonus in Part 2; (v) two

      Tables 15 and 16 in Appendix C show that our results are very similar when we restrict the sample
to those tasks for which a subject recalls the incentive amount exactly correctly (64% of all data points).
      While less rigorous, it may also be helpful to provide anecdotal evidence on payment credibility.
In general, Busara states that they "have deep ties to the community in terms of participants who have
come many times, and in general there is a strong trust in our integrated payment systems." Likewise, the
lab manager in charge of executing our particular experiments told us that "participants did not express
doubt on earning or receiving the amounts." Instead, she recalls participants making statement such as:
"Thank you so much! OMG! I am so excited." Finally, one of the authors (Hall) and one of the research
assistants (Heniford) were present for most of the pilot part of the study. In their debrief with participants,
none questioned whether the payments would be made


                                                     18
financially incentivized questions in Part 2; and (vi) a post-experimental questionnaire.

Screenshots of each step are provided in Appendix F.


Earnings.    Average earnings are 482 KSh in the standard incentive condition and 3,852

KSh in the high incentive condition. This includes a show-up fee of 450 KSh. Per the

standard procedure of the Busara Lab, all payments are transferred electronically within

24 hours of participation.



2.4    Participants

The experimental sessions take place at the Busara Center for Behavioral Economics

in Nairobi, Kenya. We conduct our experiments in this lab due to the lab's capabilities

in administering experiments without deception as well as the lab's ability to recruit a

large number of analytically capable students for whom our large incentive treatment is

equal to approximately a month's worth of their consumption. Participants are recruited

among students of the University of Nairobi, the largest public university in Kenya. Ta-

ble 1 reports the resulting sample sizes by bias and incentive level.  In total, 1,236 par-

ticipants completed the study between April and July 2019. The majority (93 percent)

are between 18 and 24 years old (mean age 22) and 44 percent are female.

   It may be helpful to compare the level of cognitive skills in our sample with that of

more traditional subject pools. The two CRT questions in our study are part of the meta-

study in Brañas-Garza et al. (2019). In the no incentive condition of our experiments at

Busara, 34% of all CRT questions are answered correctly. In Brañas-Garza et al.'s meta-

study involving 118 studies and almost 45,000 participants (91% of which were from

the U.S. or Europe), the fraction of correct responses for these same two questions is




    Table 5 in Appendix C reports summary statistics for participant characteristics across treatments.


                                                  19
                       Table 1: Number of participants by bias and incentive level

                                      No incentives     Standard incentives      High incentives

           Base rate neglect               309                   159                   150
           Contingent reasoning            308                   160                   151
           CRT                             311                   163                   146
           Anchoring                       308                   154                   153

           Total                          1,236                  636                   600



36% and therefore very similar to what we see in our sample.  



2.5     Pre-Registration

We pre-registered the design and target sample size on www.aspredicted.org at https:

//aspredicted.org/blind.php?x=5jm93d. The pre-registration specified an over-

all sample size of 1,140 participants, yet our final sample consists of 1,236 participants.

We contracted with the Busara lab not for a total sample size, but for a total amount of

money that would have to be spent. Thus, our target sample size was based on projec-

tions of how costly the experiment would be. Because it turned out that slightly fewer

subjects earned the bonus than we had anticipated, there was still "money left" when

we arrived at 1,140 participants. Busara gave us a choice between forfeiting the money

and sampling additional participants, and ­ being efficiency-oriented economists ­ we

elected to sample additional subjects to increase statistical power. Tables 9 and 10 in

      For Frederick's (2005) earlier review, only averages for the entire three-question module are available.
The corresponding numbers are, inter alia, 73% at MIT; 54% at Princeton; 50% at CMU; 48% at Harvard;
37% in web-based studies; 28% at University of Michigan Dearborn; 26% at Michigan State; and 19%
at Toledo University. Thus, according to these metrics, our subject pool has lower average performance
scores than the most selective U.S. universities, but it compares favorably with participants from more
typical U.S. schools.
      A second, and perhaps more heuristic, comparison is to follow Sandefur (2018), who recently de-
vised a method to construct global learning metrics by linking regional and international standardized
test scores (such as TIMSS). His data suggest that Kenya has some of the highest test scores in his
sample of 14 African countries. He concludes that "the top-scoring African countries produce grade 6
scores that are roughly equivalent to grade 3 or 4 scores in some OECD countries." Of course, this com-
parison is only heuristic because (i) it pertains to primary school rather than college students and (ii)
it ignores the (likely highly positive) selection of Kenyan students into the University of Nairobi. In-
deed, the University of Nairobi is the most prestigious public university in Kenya and routinely ranks
as the top university in the country and among the top universities in Africa. See, for example, https:
//www.usnews.com/education/best-global-universities/africa?page=2.


                                                     20
Appendix C replicate our main results on a sample of the first 1,140 participants only.

The results are very similar. 



2.6     Predictions by Experimental Economists

To complement our pre-registration and to be able to compare our results with the pro-

fession's priors, we collect predictions for our experiments (Gneezy and Rustichini, 2000;

DellaVigna and Pope, 2018). In this prediction exercise, we supply forecasters with aver-

age response times and average performance for each bias in the absence of incentives,

using our own experimental data. Based on these data, we ask our respondents to predict

response times and performance in the standard incentive and high incentive conditions.

Thus, each respondent issues 24 predictions (six tasks times two treatments times two

outcome variables). Respondents are incentivized in expectation: we paid $100 to the

respondent who issued the set of predictions that turned out to be closest to the actual

data. The survey can be accessed at https://hbs.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_

bDVhtmyvlrNKc6N.

    Our total sample of 68 researchers comprises a mix of experimental economists and

Harvard students with graduate-level exposure to experimental economics. First, we con-

tacted 231 participants of a recent conference of the Economic Science Association (the

professional body of experimental economists) via email. Out of these, 45 researchers

volunteered to participate in our prediction survey, 41 of which self-identified with Ex-

perimental Economics as their primary research field in our survey. In addition, we con-

tacted all students who had completed Enke's graduate experimental economics class

at Harvard in 2017­2019, which produced 23 student volunteers. The predictions of

professionals and Harvard students turn out to be similar, on average. ¹ We hence pool

     In the pre-registration, we also speculated about potential results. Specifically, we predicted that
increasing incentives would result in longer decision times, reflecting higher effort. We further predicted
that this would increase success in tasks such as the CRT, anchoring, BRN (when presented intuitively in
the format of frequencies) and Wason (when presented intuitively in a social context). We expected that
increased effort would not reduce biases in the Wason Selection task (abstract formulation) and BRN (in
the classic probability format).
   ¹ Professional experimental economists tend to predict slightly smaller increases in response times and
performance as a function of stakes, but these differences are rarely statistically significant.


                                                   21
them for the purpose of all analyses below. ¹¹



3     Results

3.1     Summary Statistics on Frequency of Cognitive Biases

A prerequisite for our study to be meaningful is the presence of cognitive biases in our

sample. This is indeed the case. In the CRT, 39% of responses are correct and about 50%

of all answers correspond exactly to the well-known "intuitive" response.

    In the abstract base rate neglect task, 11% of all responses are approximately correct

(defined as within 5 percentage points of the Bayesian posterior); the corresponding

number is 26% for the intuitive version. Across all base rate neglect tasks, we see that

subjects' responses tend to be too high, effectively ignoring the low base rate.

    In the Wason selection task, 14% of responses are correct in the abstract frame and

57% in the intuitive frame. This level difference is consistent with prior findings. A com-

mon mistake in Wason tasks of the form A  B is to turn over "B" rather than "not B".

    In the anchoring tasks, we find statistically significant evidence of anchoring on ir-

relevant information. Across questions, the correlations between subjects' estimates and

the anchors range between  = 0.38 and  = 0.60.

    In summary, pooling across incentive conditions, we find strong evidence for the

existence of cognitive biases, on average. We now turn to the main object of interest of

our study, which is the effect of financial incentives.



3.2     Incentives and Effort

We start by examining whether higher stakes induce participants to increase effort, using

response time as a proxy for effort. Response times are a widely used proxy for cogni-

   ¹¹ The respondents appear to exhibit a meaningful level of motivation. In our survey, we only briefly
describe the study by providing the names of the experimental tasks. In addition, we provide the respon-
dents with an option to view details on the implementation of these tasks. Across the six different tasks,
53%-84% of respondents elect to view the task details, with an overall average of 68%. Of course, some
respondents may not need to look up the task details because they know the task structure.


                                                   22
tive effort in laboratory experiments (e.g., Luce et al., 1986; Ratcliff, 1978; Rubinstein,

2007; Krajbich et al., 2012; Spiliopoulos and Ortmann, 2018). This analysis can plausi-

bly be understood as a "first stage" for the relationship between incentives and cognitive

biases. In absolute terms, average response times range from 99 seconds per question in

anchoring to 425 seconds per question in intuitive base rate neglect, which includes the

time it takes participants to read the (very short) instructions on their decision screens.

    Figure 4 visualizes mean response times by incentive level, separately for each ex-

perimental task. Here, to ease interpretation, response times are normalized to one in

the no incentives condition. In other words, for each cognitive bias, we divide observed

response times by the average response time in the no incentives condition. Thus, in

Figure 4, response times can be interpreted as a percentage of response times in the no

incentives condition.

    We find that standard lab incentives generally do not increase response times much

compared to no incentives. High incentives, however, robustly lead to greater effort,

a pattern that is very similar across all tasks. Overall, response times are 39 percent

higher in the high incentive condition compared to standard incentives. We observe the

largest increase (52 percent) in intuitive base rate neglect, and the smallest increase

(24 percent) in anchoring. Figure 10 in Appendix D shows that very similar results hold

when we look at median response times.

    Table 2 quantifies the effects of incentive size on response times (in seconds) using

OLS regressions. ¹² In these regressions, the omitted category is the standard incentive

condition. Thus, the coefficients of the no incentive and the high incentive conditions

identify the change in response times in seconds relative to the standard incentive con-

dition. The last row of the table reports the p-value of a test for equality of regression

coefficients between No incentives and High incentives, although again this comparison is
    ¹² In Table 2, we use raw response times. In mathematical psychology, researchers frequently rely on log
response times, ln(1+RT), because of the oftentimes skewed nature of response time data. In our data, the
residuals are indeed not normally distributed when we use raw response times. In Table 6 in Appendix C,
we instead use log response times. A p-p plot of residuals shows that they follow a normal distribution in
this case (Figure 11 in Appendix D). The treatment comparisons deliver the same qualitative results as
with raw response times. Table 7 in Appendix C provides complementary nonparametric tests that also
deliver very similar results.


                                                    23
                                                  Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                                      Base rate neglect
                           1.6                                                                                                           1.6
Normalized response time




                                                                                                              Normalized response time
                           1.4                                                                                                           1.4



                           1.2                                                                                                           1.2



                            1                                                                                                             1



                            .8                                                                                                            .8


                                  No incentives          Standard incentives           High incentives                                         No incentives        Standard incentives           High incentives

                                                                   CRT                                                                                         Abstract BRN               Intuitive BRN



                                                    Contingent reasoning                                                                                              Anchoring
                           1.6                                                                                                           1.6
Normalized response time




                                                                                                              Normalized response time
                           1.4                                                                                                           1.4



                           1.2                                                                                                           1.2



                            1                                                                                                             1



                            .8                                                                                                            .8


                                  No incentives          Standard incentives           High incentives                                         No incentives        Standard incentives           High incentives

                                                  Abstract Wason               Intuitive Wason                                                                            Anchoring




         Figure 4: Average normalized response times across incentive conditions. Response times are normalized
         relative to the no incentive condition: for each cognitive bias, we divide observed response times by the
         average response time in the no incentive condition. Error bars indicate +/- 1 s.e. Average response times
         per question in the no incentives scheme are: 171 sec. in CRT, 335 sec. in abstract BRN, 425 sec. in
         intuitive BRN, 181 sec. in abstract Wason, 113 sec. in intuitive Wason, and 99 sec. in anchoring.


         not based on randomization. In the regressions, an observation is the response time on

         a given question. However, because each subject completed two questions for the same

         bias, we have two observations per subject, so we always cluster the standard errors at

         the subject level.

                                 We can never reject the hypothesis that cognitive effort in the flat payment and

         standard incentive schemes are identical. In fact, the estimated coefficient is sometimes

         positive and sometimes negative. While it should be kept in mind that the coefficient of

         the no incentive condition is potentially confounded by order effects, we still view this

         result as suggestive.

                                 High stakes, on the other hand, significantly increase response times by between

         24 seconds (anchoring) and 191 seconds (intuitive base rate neglect), relative to the


                                                                                                         24
                           Table 2: Response times across incentive conditions

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                                           Response time [seconds]


 Omitted category:                         Base rate neglect      Contingent reasoning                 All
 Standard incentives             CRT      Abstract   Intuitive    Abstract    Intuitive   Anchoring   tasks
                                  (1)       (2)        (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)       (7)
 1 if No incentives              2.16      -4.71      19.5          -12.7       0.28        -10.2      -1.61
                                (10.25)   (20.51)    (24.79)       (7.72)      (4.72)      (6.14)     (5.50)
 1 if High incentives            55.5     141.6      190.7         52.4        29.2         23.6      71.5
                                (14.63)   (33.55)    (41.17)      (13.21)      (6.43)      (9.88)     (9.42)
 Constant                       157.2     303.1      368.8         174.5      105.9        97.8       81.6
                                (7.94)    (15.77)    (16.74)       (6.31)     (3.64)       (5.44)     (5.11)
 Task type FE                     No        No            No         No          No          No        Yes
 Observations                   1240       618        618           619         619        1230       4944
 R2                              0.02      0.05       0.05          0.07        0.05        0.03       0.29
 p-value: No inc. = High inc.   < 0.01    < 0.01     < 0.01        < 0.01      < 0.01      < 0.01     < 0.01
 Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. Omitted category: standard
incentive scheme. The last row reports the p-value of a test for equality of regression coefficients between
No incentives and High incentives.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


standard incentive treatment. On average, response times increase by 72 seconds, see

the analysis on the pooled sample in column (7). As we show in Figure 9 in Appendix D,

the empirical cumulative distribution functions of response times in the high incentive

conditions usually first-order stochastically dominate the CDFs in the other conditions.

    Even though in relative terms high stakes induce a substantial increase in response

times, the rather modest increase in absolute response times is noteworthy, given the

large increase in financial incentives. Potential explanations for this ­ which we cannot

disentangle ­ are the presence of substantial cognitive effort costs, overconfidence, or a

belief that more cognitive effort does not improve performance on the margin. ¹³

Result 1. Very high incentives increase response times by 24­52% relative to standard lab

incentives. Response times are almost identical with standard incentives and no incentives.


   ¹³ A related alternative explanation for the modest increase in effort could be that a high bonus signals
that the task is hard, undermining a participant's confidence in their ability to solve it (see e.g., Deci
(1975); Deci and Ryan (1985) for some early accounts of the informational aspects of rewards, and
Benabou and Tirole (2003) for a formalization). Our data do not support this explanation as a driving
factor, as we do not observe a decrease in confidence levels as the stake size increases, see Table 14 in
Appendix C.


                                                     25
3.3    Incentives and Cognitive Biases

Figure 5 shows how variation in the stake size affects the prevalence of our cognitive

biases. For the CRT, base rate neglect, and the Wason selection task, the figure shows

the fraction of correct answers. For base rate neglect, following our pre-registration, we

count a response as "correct" if it is within 5 percentage points of the Bayesian posterior.

While subjects only received a bonus if their answer was within 2 percentage points

of the Bayesian response, we work here with a slightly larger interval to allow for ran-

dom computational errors. For anchoring, we plot one minus the Pearson correlation

coefficient between responses and the anchor, so that higher values reflect less bias.

   The main takeaway is that performance barely improves. In the CRT, performance

in the high incentive condition increases by about 10 percentage points relative to the

standard incentive condition. However, in all other tasks, improvements are either very

small or entirely absent. Across all tasks, high incentives never come close to de-biasing

participants. These results suggest that judgmental biases are not an artifact of weak

incentives.

   Table 3 quantifies these results through regression analysis. ¹ Here, in columns (1)­

(6), the dependent variable is whether a given task was solved correctly. In the first

six columns, the coefficients of interest are the treatment dummies. Again, the omitted

category is the standard incentive condition.

   For anchoring, column (7), the object of interest is not whether a subject's answer

is objectively correct, but instead how answers vary as a function of the anchor. Thus,

the coefficients of interest are the interactions between the anchor and the treatment

dummies.

   Compared to standard incentives, the flat payment dummy usually has a negative

point estimate in columns (1)­(5). While these are not statistically significant, we see

in column (6) that when we pool the data across the tasks from the first five columns,

performance is significantly lower without incentives, although the effect size is quite


  ¹ Table 8 in Appendix C provides complementary nonparametric tests that deliver very similar results.


                                                 26
                                         Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                                                          Base rate neglect
                   .8                                                                                                                                .8



                   .6                                                                                                                                .6
Fraction correct




                                                                                                     Fraction correct
                   .4                                                                                                                                .4



                   .2                                                                                                                                .2



                   0                                                                                                                                 0
                         No incentives          Standard incentives           High incentives                                                             No incentives        Standard incentives           High incentives

                                                          CRT                                                                                                             Abstract BRN               Intuitive BRN



                                           Contingent reasoning                                                                                                                  Anchoring




                                                                                                     One minus correlation b/w response and anchor
                   .8                                                                                                                                .8



                   .6                                                                                                                                .6
Fraction correct




                   .4                                                                                                                                .4



                   .2                                                                                                                                .2



                   0                                                                                                                                 0
                         No incentives          Standard incentives           High incentives                                                             No incentives        Standard incentives           High incentives

                                         Abstract Wason               Intuitive Wason                                                                                                    Anchoring




     Figure 5: Average performance by incentive level. Error bars indicate +/- 1 s.e. The performance metrics
     are computed as follows. For the CRT, we count a response as correct if it is exactly correct. For base rate
     neglect, we count a response as correct if it is within 5 percentage points of the Bayesian posterior. For the
     Wason selection task, we count a response as correct if the participant turned over (only) the two correct
     cards. For anchoring, we plot one minus the correlation coefficient between responses and anchors.


      small. ¹ High stakes, on the other hand, lead to a statistically significant increase in

      performance on the CRT. For intuitive base rate neglect, the intuitive Wason task, and

      anchoring, the estimated coefficients of interest are positive but not statistically signif-

      icant. For abstract base rate neglect and the abstract Wason task, the point estimates

      are even negative. In the pooled sample, column (6), performance does not increase

      under high incentives compared to standard incentives. Performance does improve sig-

      nificantly relative to no incentives, but this difference (i) is almost entirely driven by the

      CRT and (ii) potentially confounded by order effects.

                        In quantitative terms, the improvements in performance are modest. Importantly,


          ¹ Including the anchoring data in this pooled regression is not meaningful because for anchoring the
      effect of interest is not the treatment dummy but its interaction with the anchor.


                                                                                                27
                                  Table 3: Performance by incentive level

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                        1 if answer correct                              Answer


 Omitted category:                          Base rate neglect       Contingent reasoning     Tasks
 Standard incentives              CRT      Abstract    Intuitive    Abstract    Intuitive    1­5        Anchoring
                                   (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)          (7)
                                                                                                     
 1 if No incentives              -0.039    0.000061     -0.0026      -0.067      -0.058     -0.034        5.60
                                 (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.02)      (3.19)
 1 if High incentives            0.099      -0.027      0.075        -0.048      0.028      0.037         3.08
                                 (0.04)     (0.03)      (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.06)     (0.02)       (3.59)
 Anchor                                                                                                  0.49
                                                                                                         (0.05)
 Anchor × 1 if No incentives                                                                             0.0037
                                                                                                         (0.07)
 Anchor × 1 if High incentives                                                                           0.017
                                                                                                         (0.08)
 Constant                        0.38       0.11        0.25         0.19        0.59       0.11         12.7
                                 (0.03)     (0.03)      (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.02)       (2.45)
 Task type FE                      No         No           No          No          No         Yes          No
 Observations                    1240        618         618          619         619       3714          1230
 R2                               0.01       0.00        0.01         0.01        0.01       0.12         0.22
 p-value: No inc. = High inc.    < 0.01      0.36        0.09         0.58        0.08      < 0.01        0.86
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. In columns (1)­(6), the
dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether an answer is correct. In column (6), the sample includes all
tasks from columns (1)­(5). In column (7), the outcome variable is the answer (between 0 and 100). Omitted
category: standard incentives. In columns (1)­(6), the last row reports the p-value of a test for the equality
of regression coefficients between No incentives and High incentives. In column (7), the last row reports the
p-value of a test for the equality of regression coefficients between Anchor × 1 if No incentives and Anchor × 1
if High incentives.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


the weak effects of the large increase in financial incentives are not driven by a lack of

statistical power. Given our large sample size, the regression coefficients are relatively

tightly estimated. Looking at 95% confidence intervals derived from the regression anal-

ysis, we can rule out that, going from standard to high incentives, performance increases

by more than: 18 pp in the CRT, 4 pp in abstract base rate neglect, 18 pp in intuitive

base rate neglect, 3 pp in the abstract Wason task, and 14 pp in the intuitive Wason task.

For anchoring, we can rule out that the OLS coefficient of the high incentives condition

is smaller than 17 pp. Notably, for the more abstract tasks, we can rule out performance

increass of only 3­4 pp, while in the more intuitive tasks the point estimates and confi-

dence bands are a bit larger. ¹ Indeed, for intuitive Wason and intuitive base rate neglect,
  ¹ It is worth pointing out that this generally small effect of incentives casts some doubt on explanations


                                                      28
the point estimates and confidence intervals are such that we cannot statistically reject

that they are different from the point estimate for the CRT.

    The last row of Table 3 reports the p-value for equality of coefficients between No

incentives and High incentives. While we caution again that this comparison is not based

on randomization, the results are broadly similar, except that for intuitive base rate

neglect and the intuitive Wason task, the improvement in performance is marginally

significant.

    The results that (i) the largest and most robust performance improvements occur in

the CRT and (ii) the performance increases are mildly stronger for the more intuitive

versions of base rate neglect and the Wason task, are informative. The CRT was designed

to capture reliance on deliberative vs. intuitive reasoning. The other tasks, however, are

usually considered to be fairly difficult. It may be that the higher cognitive effort that

is induced by high incentives reduces reliance on intuitive "gut feelings," but does not

help with solving more complex problems. We return to this observation below.

Result 2. Relative to standard incentives, very high incentives do not reduce cognitive biases,

except for in the domain of intuitive vs. deliberative thinking. We find almost no difference

in behavior between standard and no incentives.


Types of mistakes.         Up to this point, we have kept our analysis relatively simple by

focusing ­ except for anchoring ­ on a binary performance classification. Here, we briefly

discuss to what extent the size of incentives did or did not affect the specific types of

mistakes our participants make.

    First, in BRN, we only classify a response as correct if it falls within five percentage

points of the Bayesian posterior. In Table 12 in Appendix C, we check whether the ab-

solute distance between the response and the Bayesian posterior is affected by the size

of incentives, as would be the case if subjects had improved but not enough to make it

of biases as arising from some version of rational inattention or optimized cognition. To take but one
example, in a recent anchoring model by Lieder et al. (2018), people make rational use of finite time and
limited cognitive resources, and are predicted to suffer less from anchoring effects with steeper incentives.
Our study provides a direct test of this mechanism, and rejects it.


                                                    29
to the relatively narrow five-point band. However, in neither of the two BRN tasks does

performance improve under very high incentives using this continuous measure.

   Second, we investigate whether incentives affect the extent to which participants' re-

sponses directly correspond to the well-known heuristic / intuitive response patterns that

the respective literatures have documented. We define these intuitive answers: the well-

known impulsive answer for CRT; completely neglecting the base rate for BRN, which

corresponds to simply reporting the conditional probability of a positive test given that

a person is ill; and directly reporting the anchor for anchoring. For the Wason task of the

form "if P then Q," we can identify two types of intuitive mistakes. A first most common

mistake is to only turn over "P." A second mistake is to turn over "P" and "Q" instead of

"P" "not Q."

   Table 13 in Appendix C shows how the incidence of intuitive answers depends on

stake size. For CRT, we find that participants are less likely to give the impulsive answer

(consistent with the results reported above). For the abstract version of base-rate neglect,

we find that with high incentives subjects are less likely to completely ignore the base

rate compared to normal incentives but not compared to no incentives. However, there is

no similar effect for the intuitive version of BRN. In the Wason task, we find no evidence

that high stakes reduce the frequency of making the two specific mistakes explained

above. Likewise, high incentives do not reduce the frequency of directly reporting the

anchor in anchoring. In all, these results suggest that ­ with the exception of the CRT

­ very high stakes do not meaningfully reduce the frequency of particular well-known

heuristic responses.


Robustness and heterogeneity analyses.           In the pre-registration, we noted that we

would consider heterogeneity along different sociodemographic variables such as cogni-

tive skills. Table 11 in Appendix C shows that controlling for individual characteristics

and question fixed effects leaves the results unaffected. We also conduct heterogeneity

analyses with respect to college GPA, score on a Raven matrices test (a measure of in-

telligence), and income. We find no robust evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects

                                            30
                                        Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                                                               Base rate neglect
                   .8                                                                                                                                  .8



                   .6                                                                                                                                  .6
Fraction correct




                                                                                                       Fraction correct
                   .4                                                                                                                                  .4



                   .2                                                                                                                                  .2



                   0                                                                                                                                   0
                        No incentives          Standard incentives            High incentives                                                               No incentives         Standard incentives           High incentives

                                                     CRT                                                                                                           Abstract BRN                         Intuitive BRN
                                                     CRT prediction                                                                                                Abstract BRN prediction              Intuitive BRN prediction



                                          Contingent reasoning                                                                                                                       Anchoring




                                                                                                       One minus correlation b/w response and anchor
                   .8                                                                                                                                  .8



                   .6                                                                                                                                  .6
Fraction correct




                   .4                                                                                                                                  .4



                   .2                                                                                                                                  .2



                   0                                                                                                                                   0
                        No incentives          Standard incentives            High incentives                                                               No incentives         Standard incentives           High incentives

                              Abstract Wason                         Intuitive Wason                                                                                                  Anchoring
                              Abstract Wason prediction              Intuitive Wason prediction                                                                                       Anchoring prediction




     Figure 6: Average performance by incentive level and average expert predictions. Error bars on perfor-
     mance indicate +/- 1 s.e. The performance metrics are computed as described in the notes of Figure 5.
     The expert predictions for anchoring are adjusted due to a typo in our survey. We informed the experts
     that without any financial incentives, the correlation between answers and anchors is  = 0.49, while
     it is actually only 0.46. Since we are mostly interested in changes in respondent predictions across the
     different incentive levels, we adjust the data by deducting 3 pp. from each respondent prediction. Aver-
     age respondent forecasts for high stakes are always higher than actual average performance, but only fall
     outside of a 95% confidence interval around actual performance for abstract base rate neglect and the
     abstract Wason task.


      along these dimensions.



      3.4                   Comparison with Predictions

     To put our results in perspective, we compare them with experimental economists' pre-

      dictions, collected as described in Section 2.6. Recall that we provide these researchers

     with information on performance in the no incentive condition and ask them to pre-

      dict performance in the standard and high incentive conditions. Figure 6 shows the re-

      sults. The respondents are qualitatively correct in the sense that they predict that errors

     will not disappear even with very large incentives. At the same time, the respondents

                                                                                                  31
always predict larger performance increases than the actual data reveal. On average,

researchers expect about a 25% increase in performance going from no to standard

incentives, and then again a 25% increase going from standard to high incentives. ¹

Mispredictions appear particularly pronounced for abstract base rate neglect, the ab-

stract Wason task, and anchoring. Across all tasks, 56% of respondent predictions fall

outside of a 95% confidence interval around average actual performance, and of these

mispredictions, 90% are too high rather than too low. Prediction accuracy is highest in

intuitive base rate neglect (69% inside the confidence interval) and lowest in abstract

base rate neglect (24%). ¹

Result 3. Experts correctly predict that biases do not disappear with very high incentives,

yet they overestimate the responsiveness of performance to incentives, in particular for very

high incentives.



3.5     Potential Mechanisms

Effort and Performance.           The results discussed up to this point suggest that the in-

crease in response times by up to 50% that was induced by high incentives did not

translate into a reduction in the frequency of biases of anything close to the same mag-

nitude. This raises the question about the more general relationship between effort and

performance in cognitive biases tasks. Indeed, while previous literature has not focused

on implementing large increases in financial incentives, researchers have occasionally

reported correlations between response times and observed biases. A recurring finding

is that the relationship between errors and response times is statistically significant but

often quantitatively small. ¹


    ¹ Figure 12 in Appendix D shows that the respondents also substantially overestimate the increase
in response times going from no to standard and from standard to high incentives. On average, the re-
spondents forecast increases of around 25% going from no incentives to standard incentives, and another
40­60% going from standard to high incentives.
    ¹ Appendix E provides a more complete picture of the relationship between respondent forecasts and
actual performance, with plots of the empirical distribution of respondent forecasts against the posterior
distribution of actual performance on each task.
    ¹ See Enke and Zimmermann (2019), Enke (2020), and Graeber (2019).


                                                   32
   In our study, similar patterns hold. As shown in Table 4, longer response times are

correlated with a higher probability of solving a problem correctly, yet the magnitudes

of the OLS coefficients are fairly small. Interpreted causally, the coefficients suggest that

­ across biases ­ spending one additional minute on a problem increases the probability

of answering it correctly by about one percentage point. Given that the standard devi-

ation of response times in the sample after partialling out question fixed effects is 183

seconds, this implies that response times would have to increase by 33 standard devi-

ations (6,000 seconds) to increase the probability of answering correctly from zero to

one. Our interpretation is that these "effect sizes" are much too small to plausibly explain

within-treatment heterogeneity in performance purely as a result of heterogeneity in ef-

fort expended. Under this interpretation, correctly solving the types of problems that

are associated with well-known cognitive biases requires not so much large amounts of

effort but instead "the right way of looking at the problem." To the extent that financial

incentives may only increase cognitive effort per se rather than substantially improving

the problem solving approach, stakes might not matter all that much for performance.

   In this regard, it is also informative that the largest increase in performance is visi-

ble in the CRT, where finding the correct solution arguably requires only an ability or

willingness to overcome gut instincts, rather than advanced conceptual reasoning skills.

That is, in the CRT ­ and unlike in many of the other tasks ­ the intuitive, wrong answers

are relatively easy to disprove even without changing one's mental framework.

   While these analyses are all descriptive in nature, they can be interpreted as suggest-

ing that the difficulty in overcoming cognitive biases is often conceptual in nature, and

that higher effort does not easily induce "the right way of looking at the problem." Such

an interpretation is in line with other recent work that has emphasized the importance

of how people look at problems and of "mental gaps," as opposed to only cost-benefit

tradeoffs (see Handel and Schwartzstein, 2018, for an overview). Viewed through the

lens of the popular two-systems approach to reasoning (Frederick, 2005; Stanovich and

West, 2000), our results suggest that reducing reliance on "system 1" is not enough to



                                             33
             Table 4: Performance, response times, and cognitive skills within treatments

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                     1 if answer correct                       Answer


                                              Base rate neglect       Contingent reasoning
                                    CRT      Abstract     Intuitive   Abstract    Intuitive   Anchoring
                                    (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                  
      Response time [minutes]      0.018     0.0088       0.014       0.0087       0.024        0.39
                                   (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.76)
      Cognitive skills [z-score]   0.10      0.0065        0.033      0.015       0.079         -1.13
                                   (0.02)    (0.01)        (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.02)       (1.45)
      Anchor                                                                                   0.52
                                                                                               (0.06)
      Anchor × Response time                                                                   -0.0090
                                                                                                (0.02)
      Anchor × Cognitive skills                                                                -0.037
                                                                                               (0.03)
      Constant                     0.27       0.028        0.22       0.18         0.52         0.59
                                   (0.04)     (0.03)       (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.06)      (2.63)
      Treatment FE                  Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Anchor × Treatment FE         No         No           No          No          No           Yes
      Question FE                   Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
      Observations                 1240       618           618        619          619         1230
      R2                           0.07       0.03          0.06       0.01         0.03        0.37
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. In
     columns (1)-(5), the dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether an answer is correct. In
     column (6), the outcome variable is the answer (between 0 and 100). The cognitive skills variable
     is the average of the z-scores of (i) GPA on the Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education exam
     and (ii) score on a ten-item Raven matrices test.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


overcome biases because these are often limitations of the more deliberative "system 2."


Confidence.      At the end of the experiment, we elicited subjects' self-reported confi-

dence in the correctness of their answers (on a 0­7 Likert scale). While not incentivized,

the data allow us to gauge how confident subjects are in their (usually wrong) responses,

and how confidence varies as a function of the stake size.

   In our data, average confidence is 5.3 in base rate neglect, 6.2 in the CRT, 6.2 in the

Wason tasks and 4.6 in anchoring. These data are indicative that subjects were relatively

confident in their responses. As we show in Table 14 in Appendix C, reported confidence

increases very little, if at all, as the stake size increases. This may suggest that while



                                                     34
participants put in more effort when the stakes are higher, they are partially aware

that this does not translate into a significantly higher probability of solving the problem

correctly because they lack the skills to develop the right problem-solving approach. ²



4     Discussion

This paper provides a systematic investigation of a long-standing question in economics:

are people less likely to fall prey to cognitive biases when the stakes are very high? In

experiments with a large sample of college students, we increase the financial incentives

for accuracy by a factor of 100 to more than a full monthly income in the population

of interest. Despite this drastic increase in incentives, performance improves either very

modestly, or not at all. We view these results as having three main implications. First,

our results are encouraging news for the large literature on the "heuristics and biases"

program in experimental economics and psychology, as it suggests that the results in this

literature need not be understood as contingent on a particular incentive level. Second,

an active theoretical literature attempts to model how different cognitive biases arise,

where an important question is whether systematic errors arise due to genuine cogni-

tive limitations or as a result of inattention and low effort. Our experiments find support

for the former explanation in the biases we study. Third, for economists more generally,

our results highlight that the detrimental effects of the cognitive biases that are studied

in the experimental economics literature plausibly play out also in decisions with large

economic consequences. This result resonates with a considerable body of work on field

studies with high-powered incentives ­ referenced in footnote 2 ­ that often identify

systematic biases. In response to Thaler's question in our opening paragraph, this com-

bination of field and lab data strongly suggests that people do not necessarily tend to

make better decisions when the stakes are very high.



   ² An alternative interpretation centers on overconfidence. If subjects are very confident that they are
getting the task right even with standard incentives, then very high stakes need not improve performance.
This interpretation, however, is slightly at odds with the increase in response times.


                                                   35
References

Andersen, Steffen, Seda Ertaç, Uri Gneezy, Moshe Hoffman, and John A List, "Stakes

  matter in ultimatum games," American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3427­39.

Ariely, Dan, George Loewenstein, and Drazen Prelec, ""Coherent arbitrariness": Sta-

  ble demand curves without stable preferences," The Quarterly journal of economics,

  2003, 118 (1), 73­106.

  , Uri Gneezy, George Loewenstein, and Nina Mazar, "Large stakes and big mis-

  takes," The Review of Economic Studies, 2009, 76 (2), 451­469.

Arkes, Hal R, Robyn M Dawes, and Caryn Christensen, "Factors influencing the use

  of a decision rule in a probabilistic task," Organizational behavior and human decision

  processes, 1986, 37 (1), 93­110.

Barron, Kai, Steffen Huck, and Philippe Jehiel, "Everyday econometricians: Selection

  neglect and overoptimism when learning from others," Technical Report, WZB Discus-

  sion Paper 2019.

Baumert, Jürgen and Anke Demmrich, "Test motivation in the assessment of student

  skills: The effects of incentives on motivation and performance," European Journal of

  Psychology of Education, 2001, 16 (3), 441­462.

Bazerman, Max H and William F Samuelson, "I won the auction but don't want the

  prize," Journal of conflict resolution, 1983, 27 (4), 618­634.

Beggs, Alan and Kathryn Graddy, "Anchoring effects: Evidence from art auctions,"

  American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (3), 1027­39.

Belot, Michèle, V Bhaskar, and Jeroen van de Ven, "Promises and cooperation: Evi-

  dence from a TV game show," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2010, 73

  (3), 396­405.



                                           36
Benabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, "Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation," The review of

  economic studies, 2003, 70 (3), 489­520.

Benjamin, Daniel J, "Errors in Probabilistic Reasoning and Judgmental Biases," in

  "Handbook of Behavioral Economics" 2019.

Berk, Jonathan B, Eric Hughson, and Kirk Vandezande, "The price is right, but are

  the bids? An investigation of rational decision theory," The American Economic Review,

  1996, pp. 954­970.

Bettinger, Eric P, "Paying to learn: The effect of financial incentives on elementary

  school test scores," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (3), 686­698.

Binswanger, Hans P, "Attitudes toward risk: Experimental measurement in rural India,"

  American journal of agricultural economics, 1980, 62 (3), 395­407.

Borghans, Lex, Huub Meijers, and Bas Ter Weel, "The role of noncognitive skills in

  explaining cognitive test scores," Economic inquiry, 2008, 46 (1), 2­12.

Brañas-Garza, Pablo, Praveen Kujal, and Balint Lenkei, "Cognitive Reflection Test:

  whom, how, when," Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Economics, 2019.

Camerer, Colin F., "Do biases in probability judgment matter in markets? Experimental

  evidence," American Economic Review, 1987, 77 (5), 981­997.

  and Robin M Hogarth, "The effects of financial incentives in experiments: A review

  and capital-labor-production framework," Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1999, 19,

  7­41.

Cameron, Lisa A, "Raising the stakes in the ultimatum game: Experimental evidence

  from Indonesia," Economic Inquiry, 1999, 37 (1), 47­59.

Chapman, Gretchen B and Eric J Johnson, "Incorporating the irrelevant: Anchors

  in judgments of belief and value," Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive

  judgment, 2002, pp. 120­138.

                                          37
Chen, Daniel L, Tobias J Moskowitz, and Kelly Shue, "Decision making under the

  gambler's fallacy: Evidence from asylum judges, loan officers, and baseball umpires,"

  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (3), 1181­1242.

Cheng, Patricia W and Keith J Holyoak, "Pragmatic reasoning schemas," Cognitive

  psychology, 1985, 17 (4), 391­416.

Cooper, David J, John H Kagel, Wei Lo, and Qing Liang Gu, "Gaming against man-

  agers in incentive systems: Experimental results with Chinese students and Chinese

  managers," American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 781­804.

Cosmides, Leda, "The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped how hu-

  mans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task," Cognition, 1989, 31 (3), 187­

  276.

Danz, David N, Lise Vesterlund, and Alistair J Wilson, "Belief elicitation: Limiting

  truth telling with information on incentives," Technical Report, Mimeo 2019.

Deci, EL, "Intrinsic motivation," 1975.

   and RM Ryan, "Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior (Per-

  spectives in Social Psychology)," 1985.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Devin Pope, "Predicting experimental results: who knows

  what?," Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (6), 2410­2456.

den Assem, Martijn J Van, Dennie Van Dolder, and Richard H Thaler, "Split or steal?

  Cooperative behavior when the stakes are large," Management Science, 2012, 58 (1),

  2­20.

Enke, Benjamin, "What you see is all there is," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2020,

  135 (3), 1363­1398.

   and Florian Zimmermann, "Correlation Neglect in Belief Formation," Review of Eco-

  nomic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 313­332.

                                            38
Epley, Nicholas and Thomas Gilovich, "When effortful thinking influences judgmental

  anchoring: differential effects of forewarning and incentives on self-generated and

  externally provided anchors," Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2005, 18 (3),

  199­212.

   and    , "The anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic: Why the adjustments are insuffi-

  cient," Psychological science, 2006, 17 (4), 311­318.

  , Boaz Keysar, Leaf Van Boven, and Thomas Gilovich, "Perspective taking as ego-

  centric anchoring and adjustment.," Journal of personality and social psychology, 2004,

  87 (3), 327.

Esponda, Ignacio and Emanuel Vespa, "Hypothetical Thinking and Information Ex-

  traction in the Laboratory," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2014, 6 (4),

  180­202.

   and    , "Hypothetical Thinking: Revisiting Classic Anomalies in the Laboratory,"

  Working Paper, 2016.

Frederick, Shane, "Cognitive reflection and decision making," Journal of Economic per-

  spectives, 2005, 19 (4), 25­42.

Fudenberg, Drew, David K Levine, and Zacharias Maniadis, "On the robustness of

  anchoring effects in WTP and WTA experiments," American Economic Journal: Microe-

  conomics, 2012, 4 (2), 131­45.

Gigerenzer, Gerd and Ulrich Hoffrage, "How to improve Bayesian reasoning without

  instruction: frequency formats.," Psychological review, 1995, 102 (4), 684.

Giglio, Stefano and Kelly Shue, "No news is news: do markets underreact to nothing?,"

  The Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27 (12), 3389­3440.

Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini, "Pay enough or don't pay at all," The Quarterly journal

  of economics, 2000, 115 (3), 791­810.

                                          39
  , Stephan Meier, and Pedro Rey-Biel, "When and why incentives (don't) work to

  modify behavior," Journal of economic perspectives, 2011, 25 (4), 191­210.

Goodie, Adam S and Edmund Fantino, "An experientially derived base-rate error in

  humans," Psychological Science, 1995, 6 (2), 101­106.

Graddy, Kathryn, Lara Loewenstein, Jianping Mei, Michael Moses, and Rachel AJ

  Pownall, "Anchoring or loss aversion? Empirical evidence from art auctions," 2014.

Graeber, Thomas, "Inattentive Inference," Working Paper, 2019.

Grether, David M., "Bayes Rule as a Descriptive Model: The Representativeness Heuris-

  tic," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1980, 95, 537­557.

Grether, David M, "Testing Bayes rule and the representativeness heuristic: Some exper-

  imental evidence," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 1992, 17 (1), 31­57.

   and Charles R Plott, "Economic theory of choice and the preference reversal phe-

  nomenon," The American Economic Review, 1979, 69 (4), 623­638.

Handel, Benjamin and Joshua Schwartzstein, "Frictions or mental gaps: what's be-

  hind the information we (don't) use and when do we care?," Journal of Economic

  Perspectives, 2018, 32 (1), 155­78.

Holt, Charles A and Susan K Laury, "Risk aversion and incentive effects," American

  economic review, 2002, 92 (5), 1644­1655.

Hoppe, Eva I and David J Kusterer, "Behavioral biases and cognitive reflection," Eco-

  nomics Letters, 2011, 110 (2), 97­100.

Ioannidis, Konstantinos, Theo Offerman, and Randolph Sloof, "On the effect of an-

  choring on valuations when the anchor is transparently uninformative," Journal of the

  Economic Science Association, 2020, 6 (1), 77­94.

Jetter, Michael and Jay K Walker, "Anchoring in financial decision-making: Evidence

  from Jeopardy!," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2017, 141, 164­176.

                                           40
Johnson-Laird, Philip Nicholas, Mental models: Towards a cognitive science of language,

  inference, and consciousness number 6, Harvard University Press, 1983.

Jones, Martin and Robert Sugden, "Positive confirmation bias in the acquisition of

  information," Theory and Decision, 2001, 50 (1), 59­99.

Jr, Harold F O'Neil, Brenda Sugrue, and Eva L Baker, "Effects of motivational interven-

  tions on the National Assessment of Educational Progress mathematics performance,"

  Educational Assessment, 1995, 3 (2), 135­157.

Jr, Roland G Fryer, "Financial incentives and student achievement: Evidence from ran-

  domized trials," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (4), 1755­1798.

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, "On the psychology of prediction," Psychological

  Review, 1973, 80 (4), 237­251.

Klein, Barbara D, "Detecting errors in data: clarification of the impact of base rate

  expectations and incentives," Omega, 2001, 29 (5), 391­404.

Krajbich, Ian, Dingchao Lu, Colin Camerer, and Antonio Rangel, "The attentional

  drift-diffusion model extends to simple purchasing decisions," Frontiers in psychology,

  2012, 3, 193.

Levitt, Steven D, "Testing theories of discrimination: evidence from Weakest Link," The

  Journal of Law and Economics, 2004, 47 (2), 431­452.

  , John A List, Susanne Neckermann, and Sally Sadoff, "The behavioralist goes to

  school: Leveraging behavioral economics to improve educational performance," Amer-

  ican Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2016, 8 (4), 183­219.

Lieder, Falk, Thomas L Griffiths, Quentin JM Huys, and Noah D Goodman, "The

  anchoring bias reflects rational use of cognitive resources," Psychonomic bulletin &

  review, 2018, 25 (1), 322­349.




                                          41
Luce, R Duncan et al., Response times: Their role in inferring elementary mental organi-

  zation number 8, Oxford University Press on Demand, 1986.

Maniadis, Zacharias, Fabio Tufano, and John A List, "One swallow doesn't make a

  summer: New evidence on anchoring effects," American Economic Review, 2014, 104

  (1), 277­90.

Martínez-Marquina, Alejandro, Muriel Niederle, and Emanuel Vespa, "Failures in

  Contingent Reasoning: The Role of Uncertainty," American Economic Review, 2019.

Metrick, Andrew, "A natural experiment in" Jeopardy!"," The American Economic Review,

  1995, pp. 240­253.

Nelson, Thomas E, Monica R Biernat, and Melvin Manis, "Everyday base rates (sex

  stereotypes): Potent and resilient.," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1990,

  59 (4), 664.

Oechssler, Jörg, Andreas Roider, and Patrick W Schmitz, "Cognitive abilities and be-

  havioral biases," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 2009, 72 (1), 147­152.

O'Neil, Harold F, Jamal Abedi, Judy Miyoshi, and Ann Mastergeorge, "Monetary

  incentives for low-stakes tests," Educational Assessment, 2005, 10 (3), 185­208.

Parravano, Melanie and Odile Poulsen, "Stake size and the power of focal points in

  coordination games: Experimental evidence," Games and Economic Behavior, 2015,

  94, 191­199.

Pope, Devin G and Maurice E Schweitzer, "Is Tiger Woods loss averse? Persistent bias

  in the face of experience, competition, and high stakes," American Economic Review,

  2011, 101 (1), 129­57.

Rapoport, Amnon, William E Stein, James E Parco, and Thomas E Nicholas, "Equi-

  librium play and adaptive learning in a three-person centipede game," Games and

  Economic Behavior, 2003, 43 (2), 239­265.

                                           42
Ratcliff, Roger, "A theory of memory retrieval.," Psychological review, 1978, 85 (2), 59.

Rubinstein, Ariel, "Instinctive and Cognitive Reasoning: A Study of Response Times,"

  Economic Journal, 2007, 117 (523), 1243­1259.

Sandefur, Justin, "Internationally comparable mathematics scores for fourteen African

  countries," Economics of Education Review, 2018, 62, 267­286.

Simmons, Joseph P, Robyn A LeBoeuf, and Leif D Nelson, "The effect of accuracy

  motivation on anchoring and adjustment: Do people adjust from provided anchors?,"

  Journal of personality and social psychology, 2010, 99 (6), 917.

Simonsohn, Uri, Joseph P Simmons, and Leif D Nelson, "Anchoring is not a false-

  positive: Maniadis, Tufano, and List's (2014)'failure-to-replicate'is actually entirely

  consistent with the original," Working Paper, 2014.

Slonim, Robert and Alvin E Roth, "Learning in high stakes ultimatum games: An ex-

  periment in the Slovak Republic," Econometrica, 1998, pp. 569­596.

Smith, Vernon L and James M Walker, "Monetary rewards and decision cost in exper-

  imental economics," Economic Inquiry, 1993, 31 (2), 245­261.

Spiliopoulos, Leonidas and Andreas Ortmann, "The BCD of response time analysis in

  experimental economics," Experimental economics, 2018, 21 (2), 383­433.

Stanovich, Keith E and Richard F West, "Individual differences in reasoning: Implica-

  tions for the rationality debate?," Behavioral and brain sciences, 2000, 23 (5), 645­

  665.

Thaler, Richard H, "The psychology and economics conference handbook: Comments

  on Simon, on Einhorn and Hogarth, and on Tversky and Kahneman," The Journal of

  Business, 1986, 59 (4), S279­S284.




                                           43
Toplak, Maggie E, Richard F West, and Keith E Stanovich, "The Cognitive Reflection

  Test as a predictor of performance on heuristics-and-biases tasks," Memory & cognition,

  2011, 39 (7), 1275.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, "Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and

  biases.," Science, 1974, 185, 1124­1131.

Wilson, Timothy D, Christopher E Houston, Kathryn M Etling, and Nancy Brekke,

  "A new look at anchoring effects: basic anchoring and its antecedents.," Journal of

  Experimental Psychology: General, 1996, 125 (4), 387.

Wright, William F and Urton Anderson, "Effects of situation familiarity and financial

  incentives on use of the anchoring and adjustment heuristic for probability assess-

  ment," Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 1989, 44 (1), 68­82.

Yoon, Sangsuk, Nathan M Fong, and Angelika Dimoka, "The robustness of anchoring

  effects on preferential judgments.," Judgment & Decision Making, 2019, 14 (4).




                                          44
                      ONLINE APPENDIX

A    Additional Summary of Related Literature

Base-rate neglect.   The results are mixed. Arkes et al. (1986) gave their participants

either cash for each correct judgment ($.10/correct), a cash award ($5) for being the

best judge in their group, or no monetary incentive. The incentives groups had fewer

correct judgments than did the no-incentive group. Nelson et al. (1990) incentivized

participants ($50 reward to the best answer), but they did not perform better than

those in the control group. Similarly, Goodie and Fantino (1995) paid participants 10

cents for each point earned, with the top two earners receiving a bonus of $25 at the

end. Incentives did not alleviate the base rate neglect error. By contrast, Klein (2001)

told participants the top 30% would be entered into a lottery for $100, and found the

incentivized participants performed better than the non-incentivized participants.


Wason task. Only a few experiments study the effect of incentives on performance in

the task. Jones and Sugden (2001) paid their participants but did not vary the level

of incentives. Behavior was closer to Bayesian rationality than in many no-incentives

selection task experiments.


Anchoring.   Tversky and Kahneman (1974) found that payment for accuracy did not

reduce anchoring, as did Wilson et al. (1996). By contrast, Wright and Anderson (1989)

and Epley and Gilovich (2005) and Epley et al. (2004) found that incentives for accuracy

reduced anchoring. Simmons et al. (2010) showed that accuracy motivation through the

use of incentives failed to increase the gap between anchors and final estimates when

people were uncertain about the direction of adjustment, but increased anchor-estimate

gaps when people were certain about the direction.




                                          45
CRT.   Borghans et al. (2008) tested the effect of incentives on performance on 10 prob-

lems, one of which was the CRT "bat and ball" (Frederick, 2005). He crossed time con-

straint (no time constraint, 60 seconds, or 30 seconds) with incentive (no pay, 0.10,

0.40, or 1.00 for each correct answer). Higher incentives increased time investment

in answering the questions. In turn, CRT scores were higher for any level of incentive

pay except in the case of the short time limit of 30 seconds. Yet, in a meta-analysis of

CRT studies, Brañas-Garza et al. (2019) found that "paying subject for correct answers

on the CRT does not increase performance levels."


Standardized tests and academic performance.          Fryer Jr (2011) finds no effect of

incentives of $30 to fourth graders and $60 to seventh graders on either math or read-

ing test scores. Bettinger (2012) finds that incentives of $20 have a significant impact

on third through sixth graders' performance in math but no impact on reading, social

science, or science. Levitt et al. (2016) find that while an incentive of $20 delivered im-

mediately improves test performance, both rewards delivered with a one month delay

fail and a lower incentive of $10 fail to have an impact. Other studies that announced in-

centives immediately before the test and provided rewards with a delay also find mixed

evidence. O'Neil et al. (1995, 2005) report that delayed incentives can improve eighth

grade test scores but fail to have an impact on twelfth grade test scores, even at high in-

centives of $100. Similarly, Baumert and Demmrich (2001) find no effects of incentives

on ninth grade test scores. So overall, the effects of incentives on test performance are

quite mixed (see Gneezy et al., 2011, for a review). In cases where a positive effect is

reported, scores improve about 0.10 (Levitt et al., 2016) to 0.15 Bettinger (2012) stan-

dard deviations. For comparison, in our CRT task, the only task in which we observe a

significant improvement in performance, the score improves about 0.20 standard devi-

ations when going from standard stakes to very high stakes.




                                           46
B     Experimental Questions

B.1    Base rate neglect

BRN 1.     Suppose the Kenyan police set up a road block to test drivers for drunk driving.

They stop every bus and taxi driver that passes with an Alcoblow test.

    The Alcoblow shows a red light when it detects that the person is drunk, and a green

light when it detects the person is not drunk. However, the test is not completely reliable

and can give a wrong indication.

    Now suppose that 100 out of every 10,000 drivers who are stopped at a routine

police control are actually drunk.

    When ACTUAL drunk drivers are tested, the Alcoblow shows a red light for 55 of

those 100 drunk drivers.

    But, of the remaining 9,900 drivers who are NOT drunk, the Alcoblow test also shows

a red light for 500 of these 9,900 non-drunk drivers.

    To make this very clear, a diagram presenting this information is shown below:




         Figure 7: Diagram used to illustrate the "intuitive" car accidents base rate neglect task



    Now suppose that in a new sample of 2000 drivers, the Alcoblow test showed a red

light for 100 drivers. Of these 100 drivers, how many drivers do you expect to have

actually been drunk? (options 0 to 100 in steps of 1)




                                                   47
BRN 2.    1% of women screened at age 40 have breast cancer.

   If a woman has breast cancer, the probability is 80% that she will get a positive

mammography.

   If a woman does not have breast cancer, the probability is 9.6% that she will get a

positive mammography.

   A 40-year-old woman had a positive mammography in a routine screening. What is

the probability that she actually has breast cancer? (answer in %, options 0 to 100% in

steps of 1)


BRN 3.    1% of drivers who are stopped by routine police control are drunk.

   If a driver is drunk, the probability is 55% that the driver will test positive on an

alcohol test.

   If a driver is not drunk, the probability is 5.1% that the driver will test positive on

an alcohol test.

   Suppose a driver has tested positive on an alcohol test in a routine police control.

What is the probability that the driver was actually drunk? (answer in %, options 0 to

100% in steps of 1)


BRN 4. Suppose a Kenyan medical center routinely tests women at age 40 to determine

if they have breast cancer. They use an x-ray machine for this. The machine produces

images, and a medical expert examines the images.

   If the medical expert detects breast cancer on the images, the expert brings bad news

to the woman. If the medical expert does not detect breast cancer on the images, the

expert brings good news to the woman. However, the images are not always clear and

the expert can reach the wrong conclusion.

   Now suppose that 10 out of every 1,000 women at age 40 who get routinely tested

actually have breast cancer.

   When the women with actual breast cancer get tested, the expert brings bad news

to 8 out of these 10 women.


                                           48
   But, of the remaining 990 women who do NOT have breast cancer, the expert also

gives bad news to 95 out of these 990 women.

   To make this very clear, a diagram presenting this information is shown below: [see

Figure in Section 2.1.1]

   Now suppose that in a new sample of 1000 women, 100 women at age 40 received

bad news in the routine test. Of these 100 women, how many women do you expect to

actually have breast cancer? (options 0 to 100 in steps of 1)



B.2    Wason selection task

Wason 1.      Suppose you have a friend who says he has a special deck of cards. His special

deck of cards all have numbers (odd or even) on one side and colors (brown or green)

on the other side. Suppose that the 4 cards from his deck are shown below.

   Your friend also claims that in his special deck of cards, even numbered cards are

never brown on the other side. He says:

   "In my deck of cards, all of the cards with an even number on one side are green on

the other."

   Unfortunately, your friend doesn't always tell the truth, and your job is to figure out

whether he is telling the truth or lying about his statement.

   From the cards below, turn over only those card(s) that can be helpful in determining

whether your friend is telling the truth or lying. Do not turn over those cards that cannot

help you in determining whether he is telling the truth or lying.

   Select the card(s) you want to turn over: [see Figure in Section 2.1.2]


Wason 2.      Suppose you have a friend who says he has a special deck of cards. His special

deck of cards all have numbers (odd or even) on one side and colors (brown or blue) on

the other side. Suppose that the 4 cards from his deck are shown below.

   Your friend also claims that in his special deck of cards, even numbered cards are

never brown on the other side. He says:



                                             49
   "In my deck of cards, all of the cards with an even number on one side are blue on

the other."

   Unfortunately, your friend doesn't always tell the truth, and your job is to figure out

whether he is telling the truth or lying about his statement.

   From the cards below, turn over only those card(s) that can be helpful in determining

whether your friend is telling the truth or lying. Do not turn over those cards that cannot

help you in determining whether he is telling the truth or lying.

   Select the card(s) you want to turn over: [cards shown are 4 Card, 9 Card, Blue Card,

Brown Card]


Wason 3.      You are in charge of enforcing alcohol laws at a bar. You will lose your job

unless you enforce the following rule:

   If a person drinks an alcoholic drink, then they must be at least 18 years old.

   The cards below have information about four people sitting at a table in your bar.

Each card represents one person. One side of a card tells what a person is drinking, and

the other side of the card tells that person's age.

   In order to enforce the law, which of the card(s) below would you definitely need to

turn over? Indicate only those card(s) you definitely need to turn over to see if any of

these people are breaking the law.

   Select the card(s) you want to turn over: [see Figure in Section 2.1.2]


Wason 4.      You are in charge of enforcing alcohol laws at a bar. You will lose your job

unless you enforce the following rule:

   If a person drinks an alcoholic drink, then they must be at least 18 years old.

   The cards below have information about four people sitting at a table in your bar.

Each card represents one person. One side of a card tells what a person is drinking, and

the other side of the card tells that person's age.

   In order to enforce the law, which of the card(s) below would you definitely need to

turn over? Indicate only those card(s) you definitely need to turn over to see if any of


                                            50
these people are breaking the law.

   Select the card(s) you want to turn over [cards shown are Drinking Wine, Drinking

Juice, 17 Years Old, 22 Years Old]:



B.3      Anchoring

For this task, please first do the following. Take the last digit of your phone number.

   · If it is 4 or less, please enter below the first two digits of your year of birth.

   · If it is 5 or above, please enter below 100 minus the first two digits of your year

        of birth.

   Enter the two digits:



In this task, you will be asked to make two estimates. Each time, you will be asked to

  1. assess whether you think the quantity is greater than or less than the two digits

        that were just generated from your year of birth

  2. give an estimate of the quantity (a number between 0 and 100). Your answer will

        be counted as correct if it is no more than 2 away from the actual number.


Anchoring 1.        In 1911, pilot Calbraith Perry Rodgers completed the first airplane trip

across the continental U.S., taking off from Long Island, New York and landing in Pasadena,

California.

   Did the trip take more than or less than ANCHOR days?

   How many days did it take Rodgers to complete the trip? (options 0 to 100 in steps

of 1)


Anchoring 2. Is the time (in minutes) it takes for light to travel from the Sun to the

planet Jupiter more than or less than ANCHOR minutes?


                                              51
   How many minutes does it take light to travel from the Sun to the planet Jupiter?

(options 0 to 100 in steps of 1)


Anchoring 3.     Is the population of Uzbekistan as of 2018 greater than or less than

ANCHOR million?

   What is the population of Uzbekistan in millions of people as of 2018? (options 0 to

100 in steps of 1)


Anchoring 4. Is the weight (in hundreds of tons) of the Eiffel Tower's metal structure

more than or less than ANCHOR hundred tons?

   What is the weight (in hundreds of tons) of the Eiffel Tower's metal structure? (op-

tions 0 to 100 in steps of 1)



B.4    Cognitive Reflection Test

CRT 1.   A bat and a ball cost 110 KSh in total. The bat costs 100 KSh more than the

ball. How much does the ball cost? (Please provide your answer in KSh)


CRT 2.   A pencil and an eraser cost 110 KSh in total. The pencil costs 100 KSh more

than the eraser. How much does the eraser cost? (Please provide your answer in KSh)


CRT 3. It takes 5 nurses 5 minutes to measure the blood pressure of 5 patients. How

long would it take 10 nurses to measure the blood pressure of 10 patients? (Please

provide your answer in minutes)


CRT 4. It takes 5 workers 5 minutes to pack 5 boxes. How long would it take 10 workers

to pack 10 boxes? (Please provide your answer in minutes)


CRT 5. It takes 6 nurses 6 minutes to measure the blood pressure of 6 patients. How

long would it take 12 nurses to measure the blood pressure of 12 patients? (Please

provide your answer in minutes)

                                         52
CRT 6. It takes 6 workers 6 minutes to pack 6 boxes. How long would it take 12 workers

to pack 12 boxes? (Please provide your answer in minutes)




                                         53
C        Additional Tables

           Table 5: Participants' background characteristics across the two treatment conditions

                                                       Flat-standard lab          Flat-high     p-value test (1)=(2)

     Age (years)                                                22.1                22.1               0.740
     Female                                                     0.42                0.46               0.191
     GPA                                                         4.6                4.7                0.227
     Raven score (0-10)                                          3.2                3.4                0.078
     Monthly consumption level (1,000 KSh)                      23.5                13.7               0.335
     Monthly income (1,000 KSh)                                 16.1                17.1               0.363
     N                                                          636                 600
     Notes. The large difference in average consumption across treatments is driven by one extreme outlier (perhaps a
    typo by the participant). Median consumption is identical across treatments (10,000 KSh).



           Table 6: Response times across incentive conditions: Log-transformed response times

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                                        Log (1+Response time [seconds])


     Omitted category:                       Base rate neglect         Contingent reasoning                     All
     Standard incentives           CRT      Abstract   Intuitive       Abstract     Intuitive     Anchoring    tasks
                                    (1)       (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)        (7)
     1 if No incentives           -0.051     -0.040    0.00042         -0.068        -0.015         -0.052     -0.041
                                  (0.05)     (0.07)     (0.06)         (0.05)        (0.05)         (0.05)     (0.02)
     1 if High incentives         0.26       0.32        0.35          0.21          0.23            0.17      0.24
                                  (0.07)     (0.09)      (0.07)        (0.07)        (0.05)         (0.07)     (0.03)
     Constant                     4.80       5.49        5.75          5.05          4.58           4.36       4.33
                                  (0.04)     (0.06)      (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.04)     (0.03)
     Task type FE                   No         No          No            No            No            No         Yes
     Observations                  1240       618         618           619           619           1230       4944
     R2                            0.03       0.04        0.05          0.04          0.04          0.02       0.37
     Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. Omitted category:
    standard incentives. The dependent variable is ln(1+RT).  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                          54
Table 7: Non-parametric tests for response time differences across incentive levels

       Task           High vs. no      High vs. standard       Standard vs. no

       CRT               < 0.01               < 0.01                  0.38
  Abstract BRN           < 0.01               < 0.01                  0.40
  Intuitive BRN          < 0.01               < 0.01                  0.53
 Abstract Wason          < 0.01               < 0.01                  0.04
 Intuitive Wason         < 0.01               < 0.01                  0.61
    Anchoring            < 0.01               < 0.01                  0.39

 Notes. P-values for Wilcoxon ranksum tests of response times between
incentive levels.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




 Table 8: Non-parametric tests for performance differences across incentive levels

       Task           High vs. no      High vs. standard       Standard vs. no

       CRT               < 0.01                0.01                   0.23
  Abstract BRN            0.38                 0.44                   0.99
  Intuitive BRN           0.08                 0.15                   0.95
 Abstract Wason           0.57                 0.25                   0.05
 Intuitive Wason          0.08                 0.61                   0.23

 Notes. P-values for Wilcoxon ranksum tests of performance [0­1] be-
tween incentive levels.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                       55
                Table 9: Response times across incentive conditions: Pre-registered sample

                                                                 Dependent variable:
                                                            Response time [seconds]


   Omitted category:                         Base rate neglect       Contingent reasoning                     All
   Standard incentives            CRT       Abstract    Intuitive    Abstract     Intuitive    Anchoring     tasks
                                  (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)         (7)
   1 if No incentives            -0.49       -8.99        12.1         -14.9        0.98         -7.42       -3.26
                                (10.98)     (21.96)     (25.12)       (8.09)       (4.96)       (6.21)      (5.76)
   1 if High incentives          48.1       133.6       195.9         52.9         30.2          25.0       69.7
                                (14.89)     (35.04)     (43.55)      (13.78)       (6.61)       (10.15)     (9.84)
   Constant                     161.2       308.6       374.1        177.9        105.9         95.1        81.6
                                (8.59)      (16.87)     (18.16)      (6.58)       (3.78)        (5.48)      (5.36)
   Task type FE                    No         No          No            No          No            No          Yes
   Observations                  1144        569          569          572          572          1134        4560
   R2                            0.02        0.05         0.06         0.07         0.05         0.02        0.29
   Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. Omitted category:
  standard incentives. The sample is restricted to the first 1,140 subjects who completed the experiment.
  
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


                        Table 10: Performance by incentive level: Pre-registered sample

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                           1 if answer correct                              Answer


 Omitted category:                            Base rate neglect        Contingent reasoning      Tasks
 Standard incentives                CRT      Abstract    Intuitive     Abstract    Intuitive     1­5       Anchoring
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)
 1 if No incentives                -0.030     0.0012       0.013        -0.074      -0.067      -0.031       6.60
                                   (0.04)     (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.05)      (0.02)      (3.31)
 1 if High incentives               0.10      -0.018       0.099        -0.063       0.025      0.041        3.96
                                   (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.06)     (0.02)      (3.67)
 Anchor                                                                                                     0.48
                                                                                                            (0.05)
 Anchor × 1 if No incentives                                                                                0.0029
                                                                                                            (0.07)
 Anchor × 1 if High incentives                                                                              0.0051
                                                                                                            (0.08)
 Constant                          0.38       0.11         0.23         0.20         0.59       0.11        12.4
                                   (0.03)     (0.03)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.04)     (0.02)      (2.51)
 Task type FE                        No         No          No           No            No         Yes         No
 Observations                       1144       569          569          572           572       3426        1134
 R2                                 0.01       0.00         0.01         0.01          0.01      0.12        0.21
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. In columns (1)­(5),
the dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether an answer is correct. In column (6), the outcome
variable is the answer (between 0 and 100). Omitted category: standard incentives. The sample is restricted
to the first 1,140 subjects who completed the experiment.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


                                                         56
                        Table 11: Performance by incentive level: Adding covariates

                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                            1 if answer correct                             Answer


 Omitted category:                            Base rate neglect         Contingent reasoning    Tasks
 Standard incentives                 CRT     Abstract      Intuitive    Abstract   Intuitive    1­5        Anchoring
                                     (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)          (7)
                                                                                                        
 1 if No incentives                 -0.052    0.0041       0.0060        -0.063     -0.063     -0.035        5.99
                                    (0.03)    (0.03)       (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.05)      (0.02)      (3.17)
 1 if High incentives                0.10     -0.026        0.082        -0.045     0.016      0.037         4.83
                                    (0.04)    (0.03)        (0.05)       (0.04)     (0.06)     (0.02)       (3.60)
 Age                               -0.026     -0.0080      -0.020       -0.016      -0.013     -0.019       0.055
                                    (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)       (0.01)     (0.01)      (0.00)      (0.45)
 1 if male                          0.13      0.014         0.11         0.012      -0.098     0.051        -5.37
                                    (0.03)    (0.03)        (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.04)    (0.01)       (1.79)
 1 if above median income           -0.027    0.020         0.030       0.0036      -0.11      -0.017        -0.23
                                    (0.03)    (0.02)        (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.01)       (1.76)
 Cognitive skills [z-score]        0.079      0.0074        0.026       0.0048      0.079      0.044        -2.51
                                   (0.02)     (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.01)       (0.99)
 1 if STEM major                    0.013     -0.028        0.027       0.069       0.013      0.021         -0.29
                                    (0.03)    (0.03)        (0.04)      (0.03)      (0.04)     (0.02)       (2.00)
 Anchor                                                                                                     0.50
                                                                                                            (0.05)
 Anchor × 1 if No incentives                                                                                -0.0036
                                                                                                             (0.06)
 Anchor × 1 if High incentives                                                                              -0.0044
                                                                                                             (0.08)
 Constant                           0.83       0.24         0.66         0.53       0.98       0.94          13.9
                                    (0.21)    (0.14)        (0.17)       (0.13)     (0.22)     (0.09)       (10.28)
 Question FE                         Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          No
 Observations                       1240       618           618          619        619        3714         1230
 R2                                 0.09       0.02          0.05         0.03       0.05       0.15         0.24
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. In columns (1)-(5), the
dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether an answer is correct. In column (6), the outcome variable
is the answer (between 0 and 100). Omitted category: standard incentives.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                      57
             Table 12: Performance by incentive level: Additional analyses for base rate neglect

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                   |Answer - Bayesian posterior|       1 if |Answer - Bayesian posterior|  2


 Omitted category:                                              Base rate neglect
 Standard incentives                 Abstract            Intuitive           Abstract               Intuitive
                                  (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)      (5)         (6)      (7)          (8)
 1 if No incentives              2.85      2.40     -0.048     -0.60    0.027       0.028    0.015       0.027
                                (2.57)    (2.60)    (3.07)    (3.09)    (0.02)      (0.02)   (0.04)      (0.04)
 1 if High incentives            -0.12     -0.55     -4.09     -4.34    0.022       0.023    0.060       0.068
                                (2.99)    (3.02)    (3.56)    (3.57)    (0.03)      (0.03)   (0.05)      (0.05)
 Age                                       -0.11               1.24              0.00080                -0.020
                                          (0.48)              (0.60)              (0.00)                 (0.01)
 1 if male                                 -2.36              -5.28                 0.0049               0.11
                                          (2.22)              (2.61)                (0.02)               (0.03)
 1 if above median income                  -1.79               -0.73                0.0019               0.056
                                          (2.19)              (2.55)                (0.02)               (0.03)
 Cognitive skills [z-score]                -0.35               -1.75                0.0096               0.033
                                          (1.24)              (1.46)                (0.01)               (0.02)
 1 if STEM major                           1.95                2.62              -0.0098                 0.019
                                          (2.46)              (2.97)              (0.02)                 (0.04)
 Constant                       36.2      40.7      42.8      18.4     0.0036       -0.017   0.25        0.59
                                (2.06)   (10.67)    (2.96)   (13.53)   (0.02)       (0.10)   (0.04)      (0.17)
 Question FE                      Yes       Yes      Yes        Yes      Yes         Yes      Yes          Yes
 Observations                    618       618       618       618       618         618     618          618
 R2                              0.04      0.04      0.03      0.04      0.03        0.03    0.01         0.05
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. The dependent
variable is the absolute difference between a subject's response and the Bayesian posterior. Omitted category:
standard incentives.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                    58
                                                                   Table 13: Specific mistakes

                                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                                                    Gives Intuitive Answer


      Omitted category:                                Base rate neglect                            Contingent reasoning
      Standard incentives               CRT           Abstract   Intuitive               Abstract                          Intuitive              Anchoring


                                 Intuitive response   Report diagnosticity   Turns only P     Turns P and Q    Turns only P    Turns P and Q    Guess = anchor
                                        (1)             (2)         (3)           (4)                (5)           (6)                  (7)          (8)
      1 if No incentives                0.06            -0.05      0.02          -0.03               0.02          -0.04                0.03         0.03




59
                                       (0.04)          (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.03)              (0.05)        (0.04)               (0.02)       (0.02)
      1 if High incentives             -0.09           -0.11       0.03          -0.04               0.04          -0.02                0.02         0.01
                                       (0.04)          (0.05)     (0.05)        (0.04)              (0.05)        (0.04)               (0.02)       (0.02)
      Constant                         0.48            0.38       0.31          0.15                0.30          0.17                  0.04        0.04
                                       (0.03)          (0.04)     (0.04)        (0.03)              (0.04)        (0.03)               (0.02)       (0.01)
      Observations                     1240            618         618           619                619           619                  619          1230
      R2                               0.02            0.01        0.00          0.00               0.00          0.00                 0.00         0.00
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. The dependent variable is a binary indicator that equals one if
     the subject's response corresponds to the "intuitive response." In the CRT, this is given by the well-known intuitive responses. In BRN, it is given by the
     signal diagnosticity (the conditional probability P(event|state)). For Wason, we consider two types of intuitive responses, for a given rule of the type "if
     P then Q." The first is that subjects turn over only the "P" card (the "8" in the example in Section 2). The second is that subjects turn over "P" and "Q"
     (the "8" and "green" in the example in Section 2). In anchoring, the intuitive response is given by reporting the anchor.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                   Table 14: Confidence by incentive level

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                         Confidence [0­7]


         Omitted category:                         Base rate neglect            Contingent reasoning
         Standard incentives             CRT      Abstract       Intuitive      Abstract        Intuitive     Anchoring
                                         (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
         1 if No incentives              -0.11     0.085          -0.035         0.051           -0.058          0.15
                                        (0.09)     (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.11)          (0.09)         (0.15)
         1 if High incentives            0.12      -0.032            -0.16        0.23           -0.0074         0.21
                                        (0.10)     (0.17)           (0.16)       (0.13)           (0.10)        (0.18)
         Constant                       6.22       5.25             5.45         5.89            6.43           4.49
                                        (0.07)     (0.11)           (0.11)       (0.09)          (0.07)         (0.12)
         Observations                   1240           618            618            619            619             1230
         R2                             0.01           0.00           0.00           0.01           0.00            0.00
        Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. The
        dependent variable is self-reported confidence. Omitted category: standard incentives.  p <
        0.05,  p < 0.01.




Table 15: Response times across incentive conditions: Restricting sample to correct recall of incentive level

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                  Response time [seconds]


   Omitted category:                           Base rate neglect            Contingent reasoning                             All
   Standard incentives           CRT        Abstract         Intuitive      Abstract        Intuitive      Anchoring        tasks
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)
   1 if No incentives            -2.50       -5.87              10.6          -13.0           -0.94          -13.7          -5.32
                                (11.75)     (26.83)           (29.32)        (9.72)          (5.56)         (7.74)         (6.49)
   1 if High incentives          43.3       107.4             189.1           50.2           30.3            28.3           62.8
                                (16.61)     (39.42)           (50.01)        (15.17)         (8.06)         (13.68)        (10.53)
   Constant                     155.3       313.7             375.7          177.9          107.0           98.5           86.2
                                (9.14)      (20.42)           (20.28)        (8.03)         (4.36)          (7.06)         (6.09)
   Task type FE                   No             No             No             No             No              No             Yes
   Observations                  832           386             386            421             421            814            3260
   R2                            0.02          0.03            0.06           0.07            0.06           0.04           0.31
   Notes. OLS estimates, standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. Omitted category: stan-
  dard incentives. The sample is restricted to observations for which a subject recalled exactly the correct
  incentive amount in the post-experimental questionnaire.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                               60
    Table 16: Performance by incentive level: Restricting sample to correct recall of incentive level

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                                      1 if answer correct                          Answer


 Omitted category:                         Base rate neglect      Contingent reasoning   Tasks
 Standard incentives              CRT     Abstract   Intuitive    Abstract   Intuitive    1­5     Anchoring
                                  (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)
 1 if No incentives              -0.068    0.022      -0.019      -0.039      0.0082     -0.028     6.10
                                 (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.06)      (0.04)      (0.06)     (0.02)    (4.00)
 1 if High incentives             0.10     -0.025     0.053       -0.043       0.12      0.053      4.16
                                 (0.05)    (0.04)     (0.07)      (0.05)      (0.07)     (0.03)    (4.50)
 Anchor                                                                                            0.52
                                                                                                   (0.06)
 Anchor × 1 if No incentives                                                                       -0.048
                                                                                                   (0.08)
 Anchor × 1 if High incentives                                                                     -0.013
                                                                                                   (0.10)
 Constant                        0.41      0.11       0.30         0.18       0.57       0.12      12.4
                                 (0.03)    (0.03)     (0.05)       (0.04)     (0.05)     (0.02)    (3.19)
 Task type FE                     No        No         No           No          No        Yes        No
 Observations                     832       386        386         421         421       2446       814
 R2                               0.02      0.00       0.00        0.00        0.01      0.13       0.21
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (clustered at subject level) in parentheses. In columns (1)­(5),
the dependent variable is a binary indicator for whether an answer is correct. In column (6), the outcome
variable is the answer (between 0 and 100). Omitted category: standard incentives. The sample is restricted
to observations for which a subject recalled exactly the correct incentive amount in the post-experimental
questionnaire.  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                     61
D                              Additional Figures

                                       No stakes                                                         Low stakes                                                            High stakes
              1




                                                                                1




                                                                                                                                                   1
              .8




                                                                                .8




                                                                                                                                                   .8
ECDF of recalled bonus level




                                                                  ECDF of recalled bonus level




                                                                                                                                     ECDF of recalled bonus level
                   .6




                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                        .6
     .4




                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                          .4
              .2




                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                   .2
              0




                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                   0
                               0   50       100      150   200+                                  0   50       100 130 150     200+                                  0   2000 4000 6000 8000 10000    13000
                                    Recalled bonus level                                               Recalled bonus level                                                   Recalled bonus level




                                        Figure 8: Empirical CDF of recalled bonus amount by incentive level.




                                                                                                      62
                                                    Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                                       Base rate neglect abstract
                                   1                                                                                                               1
Probability (Response time < x)




                                                                                                                Probability (Response time < x)
                                  .75                                                                                                             .75



                                   .5                                                                                                              .5



                                  .25                                                                                                             .25



                                   0                                                                                                               0
                                        0   200             400           600           800         1000                                                0   200             400           600           800         1000
                                                           Response time [sec.]                                                                                            Response time [sec.]

                                                  No incentives               Standard incentives                                                                 No incentives               Standard incentives
                                                  High incentives                                                                                                 High incentives



                                                    Base rate neglect intuitive                                                                                         Wason task abstract
                                   1                                                                                                               1
Probability (Response time < x)




                                                                                                                Probability (Response time < x)




                                  .75                                                                                                             .75



                                   .5                                                                                                              .5



                                  .25                                                                                                             .25



                                   0                                                                                                               0
                                        0   200             400           600           800         1000                                                0   200             400           600           800         1000
                                                           Response time [sec.]                                                                                            Response time [sec.]

                                                  No incentives               Standard incentives                                                                 No incentives               Standard incentives
                                                  High incentives                                                                                                 High incentives



                                                       Wason task intuitive                                                                                                   Anchoring
                                   1                                                                                                               1
Probability (Response time < x)




                                                                                                                Probability (Response time < x)




                                  .75                                                                                                             .75



                                   .5                                                                                                              .5



                                  .25                                                                                                             .25



                                   0                                                                                                               0
                                        0   200             400           600           800         1000                                                0   200             400           600           800         1000
                                                           Response time [sec.]                                                                                            Response time [sec.]

                                                  No incentives               Standard incentives                                                                 No incentives               Standard incentives
                                                  High incentives                                                                                                 High incentives




               Figure 9: Empirical CDFs of response times. For the purposes of this figure, response times are winsorized
               at 1,000 seconds, which corresponds approximately to the 99th percentile across all tasks and subjects.




                                                                                                           63
                                                         Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                                                   Base rate neglect
                           1.6                                                                                                                         1.6
Normalized response time




                                                                                                                            Normalized response time
                           1.4                                                                                                                         1.4



                           1.2                                                                                                                         1.2



                            1                                                                                                                            1



                            .8                                                                                                                          .8


                                       No incentives            Standard incentives           High incentives                                                 No incentives            Standard incentives               High incentives

                                                                          CRT                                                                                                    Abstract BRN                    Intuitive BRN



                                                           Contingent reasoning                                                                                                              Anchoring
                           1.6                                                                                                                         1.6
Normalized response time




                                                                                                                            Normalized response time
                           1.4                                                                                                                         1.4



                           1.2                                                                                                                         1.2



                            1                                                                                                                            1



                            .8                                                                                                                          .8


                                       No incentives            Standard incentives           High incentives                                                 No incentives            Standard incentives               High incentives

                                                         Abstract Wason               Intuitive Wason                                                                                               Anchoring




         Figure 10: Median normalized response times across incentive conditions. Response times are normalized
         relative to the no incentive condition: for each cognitive bias, we divide observed response times by the
         average response time in the no incentive condition. Error bars indicate +/- 1 s.e.




                                                             crt                                                       brn_abstract                                                                              brn_intuitive
                                              Log(RT+1) (P-p plot residuals)                                Log(RT+1) (P-p plot residuals)                                                               Log(RT+1) (P-p plot residuals)
                             1.00




                                                                                              1.00




                                                                                                                                                                                      1.00
                             0.75




                                                                                              0.75




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.75
                             0.50




                                                                                              0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.50
                             0.25




                                                                                              0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                             0.00




                                                                                              0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.00




                                    0.00        0.25         0.50         0.75        1.00           0.00       0.25                                   0.50      0.75         1.00           0.00         0.25        0.50        0.75     1.00


                                                       wason_abstract                                              wason_intuitive                                                                                anchoring
                                              Log(RT+1) (P-p plot residuals)                                Log(RT+1) (P-p plot residuals)                                                               Log(RT+1) (P-p plot residuals)
                             1.00




                                                                                              1.00




                                                                                                                                                                                      1.00
                             0.75




                                                                                              0.75




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.75
                             0.50




                                                                                              0.50




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.50
                             0.25




                                                                                              0.25




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.25
                             0.00




                                                                                              0.00




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.00




                                    0.00        0.25         0.50         0.75        1.00           0.00       0.25                                   0.50      0.75         1.00           0.00         0.25        0.50        0.75     1.00




                                 Figure 11: p-p plot of residuals from a regression of ln(1+RT) on incentive condition indicators.



                                                                                                                       64
                                                 Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                                          Base rate neglect
                             2                                                                                                             2
Normalized response time




                                                                                                               Normalized response time
                           1.5                                                                                                            1.5



                             1                                                                                                             1



                            .5                                                                                                             .5



                             0                                                                                                             0
                                 No incentives         Standard incentives            High incentives                                           No incentives          Standard incentives            High incentives

                                                              CRT                                                                                     Abstract Base rate neglect             Intuitive Base rate neglect
                                                              CRT prediction                                                                          Abstract BRN prediction                Intuitive BRN prediction



                                                  Contingent reasoning                                                                                                    Anchoring
                            2                                                                                                               2
Normalized response time




                                                                                                               Normalized response time




                           1.5                                                                                                            1.5



                            1                                                                                                               1



                            .5                                                                                                             .5



                            0                                                                                                               0
                                 No incentives         Standard incentives            High incentives                                           No incentives          Standard incentives            High incentives

                                       Abstract Wason                        Intuitive Wason                                                                               Anchoring
                                       Abstract Wason prediction             Intuitive Wason prediction                                                                    Anchoring prediction




         Figure 12: Average response time by incentive level relative to average expert predictions. Error bars on
         response times indicate +/- 1 s.e.




                                                                                                          65
E    Comparison with Expert Forecasts

This appendix characterizes the differences between the distributions of participant re-

sponses and expert forecasts. In Figure 13, we plot the empirical distribution of our

expert predictions alongside the posterior distribution of actual performance for each

task. Each posterior distribution is centered around actual performance and has a stan-

dard deviation equal to the corresponding standard error in Figure 5. For all tasks, there

is excess mass on the right tail of the posterior distribution of performance.




                                           66
                          Cognitive Reflection Test                                                                  Base rate neglect abstract
     15




                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                 15
     10
Density




                                                                                            Density
                                                                                              10
     5




                                                                                                 5
     0




                                                                                                 0
            0       .2               .4              .6            .8             1                   0       .2               .4              .6            .8             1
                                      Fraction correct                                                                          Fraction correct

                Expert predictions             Posterior distribution of performance                      Expert predictions             Posterior distribution of performance



                          Base rate neglect intuitive                                                                    Wason task abstract
                                                                                                 15
     10
     8




                                                                                                 10
Density




                                                                                            Density
     46




                                                                                                 5
     2
     0




                                                                                                 0




            0       .2               .4              .6            .8             1                   0       .2               .4              .6            .8             1
                                      Fraction correct                                                                          Fraction correct

                Expert predictions             Posterior distribution of performance                      Expert predictions             Posterior distribution of performance



                             Wason task intuitive                                                                              Anchoring
     10




                                                                                                 8
     8




                                                                                                 6
        6
 Density




                                                                                            Density
                                                                                              4
4




                                                                                                 2
     2
     0




                                                                                                 0




            0       .2               .4              .6            .8             1                   0       .2                .4            .6           .8               1
                                      Fraction correct                                                             1 - correlation b/w response and anchor

                Expert predictions             Posterior distribution of performance                      Expert predictions             Posterior distribution of performance




   Figure 13: Empirical distributions of expert predictions and posterior distributions of actual performance.




                                                                                       67
F      Experimental Instructions and Decision Screens

F.1      General Instructions for Part 1

      Instructions

      Thank you for participating in this experiment. Please read the instructions below
      carefully.

      The experiment consists of several parts, each of which is independent.


      At completion of the study, you will receive 450 KSh via Mpesa for your participation. 50
      KSh will be given for arriving on time. This will be paid within 24 hours.


      These payments will be made regardless of whether your answers are correct or not.

      If you have a question at any point during the experiment, please raise your hand and
      one of us will come to your desk.


      What follows are the instructions for the first part. Once you are ready to start, please
      click the "Start" button to proceed.




                                                 Part 1                                    Start

      We will ask you two questions on the upcoming screens. Please answer them to the best
      of your ability.

                                          Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                                                           Start




                                          Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                   68
F.2       General Instructions for Part 2

      You have completed Part 1 of the study.


      Part 2 will now begin.




                                                     Part 2                                            


      We will ask you two questions on the upcoming screens. Please answer them to the best of your
      ability.
                                              Powered by Qualtrics A


      Please remember that you will earn a guaranteed show-up fee of 450 KSh.


      While there was no opportunity to earn a bonus in the previous part, you will now have the
      opportunity to earn a bonus payment of 13000 KSh (thirteen thousand KSh) if your answer is
      correct.


      One of the questions will be randomly selected for payment. If your answer to that question is
      correct, you will receive the bonus payment of 13000 KSh (thirteen thousand KSh). If your answer to
      that question is incorrect, you will not earn the bonus payment.


      This payment will be sent via Mpesa and will arrive within 72 hours.




      Remember, you will now have the opportunity to earn a bonus payment of 13000                     
      KSh (thirteen thousand KSh) if your answer is correct.



                                              Powered by Qualtrics A

                                                                                                       




                                              Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                       69
F.3      Sample Task Instructions

Recall that different participants solved different sets of tasks for each bias. The full set

of tasks is outlined in Appendix B, and our process for randomization is described in

Section 2.


F.3.1     Cognitive Reflection Test


      A pencil and an eraser cost 110 KSh in total. The pencil costs 100 KSh more than the
      eraser. How much does the eraser cost? (Please provide your answer in KSh)




                                                                                          
      It takes 5 workers 5 minutes to pack 5 boxes. How long would it take 10 workers to pack
      10 boxes? (Please provide your answer in minutes)


                                         Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                                                         




                                         Powered by Qualtrics A
F.3.2     Base rate neglect


      In this task, we will ask you to make two estimates. Your answers can range from 0 to
      100. We will compare each answer to the estimate of an expert. Your answer will be
      counted as correct if it is no more than 2 away from the expert's estimate.




                                                                                         




                                         Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                  70
Suppose the Kenyan police set up a road block to test drivers for drunk driving. They
stop every bus and taxi driver that passes with an Alcoblow test.


The Alcoblow shows a red light when it detects that the person is drunk, and a green
light when it detects the person is not drunk. However, the test is not completely reliable
and can give a wrong indication.


Now suppose that 100 out of every 10,000 drivers who are stopped at a routine police
control are actually drunk.


When ACTUAL drunk drivers are tested, the Alcoblow shows a red light for 55 of those
100 drunk drivers.


But, of the remaining 9,900 drivers who are NOT drunk, the Alcoblow test also shows a
red light for 500 of these 9,900 non-drunk drivers.


To make this very clear, a diagram presenting this information is shown below:




Now suppose that in a new sample of 2000 drivers, the Alcoblow test showed a red light
for 100 drivers. Of these 100 drivers, how many drivers do you expect to have actually
been drunk? (options 0 to 100 in steps of 1)




                                            71                                         
1% of women screened at age 40 have breast cancer.


If a woman has breast cancer, the probability is 80% that she will get a positive
mammography.

If a woman does not have breast cancer, the probability is 9.6% that she will get a
positive mammography.


A 40-year-old woman had a positive mammography in a routine screening. What is the
probability that she actually has breast cancer? (answer in %, options 0 to 100% in
steps of 1)




                                                                                      




                                    Powered by Qualtrics A




                                             72
F.3.3   Wason selection task


          You are in charge of enforcing alcohol laws at a bar. You will lose your job unless you
          enforce the following rule:


          If a person drinks an alcoholic drink, then they must be at least 18 years old.

          The cards below have information about four people sitting at a table in your bar. Each
          card represents one person. One side of a card tells what a person is drinking, and the
          other side of the card tells that person's age.

          In order to enforce the law, which of the card(s) below would you definitely need to turn
          over? Indicate only those card(s) you definitely need to turn over to see if any of these
          people are breaking the law.




          Select the card(s) you want to turn over:


               Drinking Beer          Drinking Soda             16 Years Old        25 Years Old




                                                                                                   




                                               Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                       73
Suppose you have a friend who says he has a special deck of cards. His special deck of
cards all have numbers (odd or even) on one side and colors (brown or blue) on the
other side. Suppose that the 4 cards from his deck are shown below.

Your friend also claims that in his special deck of cards, even numbered cards are never
brown on the other side. He says:


"In my deck of cards, all of the cards with an even number on one side are blue on
the other."


Unfortunately, your friend doesn't always tell the truth, and your job is to figure out
whether he is telling the truth or lying about his statement.


From the cards below, turn over only those card(s) that can be helpful in determining
whether your friend is telling the truth or lying. Do not turn over those cards that cannot
help you in determining whether he is telling the truth or lying.




Select the card(s) you want to turn over:


        4 Card                  9 Card                Blue Card              Brown Card




                                             74
F.3.4    Anchoring


   For this task, please first do the following. Take the last digit of your phone number.

          If it is 4 or less, please enter below the first two digits of your year of birth.
          If it is 5 or above, please enter below 100 minus the first two digits of your year of
          birth.


   Enter the two digits:




   In this task, you will be asked to make two estimates. Each time, you will be asked to
                                                                                        

        1. assess whether you think the quantity is greater than or less than the two digits that
           were just generated from your year of birth
        2. give an estimate of the quantity (a number
                                          Powered      between
                                                  by Qualtrics A 0 and 100).

   Your answer will be counted as correct if it is no more than 2 away from the actual
   number.



   Is the weight (in hundreds of tons) of the Eiffel Tower's metal structure more than or less
   than 19 hundred tons?                                                                  


        More than 19 hundred tons


                                          Powered by Qualtrics A
        Less than 19 hundred tons




   What is the weight (in hundreds of tons) of the Eiffel Tower's metal structure? (options 0
   to 100 in steps of 1)                                                                  




                                          Powered by Qualtrics A



                                                                                             




                                          Powered by Qualtrics A


                                                   75
F.4      Excerpt from Post-Experimental Questionnaire


      You will now be asked some questions that test your understanding of the study so far.



      Was it possible to earn a bonus in part 1 of the study? (In this part, you answered questions on
      selecting cards.)


        No



        Yes, there was a possible bonus of




      Was it possible to earn a bonus in part 2 of the study? (In this part, you made estimates with
      respect to a number you calculated from your phone number and year of birth.)


        No



        Yes, there was a possible bonus of




                                                                                                       




                                              Powered by Qualtrics A




                                                       76
In Part 2 of the survey, you answered the following question:

In 1911, pilot Calbraith Perry Rodgers completed the first airplane trip across the
continental U.S., taking off from Long Island, New York and landing in Pasadena,
California.


How many days did it take Rodgers to complete the trip? (options 0 to 100 in steps of 1)


Your answer to this question was: 33

How confident are you that this answer is within 2 of the correct
solution?
                       Not              Somewhat
                    Confident   Not       Not             Somewhat              Very
                      at All  Confident Confident Neutral Confident Confident Confident
How confident are
you?




                                                                                      




                                    Powered by Qualtrics A




                                             77
