                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH AND WORKERS' JOB TRANSITIONS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM CENSAL MICRODATA

                                         Elias Albagli
                                        Mario Canales
                                        Chad Syverson
                                         Matias Tapia
                                         Juan Wlasiuk

                                      Working Paper 28657
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28657


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank seminar participants at the Central Bank of Chile Workshop on Labor Markets and
Productivity. The views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the position of the Central Bank of Chile or its Board members. Any errors or
omissions are responsibility of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Elias Albagli, Mario Canales, Chad Syverson, Matias Tapia, and Juan Wlasiuk. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Productivity Growth and Workers' Job Transitions: Evidence from Censal Microdata
Elias Albagli, Mario Canales, Chad Syverson, Matias Tapia, and Juan Wlasiuk
NBER Working Paper No. 28657
April 2021
JEL No. D2,E23,J2,J6,L11

                                          ABSTRACT

A large body of work has highlighted the importance of employment reallocation as a driver of
aggregate productivity growth, but there is little direct evidence on the extent and nature of this
process at the worker-firm level. We use an administrative matched employer-employee census
for Chile to provide novel insights into the relationship between job transitions and productivity
variation across firms. As many theories would predict, worker flows from lower- to higher-
productivity firms are larger than those of the opposite sign. Empirically, however, this is only
marginally so. Almost half of all transitions occur "down the firm productivity ladder." This
process is also highly heterogeneous along several dimensions. Up-the-ladder flows are more
likely for direct job-to-job transitions than those that pass through nonemployment. They are also
much more likely for young, high-skilled workers, whose job transitions comprise in an
accounting sense the lion's share of aggregate productivity change. Interestingly, workers with
the highest job turnover rates contribute proportionally the least to aggregate productivity
changes. Put together, this evidence implies that the productivity mechanics of job reallocation
yields a net benefit, but this hides massive and heterogeneous gross flows underneath.

Elias Albagli                                    Matias Tapia
Central Bank of Chile                            Central Bank of Chile
Monetary Policy Division                         mtapia@bcentral.cl
ealbagli@bcentral.cl
                                                 Juan Wlasiuk
Mario Canales                                    Central Bank of Chile
Central Bank of Chile                            Agustinas 1180
mcanales@bcentral.cl                             Santiago, RM 6500590
                                                 Chile
Chad Syverson                                    jwlasiuk@bcentral.cl
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chad.syverson@chicagobooth.edu
1    Motivation
Labor markets reallocate workers across firms and sectors over time. The ease with which
such reallocation responds to shifts in supply and demand primitives at the micro level
has considerable influence on businesses' and industries' trajectories, frictional unem-
ployment, and over longer horizons, aggregate productivity growth. On this last point,
a large body of work suggests that reallocation of labor and other factors works in the
"right direction"--that is, away from firms with lower marginal products and toward those
with higher marginal products. In aggregate, this process explains a relevant share of an
economy's productivity gains.

    At the same time, however, substantial differences in measured productivity across
firms persist. Frictions limit the speed and completeness of productivity-enhancing real-
locations.

    In this paper we seek to make some headway in understanding how labor market
reallocation interacts with the presence of heterogeneous-productivity firms. We both
quantify the influence of labor reallocation on aggregate productivity growth and learn
more about the frictions that limit its influence.

    We conduct our investigation by leveraging a matched employer-employee census for
Chile between 2005 and 2016. Chile is an interesting case study in labor reallocation
dynamics for several reasons. It is a small open economy with substantial exposure to
relative price shocks, particularly in commodities. This, alongside the influence of techno-
logical change, leads to a significant amount of labor reallocation across firms and sectors.
In fact, Chile ranks highest among OECD countries in terms of labor turnover, with large
job creation and destruction rates at the firm level and short employment spells for in-
dividual workers (Albagli et al., 2017). At the same time, as in many other countries,
there is a large degree of persistent measured misallocation across Chilean firms, pointing
to sizeable potential productivity gains through employment reallocation (Busso et al.,
2013; Bergoeing et al., 2010). This poses a puzzle directly tied to our core question: if
the labor market is so fluid, why are productivity differentials across firms so persistent?
Do individual job transitions really correlate with productivity differentials?

    Our data allow us to track individual workers' job histories at monthly frequency and
to compute annual firm-level productivity measures across all economic sectors. This en-
ables a detailed look at how productivity gaps across firms relate to worker flows among
them, as well as a direct quantification of the relative contributions of different worker
groups to aggregate productivity gains from reallocation.

   We highlight three main results. First, while on average individual job transitions
move workers from lower-productivity to higher-productivity firms, the fraction of all job
changes that flow up the productivity ladder is only marginally higher than those in the
opposite direction. Almost half (49% in our preferred specification) of all job changes
move workers towards firms that have lower productivity levels than their prior employer.
Thus net labor reallocation towards higher-productivity firms hides a very large degree of
job churning whose productivity implications mostly cancel.



                                             1
    Second, we show that the fraction of up-the-productivity-ladder transitions varies sig-
nificantly across job flow types and across firm productivity levels. They are more likely
for direct job-to-job transitions than for those passing thorough non-employment spells.
This is consistent with standard job-search theory, in the sense that movements resulting
from on-the-job search should lead to better quality jobs more likely to be available at
higher productivity firms. They are also more likely to occur between firms at the high
end of the productivity distribution, with up-the-ladder transitions originating from low
productivity firms happening less frequently than implied by a model of completely ran-
dom movements.

    Third, the job transitions of younger workers, workers with high skills, and female
workers are more likely to be to higher-productivity firms and correspond to larger produc-
tivity gains. In fact, young skilled workers provide the plurality of net labor reallocation
to higher productivity firms. The net contributions of other large groupings are modest
or even negative. Workers with the highest turnover rates contribute proportionally little
to aggregate productivity growth.

   Overall, our findings sound a note of caution, or at least modesty in interpretation,
about the connections between labor market fluidity and aggregate productivity growth.
While fluidity enables reallocation of resources to more productive firms, many of the
observed job transitions appear to happen for reasons that are orthogonal to industry or
aggregate productivity growth. The flip side of this coin is that there may be a substantial
amount of untapped potential for labor reallocations to enhance productivity growth.

    Our paper relates to several strands of literature. The first are studies document-
ing and analyzing the existence of persistent productivity differences across firms, and
the potential efficiency gains of unrealized labor reallocation (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009;
Restuccia and Rogerson, 2013; Dias et al., 2016). A second literature looks more directly
at the role of actual employment reallocation across firms as a relevant driver of aggregate
productivity growth (De Loecker and Konings, 2006; Foster et al., 2008; Syverson, 2011;
Melitz and Polanec, 2015). These papers are closest to the spirit of our analysis. We add
to their insights by directly quantifying flows up versus down the productivity ladder, as
well as the actual contributions to aggregate efficiency gains of different types of job-flows
and worker types. A third body of evidence studies the determinants and implications of
individual job transitions (Topel and Ward, 1992; Fallick et al., 2011; Davis et al., 2012;
Foster et al., 2016; Sorkin, 2018) and, more recently, links such transitions to movements
along job ladders from the perspective of workers (Menzio et al., 2016; Lise and Robin,
2017; Moscarini and Postel-Vinay, 2018; Bagger and Lentz, 2019). Our results are gen-
erally consistent with their findings, but complement them by linking evidence from the
point of view of workers to that of productivity gaps between firms.

    We describe our data and methodology in the next section. Section 3 presents evi-
dence of overall efficiency gains from job flows, differentiating by job transition type and
by firm of origin productivity levels. Section 4 further studies the role of heterogeneity
at the worker level, and provides a direct quantification of the relative contribution of
different groups to aggregate productivity-gains. Section 5 concludes.




                                              2
2       Data and Methodology
Our data comes from two main sources. First, the Chilean tax authority, SII, provides
tax records for the universe of Chilean firms from 2005 through 2016. The annual tax
statement (F22) provides information on each firm's balance sheet, including data on
sales, expenditures in intermediate inputs, the wage bill, and capital stocks. Additionally,
firms file a labor compensation report (DJ1887) that records the annual compensation
paid to each employee and the specific months in which she was employed at the firm. We
use this information to build a monthly matched employer-employee dataset in which we
observe the employment status of an individual worker, earnings, and any job transitions.
Because all formal firms must report to the SII, the data covers any worker with a formal
wage contract. This represents roughly 60% of all employment in Chile. All data are
anonymized to ensure confidentiality of firms' and workers' identities.

    Second, we obtain workers' genders and dates of birth from the Chilean Civil Registry
and Identification Service (Servicio de Registro Civil e Identificación) and match it to the
SII data.

    We apply a set of filters to obtain the final dataset in our empirical analysis. First,
we drop all firms that have only one employee for an entire year, as it seems likely that
they represent some form of self-employment rather than an actual firm with workers in
the spirit of our exercise. We also drop all workers employed in those firms. This is about
1.7% of the initial set of 48 million monthly worker-job matches. Second, we want to
avoid spurious job transitions in which workers move to a "new" firm with a different tax
ID that is actually directly linked to the previous firm. This includes cases in which the
firm tax ID changes, M&As, or separations of a single firm into several business entities
for tax reasons. We address this by excluding from the set of transitions all cases in
which a significant share of a firm's workforce jointly reallocates to another firm, whether
existing or new. This removes just under 5000 firms.1 Third, we must assign any workers
employed by more than one firm in a given month to a single job and employer. We
classify the worker's main job as the one with the longest current tenure and, if there is
a tie, the one with the highest average monthly earnings. About 8% of our worker-job
observations are dropped as secondary jobs. Finally, as we want to focus on full-time jobs
but have no information on hours, we drop all employment relations in which the worker
earns an implied full-time wage that is less than the minimum wage for 80% of her tenure.
These jobs, which account for 20% of the initial set of observations, are probably part-time.

    We calculate average labor productivity at the firm level as a measure of annual sales
(from form F22) per annual-equivalent worker. Firms' annual-equivalent workers are sim-
ply the sum of workers in firms' monthly DJ1887 reports, divided by 12. For example, a
firm with one worker who is employed the entire year and two employees who each work
in six months of the year (whether overlapping months or not) has two annual-equivalent
    1
      We use a sliding scale to define en masse transitions likely to reflect spurious firm changes. Namely,
we do not consider job transitions where the following fractions of workers in a firm of a given size category
jointly move to the same firm: 100% of workers in firms with 4-5 employees, 90% of workers in firms
with 6-10 employees, 80% of workers in firms with 11-20 employees, 70% in firms with 21-50 employees,
60% in firms with 51-100 employees, 50% in firms with 101-200 employees, or 20% in firms with over 200
employees. These thresholds are of course rather arbitrary, but results were not affected when choosing
different reasonable thresholds.

                                                      3
employees.2 Thus, average labor productivity is defined at an annual level.3

    We define job transitions as changes in the firm identity tied to the worker's main
job. If this occurs over two consecutive months, we consider it a job-to-job transition.
If there is a gap of a month or more between jobs, we label it as a transition through
a non-employment spell. This could reflect unemployment, exit from the labor force, or
given the limits of our data, a spell of employment in the informal sector.

    We do not have worker education data, so we use workers' earnings to classify them
into skill groups. We follow the methodology proposed by Borovicková and Shimer (2017),
who define a worker's skill type as the expected wage she should receive in an employment
relationship, conditional on accepting the job. This provides a measure of the market's
valuation of the worker's skills, reflecting human capital acquired through both education
and experience. Results throughout the paper are robust to simpler methodologies, such
as a worker's earnings quantile within gender-cohort groups.

   To compute the Borovicková and Shimer (2017) skill group, we first obtain the residual
from a regression of logged monthly real earnings of worker i in firm j and year t, wijt ,
on indicators for the year, dt , as well as for the worker's age-by-gender group, da,g . The
regression is shown in equation 1.


                                              2016
                             wijt = 0 +               dt +          da,g + ijt                       (1)
                                             t=2005           a,g



   We average this residual through each worker's observed employment history to obtain
an estimate of the worker's type. Finally, we rank workers by type into quintiles, weight-
ing by the worker's observed length of employment. Because the methodology removes
the time component of wages, this worker ranking is time-invariant and comparable across
the sample.

    We also classify workers based on their job turnover propensity. Using observed job
tenure histories, we run Cox survival regressions on the duration of employment spells,
including those that remain open at the end of the sample. These hazard models control
for gender and age. The residuals are ranked and workers sorted into separation haz-
ard quintiles. These residuals reflect an estimate of an individual worker's idiosyncratic
propensity toward high or low job turnover.




   2
      For consistency with the concept of labor productivity, we include all workers employed in the firm
at any given month, regardless of whether they had multiple jobs.
    3
      For robustness, we repeated all our analyses below using alternative measures of productivity, such
as TFPR (actually, here, the residual of the revenue function) and the marginal revenue product of labor
constructed using the methodology in Ackerberg et al. (2015). We do not present these results here for
the sake of brevity, but they are qualitatively similar and available upon request.

                                                     4
3     Job Transitions and Productivity Sorting Patterns
We begin our analysis by relating worker transitions between firms to differences in those
firms' labor productivity levels.

    For each transition, we calculate the difference between the logged labor productivity
levels of the destination and origin firms. This measures both the direction of any given
transition--whether the worker went up or down the productivity job ladder--as well as
the magnitude of the change. We present statistics of this distribution in Table 1.



                        Table 1: Job Transitions and Productivity Gaps
                      Average                                              Share
                                                                                          Transi-
                    Productivity        p25        p50         p75        Upward
                                                                                           tions
                       Gap                                                Trans.
                        (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)          (5)              (6)

    Panel A: Labor Productivity
    All            7.6       -62.5                  5.2       76.1          52.4        11,017,590
    Job-to-Job    15.9       -51.4                  8.3       78.2          54.2         4,160,740
    Job-N-Job      2.6       -69.7                  2.9       74.9          51.2         6,856,850

    Panel B: Adjusted Labor           Productivity
    All            4.6                -63.6     2.8           71.6          51.3        11,017,590
    Job-to-Job    14.0                -51.6     7.5           75.7          53.8         4,160,740
    Job-N-Job     -1.0                -71.1    -0.5           69.2          49.8         6,856,850

Note: Productivity measured as log average labor productivity. Productivity gaps are defined as the
difference between the firm of destination and the firm of origin for any given job transition. Values
multiplied by 100 for readability. "Upward transitions" are defined as job transitions with a positive
productivity gap.
Source: Authors' calculations based on Chilean SII data.


    Panel A presents the results across all 11 million transitions in our sample. Consistent
with reallocation being a factor behind productivity growth, the average labor produc-
tivity gap between the destination and origin firm in a worker transition is about 8%.
However, this aggregate result averages over enormous heterogeneity. This is clear in the
large dispersion of the productivity differentials. The 25th percentile of the distribution
involves a worker moving to a firm with a labor productivity level about half the size
(e-0.625 = 0.535) of the firm she left. The 75th percentile transition is to a firm with
a productivity level more than twice as high (e0.761 = 2.14). The rough symmetry of
this dispersion is reflected in the fact that the share of job transitions that move up the
productivity ladder is only a shade above half, with 47.6% of worker transitions being to
firms less productive than the origin firm.

   This is a striking result. While net reallocation flows are directed towards more pro-
ductive firms, the process involves an enormous degree of churning in both directions.
Theoretically, even in a frictionless world in which all job transitions were efficient, some

                                                    5
transitions down the firm-productivity ladder might be motivated by better firm-worker
matches or from other non-pecuniary motives that might drive worker reallocation across
different firms (Sorkin, 2018). Nonetheless, the fact that the frequency of upward flows is
only marginally higher than that of a completely random reallocation benchmark, with
a 50% unconditional change of moving up or down the firm-productivity ladder, is notable.

    To our knowledge, there is little comparable evidence available in the prior literature.
A notable exception is the work by Stoyanov and Zubanov (2012), who study labor flows
and productivity in Denmark's manufacturing sector. Their research focus is different
from ours, centering on the potential externalities created when workers from more to
less productive firms, rather than a comprehensive characterization of reallocation and
productivity. However, they do mention the share of upward transitions in their data is
55%. This figure is somewhat higher but still close to our findings.

    The second and third rows of Panel A show the separate distributions for direct job-
to-job transitions and those broken by a spell outside formal employment (job-N-job).
Job-to-job transitions account for 37% of all transitions in our sample. They are asso-
ciated with larger average productivity gaps between destination and origin firms, and
indeed the whole distribution of productivity differentials shifts to the right. Workers
that change jobs directly are therefore more likely to climb productivity ladders and their
movements correspond to larger productivity differentials. In fact, if we sum all produc-
tivity changes tied to every reallocated worker, job-to-job transitions account for almost
80% of this implied aggregate productivity gain.

    This pattern is consistent with the presence of search frictions in the reallocation pro-
cess. The idea of on-the-job search introduced by Burdett and Mortensen (1998) implies
that direct job-to-job transitions are likely to represent voluntary movements to better
matches. To the extent that match qualities correlate positively with measures of firm-
level productivity, there should be a link between direct job-to-job transitions and worker
moving upwards through a productivity ladder. On the other hand, the productivity-
enhancing effects of indirect job transitions, where the worker goes through an intervening
spell without formal employment, are plausibly weaker. For example, a worker who ex-
perienced an involuntary separation from her prior employer and had to find work might
end up accepting a worse match, as long as it satisfies her reservation wage.

    All this said, while the share of upward transitions is larger among job-to-job transi-
tions, the fraction is still relatively close to 50%. Even direct job-to-job transitions reflect
a very noisy reallocation process.

    Panel B addresses a potential concern regarding the exercise shown in Panel A. As
discussed earlier, our data defines firm productivity by calendar years. Transitions that
occur between calendar years compare productivity measures across different points in
time. Secular aggregate productivity growth implies that the average true productivity
gaps for across-year transitions would be overestimated. Additionally, the raw productiv-
ity gap does not account for systematic differences in average labor productivity across
sectors, which are likely related to differences in capital intensity. We therefore adjust
productivity across years by subtracting from the measured destination-origin productiv-
ity difference both the average annual productivity growth over the period as well as, for


                                               6
transitions across sectors, the difference in mean sector productivity levels.

    After this adjustment, the average productivity gaps do become smaller, with the av-
erage differential for all transitions falling to about 5%, and 51.3% of transitions being
upwards. Most of the basic patterns in Panel A remain, however. The biggest difference
is that the average and median productivity gaps of job-N-job transitions are now slightly
negative. For the rest of the paper, our attention will focus on this measure of adjusted
labor productivity differences across transitions, although all results are qualitatively ro-
bust to using the unadjusted gaps summarized in Panel A.

    To have a sense of the macroeconomic scale of the reallocation process described by
the data, we sum sales per worker gaps across all job transitions that take place during
a given year and then divide that sum by firms' total sales that year. This calculation
assumes each transition leads to an output change equal to what would happen if the
transitioning worker experienced a labor productivity change equal to that between of
the two firms she transitions between. The sum of these output changes relative to total
output provides a metric of output growth coming from productivity gains through la-
bor reallocation. Over our sample period, the implied average annual sales growth from
reallocation computed in this way is 1.35%. For comparison, average annual total sales
growth in our data is 5.9%. This suggests that labor reallocation from lower to higher
marginal product activities is quantitatively important as a potential source of growth.

    Figure 1 presents another way to summarize the connections between labor realloca-
tion and productivity. It plots, for every percentile of the firm productivity distribution,
the probability that a given worker transition from an origin firm at that percentile is
to a destination firm with a higher productivity level. If worker reallocations were en-
tirely unrelated to productivity differentials, the probability would be given by a negative
45-degree line. For example, a transitioning worker leaving an origin firm at the 25th
percentile would have a 75 percent probability of moving to a higher-productivity firm.
As the figure shows, actual reallocation patterns depart from the random benchmark,
but modestly so, and the deviation from randomness varies systematically through the
productivity distribution. Movements up the productivity ladder are disproportionately
likely among workers employed by firms in the upper half of the productivity distribu-
tion. In contrast, workers leaving firms at the lower tail of the productivity distribution
are more likely to move to an even lower-productivity firm than if they moved randomly.

    It is also interesting that at the bottom end of the productivity distribution, job-to-job
and indirect transitions look virtually identical. For workers at low-productivity firms,
there seems to be no systematic difference between changing jobs directly or indirectly
in terms of the likelihood of moving up the productivity ladder. In contrast, the two
types of transitions look very different at the upper end of the productivity distribution.
Indirect transitions lie (almost) along the random reallocation benchmark, but job-to-job
transitions are much more likely to lead to movements up the job ladder.




                                              7
          Figure 1: Conditional probability of moving to a more productive firm




Note: Job transitions are sorted by adjusted labor productivity of the firm of origin. For each percentile
of this distribution, the figure plots the share of transitions to a more productive firm.
Source: Authors' calculations based on Chilean SII data.



4     Job Transitions and Worker Heterogeneity
In this section, we explore systematic differences in the labor reallocation-productivity
relationship across observable worker types.



4.1     Reallocation Patterns by Worker Groups: Firm-Level Evi-
        dence
For a first glance at the role of worker heterogeneity in employment transitions and produc-
tivity gaps, we replicate the exercise in Haltiwanger et al. (2018), who look at job-to-job
flows between low and high productivity firms (what they call "poaching flows") in the US
across different worker categories. This provides an analysis at the firm level, rather than
at the worker level as the rest of the paper, but provides some insights that can motivate
our later analysis.

    Haltiwanger et al. (2018) place firms into productivity quintiles and focus on net job-
to-job flows at the lowest and highest quintiles. Like our findings above, their results
show that net job-to-job flows are consistent with productivity-enhancing reallocation.
Net flows are negative for low-productivity firms and positive for high-productivity firms.
However, net inflows into high-productivity firms are not homogeneous across types of
individuals. Younger and more educated workers are over-represented.

    We find very similar patterns in Chile. Net job-to-job flows are negative (positive) for

                                                    8
                          Table 2: Poaching Patterns by Worker Type
                                           Low Productivity               High Productivity
                          Share in the        Net                            Net
                                                      Ratio                          Ratio
                           economy         Job-to-job                     Job-to-job
                              (1)             (2)      (3)                   (4)      (5)

     Panel A: By age
     Less than 25              13.0            26.7          2.05             14.2          1.09
     Age 25 - 34               31.1            46.6          1.50             48.1          1.55
     Age 35 - 44               26.5            19.4          0.73             24.3          0.92
     Age 45 or older           29.4             7.3          0.25             13.4          0.45

     Panel B: By worker skill type
     Low wage         23.4         10.0                      0.43             5.8           0.25
     Q2               23.3         24.7                      1.06             15.7          0.67
     Q3               20.6         29.5                      1.43             22.9          1.11
     Q4               17.3         25.8                      1.49             28.9          1.67
     High wage        15.4         10.0                      0.65             26.7          1.74



Note: This table summarizes net job-to-job transitions by age and worker skill categories. Following
Haltiwanger et al. (2018), we define high- (low-)productivity firms as the top (bottom) quintile in the
firm labor productivity distribution.
Source: Authors' calculations based on Chilean SII data.



low (high) productivity firms across all worker categories. This reinforces the idea that on
net, reallocation enhances productivity. More interestingly, though, poaching is far from
uniform across all workers. This can be seen in Table 2.

    Panel A presents poaching patterns across four age groups: workers younger than 25
years old, 25-34 years old, 35-44 years old, and 45 and older. Column (1) presents the
worker age groups' shares of all job-to-job transitions in the sample, while column (2)
reports the groups' shares of job-to-job transitions out of firms in the lowest productivity
quintile. As is clear in column (3), which reports the ratio of these two shares, workers
poached from these low-productivity firms are considerably younger. Even though those
under 35 account for only 44% of transitions, they are 73% of poached workers. Workers
over 45, while almost 30% of transitions, represent a scanty 7% of workers who leave low-
productivity firms. This is not completely a phenomenon of low-productivity firms. If we
focus on poaching from firms in the highest productivity quintile, as shown in columns
(4) and (5), the age pattern is not as strong yet still remains. More than 60% of work-
ers poached from these firms are younger than 35, and those over 45 are underrepresented.

   Panel B repeats the exercise for worker skill groups, where worker skills are proxied
by the lifetime earnings quintiles defined in Section 2. Once again, poaching patterns
are far from homogeneous. Here, the strongest patterns regard transitions away from
the highest-productivity firms. These are disproportionately high-skill (high-wage) work-

                                                    9
ers, with the highest skill quintile accounting for 1.7 times as many transitions from the
most productive firms as their overall share of transitions. Poaching from the lowest-
productivity firms is qualitatively similar but of smaller magnitude.

    Overall, the results in Table 2 indicate that worker heterogeneity is tied to systematic
differences in reallocation patterns. These differences are consistent with existent theory
and evidence on labor market dynamics, and are similar to the evidence found for the US
in Haltiwanger et al. (2018).

4.2    Reallocation Patterns by Worker Groups: Worker-Level Ev-
       idence
An enormous literature (Topel and Ward, 1992; Menzio et al., 2016; Lagakos et al., 2018)
has documented the importance of worker life-cycles in shaping employment dynamics
and the evolution of earnings. Job mobility is larger early in the employment life-cycle,
consistent with both young workers starting to build their job ladders and having lower
transition costs due to having built less sector- or firm-specific human capital. Earnings
growth is also especially strong in the first decade of labor market participation, pointing
to a rapid accumulation of skills and rapidly movement to better job matches. Workers
in the later portions of their work lives, on the other hand, move significantly less, have
flatter earnings profiles, and suffer significantly more from job displacements. It is there-
fore not surprising that younger workers play a leading role in employment reallocation
towards more productive firms.

    Similarly, there are reasons why movements up the productivity ladder might be more
likely for workers in the upper end of the ability distribution. For example, complemen-
tarities between high-productivity firms and high-skilled workers will naturally lead to
sorting as an equilibrium outcome.

     To explore these elements further and complement our firm-heterogeneity results in
the previous section with worker-heterogeneity results, we place every worker into one
of 25 age-by-skill worker groups. These use the five skills quintiles derived as above as
well as five age groups (less than 25, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55+). We compute the average
productivity gap associated with worker transitions within each group. We take further
advantage of our data to introduce one additional dimension by dividing the sample into
men and women. This is a particularly interesting dimension for an economy like Chile,
in which the gender wage gap is large and female labor participation, while growing, is
still low.




                                             10
                    Figure 2: Productivity gaps by worker characteristics

                     (a) Males                                            (b) Females




Note: The figure plots adjusted average productivity gaps resulting from job transitions, averaged by worker
type group.
Source: Authors' calculations based on Chilean SII data.


   Figure 2 graphs the results. The differences across groups reflect some remarkable
patterns.

    Consistent with the discussion above, productivity differentials are significantly larger
for young, skilled workers. They are the largest for workers younger than 25 and in the
top skill quintile. Productivity gaps decline monotonically with age, even conditioning
on skill, becoming almost negligible for workers over 45. They also tend to increase with
worker skill, conditioning on age. The one group where the average productivity differ-
ence between the destination and origin firm is clearly negative is for high-skilled workers
over 55. This may reflect that a large share of those transitions are non-voluntary and
associated with the destruction of such workers' valuable job ladders. Comparing across
genders, productivity gaps for a given age-skill group are consistently larger for female
workers. The sole exception is the youngest, least-skilled group, where long time gaps
between jobs are frequent. This indicates systematic gender-related difference in the pro-
cess of labor reallocation.

    Overall, these results are further evidence of the heterogeneity in the interaction be-
tween job transitions and productivity. Productivity-enhancing reallocation is signifi-
cantly stronger among young, high-skilled, and female workers. We now use these results
to decompose productivity gains from reallocation into group-level contributions.

4.3     Taking Stock: Decomposing Aggregate Gains from Job Re-
        allocation across Different Groups
We explore the aggregate implications of the heterogeneity documented above by com-
puting the total implied productivity change from worker transitions within each group.
For each worker category, we calculate the contribution as the average productivity dif-
ferential from job transitions within the group, weighted by the group's share of total
transitions. As with the analogous exercise we did above for the aggregate, this assumes
that each transitioning worker experiences a labor productivity change equal to the pro-


                                                  11
ductivity gap (positive or negative) between her destination and origin firm. To the best of
our knowledge, this decomposition of aggregate reallocation across worker characteristics
is novel to the literature, and provides a quantitative assessment of the microeconomic
structure that underlies macroeconomic reallocation.

    Table 3 presents the results. Column (1) decomposes the economy's average productiv-
ity gain from job transitions (4.69%) into the absolute contributions by age group (Panel
A), worker skill quintile (Panel B), gender (Panel C), and job tenure (turnover propensity)
quintiles (Panel D). Column (2) reports the share of total reallocation accounted for by
each group, while Column (3) reports the share of job transitions. Column (4) is the ratio
of (2) to (3).

   As suggested by the analysis in Figure 2, there is a lot of heterogeneity in implied
productivity effects across different types of workers. Almost half of the economy's
worker-reallocation-based productivity gains are associated with the job transitions of
workers between 25 and 34 years old, and this rises to 80% if those under 25 are included.
Productivity-enhancing labor reallocation is a young worker's game. Job transitions of
workers between 45 and 54 contribute a meager 0.8%, and those over 55 years old make a
negative contribution. This once again reflects the strong life-cycle effect in reallocation
patterns.

    Column (4) highlights that these results reflect more than the fact that workers under
35 are more mobile. Their share of the implied productivity gain considerably exceeds
their share of transitions. Younger workers not only transition more, they experience a
larger productivity gap when they do move.4 As discussed above, these age-specific real-
location patterns closely relate to the literature on life-cycle income profiles (Lagakos et
al., 2018; Menzio et al., 2016), which highlights that wage gains--likely associated with
successful job transitions towards better matches--are especially relevant during the first
decade of work experience.

    The worker skill decomposition in Panel B shows that average productivity differ-
entials are non-negative for all quintiles, but the relative contribution toward aggregate
productivity growth rises monotonically with our skills measure. Transitions from work-
ers in the first quintile make no contribution to productivity growth through reallocation.
Conversely, almost 60% of all reallocation gains come from the top two skill quintiles
despite representing only 38% of transitions. In fact, although workers in the highest
quintile move relatively infrequently (accounting only for 16% of all transitions), they
explain more than a third of aggregate reallocation-based labor productivity gains. These
results highlight that, conditional on switching jobs, more skilled individuals are more
likely to move to a firm with larger labor productivity. Productivity job ladders among
more skilled individuals are a relevant driver of reallocation-based productivity gains in
the economy.

    The third panel replicates the exercise for male and female workers. Female work-
ers punch above their weight in terms of productivity gains through labor reallocation.
While they account for only 21% of job transitions in the economy, they comprise 31% of
reallocation-based aggregate productivity gains.
   4
       As mentioned earlier, they are also more likely to move directly through job-to-job transitions.

                                                     12
        Table 3: Decomposition of Average Productivity Gains from Reallocation
                                                                                        Gains-to-
                     Weighted average            Share of            Share of job
                                                                                       transitions
                     productivity gains      productivity gains       transitions
                                                                                          ratio
                              (1)                      (2)                (3)              (4)
 Panel A: By age
 Less than 25                 1.46                    31.0%             18.3%             1.69
 Age 25 - 34                 2.66                     56.7%             35.3%             1.61
 Age 35 - 44                 0.70                     14.9%             24.8%             0.60
 Age 45 - 54                 0.04                      0.8%             15.4%             0.05
 Age 55 or older             -0.16                    -3.4%              6.2%             -0.55
 Total                        4.69

 Panel B: By worker skill quintile
 Low skill           0.00                              0.0%             15.4%             0.00
 Q2                  0.56                             12.0%             24.3%             0.49
 Q3                  0.98                             21.0%             22.8%             0.92
 Q4                  1.58                             23.6%             21.6%             1.56
 High skill          1.57                             33.5%             16.0%             2.09
 Total               4.69

 Panel C: By gender
 Male               3.25                              69.1%             79.3%             0.87
 Female             1.45                              30.9%             20.7%             1.49
 Total              4.69

 Panel D: By job tenures (turnover propensity)
 Short tenure        0.59             12.5%                             38.1%             0.33
 Q2                  0.92             19.5%                             25.9%             0.75
 Q3                  1.03             22.0%                             17.8%             1.24
 Q4                  1.17             24.9%                             11.7%             2.13
 Long tenure         0.99             21.1%                              6.6%              3.2
 Total               4.69


Note: Productivity measured as log average labor productivity. Weighted average productivity gains
are the adjusted average productivity gap in a group's worker transitions weighted by that group's
share of total transitions.
Source: Authors' calculations based on Chilean SII data.




                                                 13
    Panel D looks at the contribution of workers with different job tenures, based on the
job turnover propensity regressions described in Section 2. Workers in the two quintiles
with the shortest employment spells have a high turnover rate, and account for 64% of
all transitions. However, they represent only 32% of total reallocation gains. The bulk
of reallocation-based productivity gains come from quintiles 3 and 4, which contribute
47% of all gains despite being only 29% of job transitions. Workers on the fifth quintile
by definition seldom change jobs, and therefore represent a meager 6.6% of job tran-
sitions in the economy. Despite this, when they do move, they experience very large
productivity gains, providing 21% of the overall productivity growth through worker re-
allocation. This general pattern is seen in the gains-to-transitions ratio in column (4),
which increases strongly along the tenure groups and even more so than across skill levels.



5    Conclusions
This paper provides a novel and more complete characterization of the relationship be-
tween individual job transitions and the aggregate process of employment reallocation
that increases productivity by moving workers towards more productive firms.

    Our results suggest that this process has a complex structure. The labor market's
ability to reallocate workers away from less productive and into more productive firms
involves an enormous amount of labor turnover, with a very large share of job transitions
not leading to net productivity gains. Productivity-enhancing job transitions are not
uniformly distributed, but instead exhibit significant and systematic differences across the
distribution of firms and workers. Such transitions draw especially heavily from young,
high-skill workers. Workers who change jobs the most frequently contribute proportionally
the least to reallocation-based productivity growth. These patterns of heterogeneity,
besides being informative about some theories of the labor market and serving as useful
quantitative benchmarks, also demonstrate that a highly fluid labor market need not be
an unequivocal sign of economy-wide productivity gains.




                                            14
References
Ackerberg, Daniel A, Kevin Caves, and Garth Frazer, "Identification properties
 of recent production function estimators," Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2411­2451.
Albagli, Elías, Alejandra Chovar, Emiliano Luttini, Carlos Madeira, Alberto
 Naudon, and Matias Tapia, "Labor Market Flows: Evidence from Chile Using Micro
 Data from Administrative Tax Records," Working Papers Central Bank of Chile, 2017,
 812.
Bagger, Jesper and Rasmus Lentz, "An empirical model of wage dispersion with
 sorting," The Review of Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 153­190.
Bergoeing, Raphael, Facundo Piguillem, and Norman V Loayza, Why are devel-
 oping countries so slow in adopting new technologies? The aggregate and complementary
 impact of micro distortions, The World Bank, 2010.
Borovicková, Katarína and Robert Shimer, "High wage workers work for high wage
 firms," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T Mortensen, "Wage differentials, employer size, and
 unemployment," International Economic Review, 1998, pp. 257­273.
Busso, Matías, Lucia Madrigal, and Carmen Pagés, "Productivity and resource
 misallocation in Latin America," The BE Journal of Macroeconomics, 2013, 13 (1),
 903­932.
Davis, Steven J, R Jason Faberman, and John Haltiwanger, "Labor market flows
 in the cross section and over time," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2012, 59 (1), 1­18.
Dias, Daniel A, Carlos Robalo Marques, and Christine Richmond, "Misallocation
 and productivity in the lead up to the Eurozone crisis," Journal of Macroeconomics,
 2016, 49, 46­70.
Fallick, Bruce, John Haltiwanger, and Erika McEntarfer, "Nonemployment Dura-
  tion and the Consequences of Job Separations," Unpublished. Accessed November, 2011,
  15, 2011.
Foster, Lucia, Cheryl Grim, and John Haltiwanger, "Reallocation in the great
  recession: cleansing or not?," Journal of Labor Economics, 2016, 34 (S1), S293­S331.
  , John Haltiwanger, and Chad Syverson, "Reallocation, firm turnover, and effi-
  ciency: Selection on productivity or profitability?," American Economic Review, 2008,
  98 (1), 394­425.
Haltiwanger, John, Henry Hyatt, and Erika McEntarfer, "Who moves up the job
 ladder?," Journal of Labor Economics, 2018, 36 (S1), S301­S336.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter J Klenow, "Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in
 China and India," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403­1448.
Lagakos, David, Benjamin Moll, Tommaso Porzio, Nancy Qian, and Todd
  Schoellman, "Life cycle wage growth across countries," Journal of Political Economy,
  2018, 126 (2), 797­849.

                                          15
Lise, Jeremy and Jean-Marc Robin, "The macrodynamics of sorting between workers
  and firms," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (4), 1104­35.

Loecker, Jan De and Jozef Konings, "Job reallocation and productivity growth in a
  post-socialist economy: Evidence from Slovenian manufacturing," European Journal of
  Political Economy, 2006, 22 (2), 388­408.

Melitz, Marc J and Saso Polanec, "Dynamic Olley-Pakes productivity decomposition
 with entry and exit," The Rand Journal of Economics, 2015, 46 (2), 362­375.

Menzio, Guido, Irina A Telyukova, and Ludo Visschers, "Directed search over the
 life cycle," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2016, 19, 38­62.

Moscarini, Giuseppe and Fabien Postel-Vinay, "The cyclical job ladder," Annual
 Review of Economics, 2018, 10, 165­188.

Restuccia, Diego and Richard Rogerson, "Misallocation and productivity," Review
 of Economic Dynamics, 2013, 16 (1), 1­10.

Sorkin, Isaac, "Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2018, 133 (3), 1331­1393.

Stoyanov, Andrey and Nikolay Zubanov, "Productivity spillovers across firms
  through worker mobility," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2012, 4
  (2), 168­98.

Syverson, Chad, "What determines productivity?," Journal of Economic literature,
  2011, 49 (2), 326­65.

Topel, Robert H and Michael P Ward, "Job mobility and the careers of young men,"
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 439­479.




                                         16
