                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CHOOSING THE FUTURE:
       MARKETS, ETHICS, AND RAPPROCHEMENT IN SOCIAL DISCOUNTING

                                       Antony Millner
                                       Geoffrey Heal

                                     Working Paper 28653
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28653


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We are grateful to Maya Eden, Marc Fleurbaey, and Christian Gollier for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Antony Millner and Geoffrey Heal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Choosing the Future: Markets, Ethics, and Rapprochement in Social Discounting
Antony Millner and Geoffrey Heal
NBER Working Paper No. 28653
April 2021
JEL No. D61,D71,Q50

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper provides a critical review of the literature on choosing social discount rates (SDRs) for
public cost-benefit analysis. We discuss two dominant approaches, the first based on market
prices, and the second based on intertemporal ethics. While both methods have attractive
features, neither is immune to criticism. The market-based approach is not entirely persuasive
even if markets are perfect, and faces further headwinds once the implications of market
imperfections are recognised. By contrast, the `ethical' approach ­ which relates SDRs to
marginal rates of substitution implicit in a single planner's intertemporal welfare function ­ does
not rely exclusively on markets, but raises difficult questions about what that welfare function
should be. There is considerable disagreement on this matter, which translates into enormous
variation in the evaluation of long-run payoffs. We discuss the origins of these disagreements,
and suggest that they are difficult to resolve unequivocally. This leads us to propose a third
approach that recognises the immutable nature of some normative disagreements, and proposes
methods for aggregating diverse theories of intertemporal social welfare. We illustrate the
application of these methods to social discounting, and suggest that they may help us to move
beyond long-standing debates that have bedevilled this field.


Antony Millner
Department of Economics
University of California at Santa Barbara
North Hall
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
millner@ucsb.edu

Geoffrey Heal
Graduate School of Business
516 Uris Hall
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
gmh1@columbia.edu
1    Introduction
Towards the end of the first century AD the Roman emporer Domitian ordered the con-
struction of an aqueduct to serve the settlement of Segovia, a trading centre serendipitously
located in the middle of the Iberian peninsula. The aqueduct was an architectural marvel;
it transported water from the mountains over 15 km away, and required the construction
of 167 arches. The Sevogia aqueduct operated almost continuously for over 1800 years,
supplying the town with water until the early 20th century. It remains a tourist attraction
to this day.
    Nestled in a nature reserve on the Atlantic ocean, about half an hour's drive from central
Cape Town, sits Koeberg nuclear power station ­ the only such facility in Africa. Koeberg
is capable of producing 1860MW of zero-carbon electricity, and currently accounts for
about 5% of South Africa's electricity production. Carbon-intensive coal power accounts
for almost 90% of national production. Like all nuclear power stations, Koeberg produces
radioactive waste. Low grade waste is sealed in concrete drums and trucked up the coastal
highway to be buried in the Namaqualand desert, a region known for vivid displays of
spring wild flowers. High grade waste ­ spent fuel rods and the like ­ is too hazardous
to be transported. It is stored on site in cooling ponds, across the bay from a rapidly
expanding city of 4 million inhabitants. The half life of spent nuclear fuel is roughly
160,000 years.
    According to recent climate science (Ricke & Caldeira, 2014), the increase in global
average temperature due to a pulse of carbon dioxide emissions is likely greatest after only
10 years. But even after 100 years the temperature response is still at 80% of its peak.
Some studies have estimated that even if we stopped emitting carbon dioxide immediately
today, sea levels would continue to rise for a further 1000 years (Solomon et al., 2009).
    To what extent are large infrastructure projects, nuclear power, and reductions in
carbon dioxide emissions `good things' ? The three examples above serve to show that
these questions cannot be answered without consideration for the distant future ­ time
horizons extending to multiple decades, centuries, perhaps even millennia. How should
such projects be evaluated? If we take the conventional tools of cost-benefit analysis as
read, this question largely boils down to how to aggregate project consequences that occur
at different points in time. The tool that enables us to convert temporal streams of payoffs
into a net present value that captures the social value of a project is the social discount
rate (SDR). The SDR is the rate at which the social value of a marginal consumption
change declines as it moves further into the future. The values that governments pick

                                              2
for SDRs largely determine the degree of consideration that they give to the future when
evaluating investments and policy choices. It is not an overstatement to say that choosing
SDRs amounts to choosing a substantial part of the future itself.
     Despite its central role in determining the future orientation of government policy, the
choice of SDRs ­ especially for long-term project evaluation ­ has been a source of con-
troversy for decades. At the heart of this controversy is a fundamental methodological
schism in the community of scholars and practitioners who work on this issue. The central
line of cleavage concerns the relative importance of markets and ethics as determinants
of appropriate values for SDRs. Paraphrasing the arguments, those who view markets as
paramount argue that prices determine the opportunity costs of public investment, and
hence efficiency requires that social discount rates should coincide with observed market
rates of return. By contrast, proponents of the `ethical' approach point to the numerous
market imperfections that operate in the real world, and hence suggest that prices can-
not capture `true' social values. Instead, they propose to compute SDRs directly from a
normative model of society's intertemporal welfare function. This function represents in-
tertemporal distributive objectives in much the same way that the social welfare functions
used in optimal income tax theory capture intratemporal distributive objectives. While
this approach is less prone to the criticism of na¨  ive market perfectionism, it has its own
difficulties. In particular, the SDRs that emerge from this approach depend strongly on
normative parameters that capture e.g., societal impatience, aversion to inequality, and
attitudes to uncertainty. Small changes in the prescribed values for these parameters can
have an enormous effect on the evaluation of projects with long-run consequences. Since
these parameters capture primitive normative judgements about intertemporal social ob-
jectives, it will come as no surprise that there is a diverse set of views on how they should
be chosen. Critics of the `ethical' approach argue that it is paternalistic, or point to the
inherent indeterminacy of an analytic framework that rests on normative parameters about
which there can never be objective scientific consensus.
     The first purpose of this article is to lay out rigorous `steel man' presentations of the
approaches to social discounting based on markets and ethics respectively. Due to the at
times factional nature of the debate, each of these approaches is rarely presented in its
best light, and there are many attractions and difficulties with each of them that have not
been widely appreciated. The second purpose is to offer a rapprochement, a `third way'
that we believe has the potential to combine the best of both worlds. This new approach
draws on a recent literature on intertemporal social choice; a set of theoretical ideas that


                                              3
allows for the preservation of disagreements about intertemporal societal objectives, but
nevertheless seeks to achieve some kind of resolution or consensus that allows us to move
beyond them. Although nascent, we believe that this line of work avoids some of the
pitfalls of approaches to social discounting that rest on a na¨    ive faith in markets, or on
a single normative paradigm that is invariably open to attacks of paternalism or ethical
arbitrariness. Although there are many previous fine reviews of social discounting and its
role in public cost benefit analysis, much of what we will discuss has been published in
the last 15 years, and is thus absent from these treatments.1 We also believe that our
presentation offers something of a fresh perspective, in that we are mostly concerned with
the conceptual underpinnings of the dominant approaches to social discounting, rather
than calculations of discount rates under various detailed modelling assumptions.
    We begin with a discussion of what we can, and cannot, learn from market prices.
We suggest that while there are some situations where an approach to social discounting
based on observed prices may make sense, on the whole this requires a strong faith in
the welfare significance of prices, and is at best incomplete. Indeed, even if markets are
perfect, there are a number of reasons to be skeptical about whether prices are telling
us what we need to know for the purposes of setting SDRs. We discuss three of these:
limitations of revealed preference in dynamic choice contexts, intergenerational issues, and
the presence of heterogeneous or erroneous beliefs. We then discuss deficiencies in the
implementation of the market-based approach, focussing on the way governments currently
handle the maturity- and risk-dependence of discount rates. We close our discussion of this
approach with an elaboration of the consequences of market imperfections. We discuss
the implications of market incompleteness, and also point out that in the presence of
market failures competitive prices do not contain the information needed to determine
social discount rates at the social optimum, i.e., after inefficiencies have been corrected by
non-marginal policy instruments.
    We then provide a detailed treatment of the dominant normative paradigm for setting
discount rates, an approach based on computing intertemporal marginal rates of substi-
tution for an idealized planner with discounted utilitarian time preferences. We describe
the mechanics of this approach, the strong constraints on social preferences implicit in
the choice of the discounted utilitarian form for the planner's objective function, and the
   1
    Classic texts on public cost benefit analysis and other reviews of social discounting include Dasgupta
et al. (1972); Little & Mirrlees (1974); Lind (1982); Dreze & Stern (1987); Portney & Weyant (1999);
Groom et al. (2005); Heal (2005); Dasgupta (2008); Gollier (2012); Arrow et al. (2013, 2014); Gollier &
Hammitt (2014); Cropper et al. (2014); Groom & Hepburn (2017); Greaves (2017); van der Ploeg (2020).



                                                    4
debates surrounding how the normative parameters of that welfare function should be
chosen.
    Our final substantive section presents recent developments in intertemporal social choice,
and their potential applications to resolving disagreements about normative parameters
that strongly influence SDRs. We show that although there are several promising ap-
proaches in the literature, they have one recommendation in common: long-run risk-free
discount rates should be very low.


2       What can we learn from the markets?
We begin with a brief treatment of the problem of public investment appraisal in complete,
competitive markets, a useful point of departure for three reasons. First, much of the
formalism developed in the case of perfect markets can be applied to the more realistic case
of imperfect markets with appropriate modifications. Second, a careful treatment of perfect
markets will make it clear how special this case is; strong conditions must be satisfied in
order for this framework to be directly applicable in the real world. Finally, even if we
take the assumptions underlying the perfect markets model as read, there are a number
of important deficiencies in the way it is often implemented in practical applications. Our
treatment of this case thus highlights inconsistencies in the practice of social discounting
that are relevant even if we turn a blind eye to the strong assumptions that underpin this
approach.


2.1     Project appraisal in a perfect economy
Consider an exchange economy with I consumers, indexed by i = 1, 2, .., I , who have
preferences over N goods, indexed by n = 1, 2, ....., N . These goods can be consumed in
any of T + 1 time periods indexed by t = 0, 2, ...., T , and S states of the world indexed by
s = 1, 2, ..., S .2 We assume that there is no uncertainty about consumption in the initial
period. Consumer i's consumption bundle may thus be represented by the N (T S + 1)
    2
     For simplicity's sake our main discussion favours a static uncertainty interpretation of the state
space, i.e., the state s represents a single event about which consumers are uncertain at t = 0. Dealing
with dynamic uncertainty simply requires a redefinition of the state space. In a dynamic framework we
can think of a state of the world as a sequence of future events that occur at times 1, . . . , T , and we
are uncertain about which sequence will be realised right up until the end of the last period. Instead of
indexing consumption at time t by the state of the world s, we can index it by the history of events up to
time t, so that consumption in states of the world that share a common history up to time t is the same.
The relevant state space at time t is then just the set of all possible histories of length t.


                                                    5
dimensional bundle ci = (ci        i
                            n,0 , cn,t,s )n=1,...,N,t=1,...,T,s=1...,S . We will assume that consumer
i's preferences over consumption bundles are represented by a differentiable and strictly
quasi-concave utility function U i (ci ) that satisfies Inada-like conditions, and her initial
endowment of claims to time and state contingent consumption is  i . The function U i (ci )
captures consumer i's tastes and beliefs. A case that is often studied is where individuals
have expected discounted utilitarian preferences but we will not need to restrict ourselves
to this special case. Let pn,t,s be the price of good n in time period t and state s, and
let p be the N (T S + 1) dimensional vector of these prices.3 At the beginning of period 0
consumers trade on a complete set of state-contingent futures markets, so that they can
buy and sell any good at any date or any state of the world at the prices pn,t,s . We also
make enough additional assumptions (on preferences and endowments) to ensure that a
competitive equilibrium of the economy exists, and may be characterized by first order
conditions.
    We assume that consumers maximize their utility given their budget constraint:

                                    max
                                     i
                                        U i (ci ) s.t. p · ci = p ·  i .
                                     c


The first order conditions for this optimization problem imply that

                                            U i (ci )
                                            cn,t,s           pn,t,s
                                            U i (ci )
                                                        =                                        (1)
                                                            pn ,t ,s
                                            cn ,t ,s


where ci is the equilibrium consumption bundle of consumer i, determined by (1) and
the market clearing conditions.4 In a complete, competitive market, price ratios capture
all consumers' marginal rates of substitution between time and state contingent goods in
equilibrium.
    To see the implications of this result, let us simplify to the case where there is only one
consumption good in the economy (i.e., N = 1). We can thus suppress the index n, and
we can also choose (certain) consumption at t = 0 as the numeraire in this economy. Then
from (1) we have
                                             U i (ci )
                                             ct,s               pt,s
                                             U i (ci )
                                                            =        .                           (2)
                                                                 1
                                              c0

      It will be helpful for what follows to provide an interpretation of this result. Sup-
  3
      We again adopt the convention that when t = 0 the s index is redundant.
  4                          i          i
      These are given by i cn,t,s =   i n,t,s .



                                                        6
pose that consumer i with initial consumption vector c has the opportunity to sacrifice
a small amount 0 of current consumption in exchange for a bundle of marginal payoffs
(t,s )t=1,...,T,s=1,...,S . Should she do so? Denoting the vector of net payoffs by  , this trade
is advantageous iff
                                                                                              
                                                                T      S            U i (c)
                                                                                    ct,s
               U i (c +  ) - U i (c) > 0  -0 +                             t,s      U i (c)
                                                                                               > 0,              (3)
                                                                t=1 s=1             c0


where we have Taylor expanded to first order, neglecting higher order terms due to the
                                                                                                      U i (c)
                                                                                                      ct,s
marginality of payoffs. Thus we see that the marginal rate of substitution                            U i (c)
                                                                                                                tells
                                                                                                      c0

us the present value of the payoff t,s for consumer i at the consumption vector c. This
fact motivates us to define a set of consumption discount rates it,s (c) for consumer i as
follows:
                                                 i 
                                                                 U (c)
                                                                 ct,s
                                 (1 +   i
                                        t,s (c))
                                                 -t
                                                         :=      U i (c)
                                                                                                                 (4)
                                                                 c0


In what follows we will also often talk about the risk-free consumption discount rate i
                                                                                      t (c),
i.e., consumer i's discount rate on a sure transfer of current consumption to time t (i.e.,
t,s = t for all states s):
                                                                              
                                                           S        U i (c)
                                                                    ct,s
                                (1 + i
                                     t (c))
                                            -t
                                               :=               
                                                                    U i (c)
                                                                                                                 (5)
                                                          s=1       c0


Risk-free discount rates are related to state-contingent discount rates through:

                                                      S
                              (1 +   i
                                     t (c))
                                            -t
                                                 =         (1 + i       -t
                                                                t,s (c)) .
                                                     s=1


   Using the definition (4), consumer i's cost-benefit rule becomes:

                                       T    S
                            - 0 +                t,s (1 + i
                                                          t,s (c))
                                                                   -t
                                                                      > 0.                                       (6)
                                      t=1 s=1


The finding that all consumers' marginal rates of substitution at their equilibrium alloca-


                                                     7
tions are equal to competitive state prices can thus be restated in terms of their consump-
tion discount rates:
                                                    1/t
                                                1
                            i, i t,s ( c i
                                           ) =          - 1 := t,s .                     (7)
                                               pt,s
Consumption discount rates capture consumers' private relative valuations of marginal
consumption changes that occur at different times and in different states of the world.
Nevertheless, in competitive markets all individuals' marginal valuations are equal. This
identification between statistics of consumers' preferences (consumption discount rates) and
observable features of the world (competitive state prices) is at the heart of the approach
to social discounting based on markets. Since all individuals' consumption discount rates
are equal at the competitive equilibrium we can drop the i index, and simply talk about
the consumption discount rate, which we denote by          t,s . Similarly, we may talk about
                                           
the risk-free consumption discount rate t . The asterisk on these quantities indicates that
they are equal to individuals' consumption discount rates evaluated at their equilibrium
allocations.
    The results developed above in our model of an exchange economy apply equally well
in a productive economy. Consumers face similar optimization problems in a model with
production,5 and state prices will again reflect all consumers' marginal rates of substitution.
Modelling production explicitly does however provide an additional relationship between
competitive prices and economic fundamentals that has proven influential in the practice of
social discounting: in a competitive productive economy state prices also reflect aggregate
marginal rates of transformation, i.e., private returns on investment. In our model with
a single consumption good this relationship can be stated as follows. If Y is a vector of
aggregate net outputs in the economy, and T (Y) the aggregate transformation function,6
profit maximization implies that
                                                    T
                                                    Ct,s
                                           pt,s =   T
                                                             ,                                        (8)
                                                    C0 Y 


where Ct,s is aggregate consumption is state t, s. As the marginal rate of transformation
captures the technological rate of exchange between initial investments (i.e., reductions
   5
     Consumers' budget constraints must be modified to account for rents from inputs and shares in firms'
profits, but are otherwise identical.
   6
     The aggregate production set is given by T (Y) < 0. If there are no externalities and individual
firms have convex production sets a convex aggregate production set exists, and we can also work with an
aggregate transformation function for the economy as a whole, rather than modelling each firm's production
decisions individually (see e.g. Varian, 1992, p. 339).


                                                    8
in C0 ) and future consumption, we can think of it as defining a private rate of return on
investment r^t,s in state t, s:

                                                        T
                                                        C0                 1
                                         ^t,s )t =
                                    (1 + r              T
                                                                     =         .
                                                        Ct,s Y 
                                                                          pt,s

Of course, in a competitive equilibrium private rates of return are equal to consumption
discount rates:                                    1

                                               1 t
                                ^t,s = t,s =
                                r                    - 1.
                                              pt,s
    Suppose now that the economy is at a competitive equilibrium, and a government
                                                                i
wishes to evaluate a marginal public project that yields t,s      units of net consumption to
individual i at time t in state s. Since initial consumption c0 is the numeraire, consumer
                                                    i (ci )
i's marginal utility of income is given by i = Uc      0
                                                            > 0. Since the project is marginal,
consumer i's compensating and equivalent variations for the project are equal,7 and given
by
                          T    S U i (ci )             T       S                          T   S
            dU i
            i                    ct,s        i
           = i =                 U i (ci )
                                             t,s   =               (1 +        -t i
                                                                          t,s ) t,s   =                  i
                                                                                                    pt,s t,s .   (9)
                         t=1 s=1                       t=1 s=1                            t=1 s=1
                                  c0

The project constitutes a Pareto improvement relative to the initial market equilibrium iff

                                                   T       S
                                             i                      i
                                    i,  =                      pt,s t,s  0,
                                                   t=1 s=1


with the inequality being strict for at least one i. This is not a very practicable criterion for
project evaluation, as almost all projects will fail to be Pareto improvements. There are two
standard ways to proceed beyond this criterion. The first is to introduce a differentiable
social welfare function
                            W = W (U 1 (c1 ), U 2 (c2 ), . . . , U I (cI ))

that captures society's normative preferences over distributions of utility across individuals.
This construction invariably requires us to make interpersonal utility comparisons across
individuals. Let
                                        W
                                  wi =
                                        U i U (c1 ),...,U (cI )
   7
    Marginality here should be taken to mean that the project does not affect prices. If prices and incomes
change as a result of the project, there is no guarantee that a positive sum of compensating variations
across individuals implies the existence of a potential Pareto improvement (Blackorby & Donaldson, 1990).


                                                        9
be the social marginal welfare weight on individual i at the equilibrium allocation. The
project improves social welfare iff

                        I                  I                      T    S            I
                                 i                 i   i
               dW =          wi dU =           wi   =                       pt,s         wi i t,s
                                                                                              i
                                                                                                    > 0.   (10)
                       i=1             i=1                      t=1 s=1            i=1


As this expression shows, project payoffs across heterogeneous individuals are weighted by
their contribution to social welfare, computed as the product of the marginal utility of
income i and the social marginal welfare weight wi . i captures the impact of a small
change in wealth on consumer i's utility, and wi captures the impact of a small change
in consumer i's utility on social welfare. These quantities capture important information
about wealth effects, and society's attitudes to distributive justice, respectively.
     The second approach to aggregating project consequences across individuals is to ap-
peal to the Kaldor-Hicks potential compensation criterion. This criterion aims to separate
efficiency issues from distributional concerns, and obviates the need for interpersonal com-
parisons of utility. The Kaldor-Hicks criterion simply requires the winners to be able to
compensate the losers, in theory, i.e.,

                                 I             T       S               I
                                       i                                    i
                                       =                   pt,s             t,s    > 0.                    (11)
                                i=1            t=1 s=1                i=1


If this criterion is satisfied then there exist hypothetical lump-sum transfers that could
make the project a Pareto improvement (and conversely, no such transfers exist otherwise).
These transfers need not actually occur, and are almost always infeasible in practice.8
    For the remainder of the paper we largely ignore the issues that are involved in aggre-
gating project consequences across individuals, and instead focus on intertemporal issues.
Regardless of whether we follow an approach based on a social welfare function or the
Kaldor-Hicks criterion, the intertemporal issues are formally similar, i.e. aggregation of
project payoffs across time is performed using state-contingent discount rates. Neverthe-
less, it is important to emphasise that the assumption of perfect markets does not remove
the issues associated with aggregation of payoffs across individuals from consideration; they
lurk in the background, as they do in any welfare analysis.
    Finally, although our presentation of these results has focussed on the simple case of
   8
     A recent literature defines new compensation tests that rely on feasible transfers given the limited
information and instruments of a redistributive planner, and account for the fact that redistribution is
itself distortionary (Antras et al., 2017; Tsyvinski & Werquin, 2018; Hendren, 2019).


                                                           10
a single consumption good, notice that it is straightforward to generalise to an arbitrary
number of goods. Equilibrium Arrow-Debreu prices for each good can be converted into
good-specific time and state contingent discount rates as in the single good case. Public
projects that affect individuals' consumption of multiple goods are evaluated using an ag-
gregate cost-benefit rule, in which the project's marginal effect on the consumption of each
time and state contingent good is discounted using the appropriate good-specific discount
rate, and the project is implemented if and only if the (welfare-weighted) sum of these
discounted marginal effects across goods, time, and states, is positive.

                                             ***
    Taking the perfect markets scenario as read, the problem of evaluating public projects
seems to be straightforward ­ simply calculate the prices of Arrow-Debreu securities from
the market prices of assets,9 and use them to discount project payoffs. This recipe works
regardless of how projects are financed. We now draw an expanding circle of criticism
around this approach and the way it has been implemented in practice. First we discuss
deficiencies of implementation, taking the assumptions of our analysis thus far as read.
Second we discuss reasons to be skeptical of the welfare significance of market prices, even
if markets are perfect. Finally, we interrogate the perfect markets assumption itself.


2.2     Which market rates?
In the case of perfect markets we can use the market prices of assets to back out the prices
of Arrow-Debreu securities, and hence the appropriate discount rates for public cost-benefit
analysis. There are two immediate practical questions that arise when implementing this
approach: First, what is the maturity dependence of market interest rates? Second, how
should the government account for risk when evaluating public projects?
    With respect to maturity dependence, the key issue is that the prices markets place
on payoffs that occur at different future times are almost never consistent with risk-free
discount rates that are independent of maturity. Despite this, several governments that use
a market-based approach to set social discount rates, most notably that of the United States
(OMB, 2003), recommend that public projects be evaluated using constant discount rates.
   9
    If markets are complete, satisfy a no-arbitrage condition, and the law of one price holds, there is a
unique positive matrix of state prices that rationalises observed asset prices with their state-contingent
payoffs.




                                                   11
The formula that relates risk-free interest rates to the prices of Arrow-Debreu securities is:
                                                             1
                                          f         1        t
                                         rt   =                  - 1.
                                                    s pt,s


For this to be independent of maturity we require 1      t
                                                           ln ( s pt,s ) to be independent of t.
This is clearly a very strong constraint on observed prices, and is seldom, if ever, satisfied
in practice. Observed yield curves for inflation-indexed government debt (the closest thing
we have to a risk-free asset in countries with low default risk) are almost never flat. There
is thus an internal inconsistency in the constant rate approach ­ governments defer to
market interest rates when setting social discount rates, but the discount rates they end
up prescribing do not reflect the prices that actually prevail on the market.
    The second question ­ regarding project risks ­ has been the subject of heated discus-
sion amongst economists since the 1970s. A seminal result due to Arrow & Lind (1970)
suggested that since the payoffs from risky government projects are distributed across a
large number of individuals, the aggregate cost to society of bearing this risk is zero.10 This
seems to suggest that public cost-benefit analysis should not concern itself with project
specific risks, i.e., all payoffs should be discounted using risk-free discount rates. However,
the Arrow-Lind result depends critically on the assumption that project payoffs are uncor-
related with aggregate macroeconomic risks. If, as is very likely, such a correlation does
exist, project risks must be accounted for. This can be achieved either by using time- and
state-dependent discount rates, or by working with expected project payoffs, but adjusting
discount rates to reflect the fact that the project either amplifies (positive correlation) or
attenuates (negative correlation) the risk society faces. In practice the latter approach is
often implemented by using a reduced form asset pricing model ­ the Consumption-based
Capital Asset Pricing Model (CCAPM) being by far the most popular choice.11
    To understand this approach, assume for the moment that a representative agent for
the economy exists ­ we will return to this strong assumption below, but for the mo-
ment ask the reader to suspend disbelief. The CCAPM models project payoffs and the
representative agent's consumption at maturity t using the random variables Bt and Ct
  10
     This result is a consequence of the fact that risk aversion is a second order phenomenon. The Arrow-
Pratt approximation tells us that the cost to an individual of bearing a 1/nth share of a zero mean risk with
standard deviation  is proportional to  2 /n2 . Hence the aggregate cost of bearing this risk is proportional
       2
to n × n 2  0 as n  .
  11
     The CCAPM is widely used in the academic literature on social discounting, despite its well known
empirical shortcomings (Fama & French, 2004).



                                                     12
respectively. Assume moreoever that ln Bt and ln Ct are jointly normally distributed. If
the representative agent has a constant elasticity of marginal utility  , it can be shown
that the appropriate certainty equivalent discount rate for expected payoffs EBt is:

                                                    f     2
                                             rt = r t + t t                                              (12)

       f                                  2
where rt is the risk-free rate at time t, t is the variance of consumption growth at maturity
t, and
                                   1
                            t = 2 Cov(ln(Bt /Bt-1 ), ln(Ct /Ct-1 )).
                                  t
The coefficient t is project and maturity specific, and captures the correlation between
growth in the project's payoffs and aggregate consumption growth. If the project is growth
enhancing in low growth states of the world it provides desirable insurance against aggre-
gate risk, and t is negative. Conversely, t is positive if the project's returns are highest
in high growth states of the world. To our knowledge, only one country has trialed the use
of project-specific social discount rates based on the CCAPM ­ France (see Gollier, 2011;
Quinet, 2013).12
    The importance of accounting for both maturity dependence and project-specific risk
adjustments in social discounting is illustrated in a recent set of empirical papers (Giglio
et al., 2015a,b). The authors exploit an idiosyncratic feature of the real estate markets
in the United Kingdom and Singapore ­ property can be bought as either `freehold' (an
indefinite ownership right) or `leasehold' (a lease agreement, at the end of which ownership
reverts to the freeholder) in these markets. The price differential between a freehold prop-
erty and a 100 year lease on an otherwise identical property contains information about
how the market values cash flows at 100 years and beyond. Using a database on the uni-
verse of property transactions in these markets, the authors are able to infer bounds on
implied discount rates for this asset class. Remarkably, because leasehold contracts are
often very long (extending to 999 years in some cases), these data can be used to constrain
implicit discount rates at time horizons far exceeding those for other asset classes. While
Giglio et al. (2015a) focusses on obtaining an upper bound on the long-run risk-free rate
(their estimate is 2.6%/yr), Giglio et al. (2015b) investigate the term structure of discount
   12
      The US government uses constant discount rates of 3%/yr and 7%yr for cost-benefit analysis. 3%/yr
is supposed to reflect the average rate of return on risk-free government debt, while 7%/yr is supposed
to represent the average return to risky capital (i.e., equities). Although this approach pays lip service to
the risk adjustments we discuss in this section, it is a long way from the project specific risk premia that
basic asset pricing theory requires. Gollier (2019) presents a model that uses French estimates of betas in
different sectors to suggest that the welfare consequence of neglecting project-specific betas could be large.

                                                     13
rates, and how the market adjusts for the riskiness of real estate. They observe that since
the average rate of return for real estate is 6%/yr, but the long-run (i.e., > 100 year) rate
is only 2.6%/yr, the term structure of discount rates for this asset class cannot be flat,
and must be downward sloping for at least some maturities. This suggests that using a
constant discount rate calibrated to the average rate of return of 6%/yr could substantially
undervalue investments that pay off most in the long run, e.g. climate change mitigation
measures, which should be discounted at much lower rates. Since climate abatement invest-
ments do not have the same risk profile as real estate, Giglio et al. (2015b) also construct
a model of climate change as a rare disaster. In their baseline estimates discount rates on
climate mitigation investments are low (i.e., always below the risk-free rate) but, unlike
real estate, have an increasing term structure. These results highlight the importance of
having a procedure for setting discount rates that is consistent with basic principles from
asset pricing. Even if we take the perfect markets assumption as read, and attempt to read
off social discount rates from market prices, the implied discount rates should reflect the
risk profile of the investment in question, as well as the market's valuation of payoffs that
occur at different points in time.


2.3    Critiques of the welfare significance of prices in perfect mar-
       kets
The previous discussion highlights areas where the practice of social discounting diverges
from what we know about the implications of market prices for discount rates from eco-
nomic theory, assuming market perfection. These issues are operationally important, but
ultimately do not require a major shift in our thinking about the relevance of market prices
for public project evaluation. They are technical complaints about how prices are currently
used by those governments that follow a market-based approach to setting social discount
rates, but the remedies are conceptually straightforward.
    In this subsection we take a more critical look at this procedure. We suggest that, even
in the optimistic case of perfect markets, there are still reasons to be skeptical about the
welfare significance of market prices for public project evaluation. We focus on three ar-
guments: the limitations of revealed preference as a welfare indicator in dynamic contexts,
intergenerational issues, and the implications of belief heterogeneity for welfare measure-
ment.




                                             14
2.3.1       Limitations of revealed preference in dynamic contexts

The central argument for using market prices to set social discount rates in a perfect market
setting is that equilibrium price ratios capture individuals' marginal rates of substitution
across times and states of the world, as demonstrated in (1). An implicit assumption in this
approach is that these marginal rates of substitution capture all the effects we care about
for the purposes of computing consumer welfare. There is however a profound critique of
this reasoning due to Caplin & Leahy (2004) (CL). CL make the deep observation that
in the context of dynamic choice, observed preferences (as encoded in market prices) are
only partial indicators of welfare: `preferences revealed in the market do not adequately
represent tastes'. At its core, their insight is that preferences over future consumption
streams do not fully capture information about agents' attitudes to past consumption.
    CL's argument is easiest to illustrate in a two period model, with time indexed by
t  {1, 2}. Following Strotz (1955), who highlighted `the possibility that a person is not
indifferent to his consumption history but enjoys his memory of it', CL consider an agent
who may derive utility from past as well as future consumption. Let U t denote the agent's
utility from the consumption stream (c1 , c2 ) at time t, and assume that:

                                    U 1 (c1 , c2 ) = u1 (c1 ) + (1)u2 (c2 )
                                    U 2 (c1 , c2 ) = (-1)u1 (c1 ) + u2 (c2 ).               (13)

The preferences in (13) are trivially time consistent,13 but depend on the history of con-
sumption. From the perspective of describing choice over future consumption streams, the
term in red is irrelevant, and can be neglected. This term represents the agent's preferences
over past consumption in period 2, but since the past is fixed, it has no influence on choices
in period 2. However, this does not imply that this term is irrelevant for welfare compu-
tations. Indeed, the presence of this term destroys the correspondence between choice and
welfare that exists in static applications of revealed preference. To see this consider the
Fisher diagram in Figure 1. The agent's equilibrium consumption allocation occurs where
the indifference curve associated with U 1 (c1 , c2 ), denoted IC1 , is tangent to the production
possibilities frontier. However, this equilibrium is not welfare maximising for the agent at
t = 2, who would like to implement the allocation at point Q. The t = 2 agent's choices
are however constrained by the fact that c1 has already been chosen ­ it is in the past,
and therefore immutable. The constrained optimal choice of c2 for the agent at t = 2
  13
       See Section 3.3 for a detailed definition of time consistency.


                                                        15
          c2
                                         IC1



                                                        Private eq
                                                        Pr      equilibrium




                        Production set              Q



                                                                              IC2

                                                                               c1
Figure 1: Illustration of the insights in Caplin & Leahy (2004). The solid blue curve
denotes the production possibilities frontier. IC1 denotes the agent's maximal indifference
curve at t = 1, while IC2 denotes her maximal indifference curve at t = 2. Consumption
allocations on IC2 are not attainable, as period 1 consumption is fixed in period 2.


is the same as the optimal choice for the agent at t = 1, but the resulting consumption
stream is sub-optimal from the perspective of t = 2. Note that time inconsistency plays
no role whatsoever in this argument ­ the agent is perfectly time consistent. The conflict
between welfare measures at different times is an inescapable consequence of concern for
past consumption, and the fact that the arrow of time flows in only one direction.
    What can be concluded from this observation? CL explain that `while neglecting period
2 preferences makes sense from the viewpoint of private decision making, social policy is
quite a different matter. The fact that only period 1 and not period 2 preferences over
consumption streams can be put into effect should not be confused with a policy doctrine.
The asymmetry in intertemporal control rights should no more determine policy in this
case than it would were we dealing with two distinct individuals.' How then should the
agent's welfare be defined in this case? One natural procedure is to explore the set of
Pareto optimal allocations across the agent's preferences at all times. In the example
above this corresponds to finding feasible allocations that maximize V = w1 U 1 (c1 , c2 ) +

                                               16
w2 U 2 (c1 , c2 ), where w1 , w2  0. The observed private equilibrium is clearly Pareto efficient,
but corresponds to the case w2 = 0. Using a more general model, CL find plausible
conditions under which observed intertemporal equilibria are the most impatient Pareto
optima. Their argument thus provides an entirely non-paternalistic reason for a social
planner to adopt an intertemporal welfare function that does not replicate observed market
prices, even if markets are perfect. Moreover, such a planner will often be more patient
than the market.
    CL's argument is powerful because it applies even to the bread and butter variety
consumer preferences that economists find congenial in many applications. For example,
(two period) discounted utilitarian preferences are indistinguishable from the preferences
in (13) from a revealed preference perspective, and thus the concerns they raise are relevant
whenever this model is used. While CL's critique relies on a backward-looking aspect of
preferences, this is not required for the general set of concerns they identify to be rele-
vant. Indeed, their argument parallels issues that arise in thinking about the appropriate
welfare measure for exclusively forward-looking agents who suffer from time inconsistency
problems. There too we have an asymmetry in `intertemporal control rights'; it is not at
all clear that welfare should be identified with the preferences of the `current self', when
those preferences conflict with those of `future selves'. We will have a lot more to say about
time (in)consistency issues below, but simply note here that there is abundant evidence
that consumers exhibit this kind of behaviour.14 This is another, independent, reason to
be skeptical of a straightforward identification between observed prices and the welfare
measures that are relevant for setting social discount rates.

2.3.2    Intergenerational issues

An arguably even more serious concern with the identification of social discount rates with
consumer prices is that these prices will only reflect the preferences of currently living
consumers. In our discussion of the CL critique we saw that even if agents are time
consistent, current preferences may not reflect the preferences of past selves, and thus
social welfare may be underdetermined by preferences. This `missing preferences' critique
becomes even more salient in the context of intergenerational decision-making, since those
who are most affected by payoffs that occur in say 100 years are not yet born. Clearly,
  14
    See e.g. Benartzi & Thaler (2007); Skinner (2007) for a discussion of evidence of time inconsistency
in the context of retirement savings. Cohen et al. (2020) provide an up to date review of recent empirical
approaches to estimating time preferences.



                                                   17
these considerations are of primary importance when choosing long-run social discount
rates.
    To illustrate this point it is helpful to consider a simple model of intergenerational
altruism, versions of which have been studied by Bernheim (1989); Farhi & Werning (2007).
Suppose that a generation of identical individuals is born at time t. Each individual lives
for a single period, and each has a single child with identical preferences. All individuals
at time t care about their own consumption ct and the wellbeing of their children Vt , in
such a way that the preferences of generation t can be represented by:
                                                               
                                  Vt = U (ct ) + Vt+1 =                U (ct+ ),           (14)
                                                                =0


for some   (0, 1). The agents in this model are `purely altruistic' with respect to their
children: they care about what their children care about (i.e., Vt ), and not just about their
children's utility (i.e., U (ct+1 )). It is clear that the preferences of successive generations
are time consistent in this case,15 suggesting that any consumer prices that capture current
individuals' marginal rates of substitution between consumption in different time periods
will also capture future generations' relative valuations.
    So much for each generations' preferences, but how should a social planner evaluate
welfare? One possibility is that the planner at time t should only account for the prefer-
ences of the current generation, since that generation's preferences already reflect direct
concern for the next generation, and indirect concern for all generations after that via the
preferences of their children. But that is a rather extreme possibility ­ it implies that only
the current generation's preferences have welfare significance. A more general approach
would be for the planner to give the preferences of each generation direct weight in her
welfare measure. As in the CL model, the Pareto frontier in such a framework can be
captured by maximising welfare functions of the form
                                                              
                                    Wt =          Vt+ =              U (ct+ ),             (15)
                                            =0                 =0


for some weights   0, where

                                                      
                                            =             k   -k       .                   (16)
                                                    k=0

 15
      See Section 3.3 for a detailed definition of time consistency.


                                                         18
If 0 = 1,  = 0 for all   1, then only currently living consumers' preferences are relevant
for welfare analysis. But the expression (15) makes it plain that this choice corresponds
to a highly inequitable point on the Pareto frontier, a kind of `tyranny of the present'.
It seems highly questionable to identify welfare with the preferences of a single group of
agents who happen to have had the good fortune to be born in the present. At the least,
we should give each generation's preferences some non-negative weight in social welfare.
When we do this, social preferences and current consumers' preferences will differ. Indeed
we can say more: social preferences will be more patient than consumers' preferences, since

                                       +1     +1
                                ,         =+     >
                                             

whenever  > 0 for all  .
    Notice that this argument proceeded in an environment that was very advantageous to
the welfare significance of consumer preferences. As the preferences of successive genera-
tions are time consistent in this model, it seems natural a priori to identify discount rates
with prices. Yet, as in our discussion of the CL critique, a deeper look at the implications
of this intuitive procedure calls it into question. The CL critique and the intergenerational
issues discussed here are temporal mirror images of one another ­ CL operates backwards
in time from the perspective of individual consumers, while this model operates forwards in
time from the perspective of altruistic generations. Both arguments assume time consistent
preferences, and both apply even if markets are perfect. Thus, even in these optimistic
cases, current consumers' preferences are arguably a poor guide to social welfare computa-
tions in general. We will return to a discussion of alternative notions of intergenerational
welfare in Section 4.

2.3.3   Belief heterogeneity

A third issue concerns the welfare significance of market prices when agents have hetero-
geneous, and possibly erroneous, beliefs. Traditionally, economists tend to distance them-
selves from strong normative pronouncements on the legitimacy of individuals' preferences.
Where possible we defer to the Pareto criterion, which is often seen as a value-free rational-
ity criterion for social comparisons. The Pareto criterion is fundamentally non-paternalistic
­ it is an incomplete ordering on sets of individual preferences, and all individuals are free
to determine their preferences in any manner they please. In a world with uncertainty, in-
dividuals' preferences depend on their tastes and their beliefs. The Pareto criterion allows


                                             19
individuals complete sovereignty over both these components. Even if someone believes
that the world is flat, this belief is a perfectly legitimate input to preferences, and hence
also relevant for social comparisons.
    But the world is not flat. There is a material difference between a planner who imposes
her tastes on individuals, and a planner who respects individuals' tastes, but makes social
comparisons using the best available information about the world, even if that information
conflicts with some citizens' beliefs. In the former case there is a clear violation of individual
sovereignty, but can we say the same of the latter? Perhaps the planner is simply better
informed than some citizens, or less prone to the many biases in judgment under uncertainty
that have been documented by psychologists?16 If the notion of objective truth has any
currency, it seems perverse for welfare criteria to account for beliefs that are known to
be incorrect or irrational, or to admit plural beliefs that are in direct conflict with one
another.17
    A recent literature has begun to grapple with the difficulties of making welfare com-
parisons when beliefs are heterogeneous, or erroneous. Gilboa et al. (2014) define a re-
finement of Pareto dominance called `No-betting-Pareto'. This criterion recognises that
trade between individuals with heterogeneous beliefs can still be desirable (their tastes
may differ too, after all), but excludes trades that are Pareto improving solely because of
belief heterogeneity when making social comparisons. Brunnermeier et al. (2014) introduce
the alternative notion of `belief-neutral' Pareto efficiency. The motivating thought behind
their definition is that welfare should be computed with respect to the `true' objective
probabilities of events, but it is often difficult for planners to identify those probabilities.
The authors thus look for a definition of efficiency that is robust for all `reasonable' beliefs,
taken to be the set of convex combinations of all agents' beliefs. These two definitions
occupy somewhat different philosophical territory, and lead to different characterisations
of efficiency. The important point for our purposes is that both criteria do not take agents'
beliefs as given when making social comparisons. Each of them is more demanding than
the standard notion of efficiency, and in each case social states are compared from the
perspective of a coherent, non-contradictory, set of beliefs. This literature has natural
  16
     Our argument here is not in conflict with the well known arguments for the informational virtues
of markets (Hayek, 1945). It is possible to recognise the market's ability to aggregate dispersed local
information about tastes, while simultaneously acknowledging that market participants' beliefs are not
always rational.
  17
     Mongin (2016) observes that there are many ways for a group of people to reach agreement on the
ranking of social states, despite disagreements about facts and values. Even if everyone agrees that one
policy is superior to another, their reasons for believing this may differ. Ranking social states with the
Pareto principle may thus give rise to `spurious unanimity'.

                                                   20
implications for public cost benefit analysis, even though we generally cannot rely on the
Pareto principle or its modifications in this domain. The essential message is that since
market prices reflect the distribution of consumers' tastes and beliefs, there is no reason
to expect them to encode the information that is needed for welfare analysis if there is
substantial belief heterogeneity in the population.18
    As an empirical matter, the prevalence of heterogenous, or possibly erroneous, beliefs
can hardly be contested (see Brunnermeier et al., 2014, for a summary of the literature). In
the case of climate change, for example, Severen et al. (2018) have used hedonic methods
to demonstrate that the value of agricultural land depends on forecasts of future climate
change, and that this dependence is stronger in counties where larger proportions of the
population believe that `global warming is happening'. In those counties were belief in cli-
mate change is very weak, the value of land is likely insufficiently sensitive to projections of
the effects of climate change. Bakkensen & Barrage (2018) document similar heterogeneity
in beliefs about coastal flooding risks, and show that this can explain the variation in the
capitalisation of climate change risks into coastal housing markets. While these are limited
examples, the lesson applies to asset prices more generally.

2.3.4    Implications for cost benefit analysis

If we accept the arguments in the previous three subsections, it follows that the marginal
rates of substitution that are captured by competitive market prices do not necessarily con-
tain all the information required to assess the welfare consequences of public investments,
even if markets are perfect. Nevertheless, when markets are perfect planners can still use
them to frictionlessly redistribute consumption across time and states of the world, and
prices still reflect opportunity costs in the planner's budget constraint. Does this imply
that it is prices, not welfare-relevant marginal rates of substitution, that are important,
regardless of the concerns raised in the discussion above?
    To address this question, consider a planner with arbitrary preferences over aggregate
consumption bundles represented by U (c).19 The planner's preferences may be assumed to
  18
     Belief heterogeneity that stems purely from differing priors is less problematic than heterogeneity that
stems from differing information sets, or idiosyncratic irrational belief updating. In reality however, it can
hardly be contested that heterogeneity stems from all these channels. Indeed agents' priors can strongly
reinforce biases in belief updating, e.g. via confirmation bias. See e.g. Millner & Ollivier (2016) for further
discussion.
  19
     We focus here on preferences over aggregate (or per capita) consumption, and thus again abstract from
intratemporal distributive issues. It is straightforward to extend our discussion to include these concerns
in the planners' objective function.



                                                      21
account for issues relating to the CL critique, intergenerational concerns, and to represent
beliefs about future states of the world based on the best available evidence. Suppose that
the current state of the economy is c0 , and the planner seeks to evaluate a marginal project
that yields payoffs  = (t,s )t=0...T,s=1,...,S . Since markets are complete, the planner can in
principle achieve any desired redistribution of the project payoffs across time and states by
borrowing and lending on the market. Under this view, the value she would obtain from
the project is

                                               T    S                  T   S
                V ( ) = max U (c0 + ~ ) s.t.              pt,s ~t,s              pt,s t,s .   (17)
                          ~
                                               t=0 s=1                 t=0 s=1


The envelope theorem now immediately yields

                                        V
                                            = pt,s ,
                                        t,s

where  > 0 is the Lagrange multiplier on the budget constraint (which is always binding),
and hence for marginal projects 

                                         0) 
                              V ( ) > V (0                pt,s t,s > 0.
                                                    t,s


When markets are perfect a project seems to improve the planner's welfare measure if and
only if it improves her market budget position. So does this mean that the concerns about
the welfare significance of prices we laid out above are irrelevant?
    In general the answer is no; the redistribution of consumption the planner undertakes
in (17) will generally be highly non-marginal, thus violating the implicit assumption that
prices are independent of the planner's actions. Indeed, the problem in (17) is equivalent to
determining the optimal consumption bundle c , subject to the constraint that the market
value of c is equal to the market value of c0 +  ; the planner is assumed to be able to
redistribute the economy's entire aggregate consumption bundle c0 at constant prices!
    A correct account of the effects of non-marginal redistributive actions would require
a full general equilibrium model of the economy, but that is beyond the scope of our
discussion here. Nevertheless, it is of interest to ask how the planner's ability to use the
markets to pursue social objectives might affect project evaluation at the margin, given
the current (non-optimal) market equilibrium. One approach to this question is to study
a problem where the planner may use the markets to redistribute a marginal project's


                                               22
payoffs, but the redistributed payoffs are themselves constrained to be marginal. In this
setting it is reasonable to assume that prices are unaffected by the planner's actions as
before. A useful formulation of this problem is as follows:


       ~ ( ) = max                   U
       V                                            ~t,s subject to
                    ~
                    
                              t,s
                                     ct,s
                                               c0

               i)             pt,s ~t,s                   pt,s t,s ,
                        t,s                         t,s

                              1                    2U                                      1                 2U
               ii) -                                                     ~t,s ~t ,s  -                                        t,s t ,s .       (18)
                              2     t,s t ,s
                                                ct,s ct ,s          c0                     2   t,s t ,s
                                                                                                          ct,s ct ,s     c0


   The objective function in this problem is the marginal effect of the redistributed project
payoffs ~ . The inequality in i) is the budget constraint, and ii) is a marginality constraint
on the redistributed payoffs. This latter constraint says that the second order effects of the
redistributed project payoffs on the planner's welfare measure cannot exceed the second
order effects of the original payoffs (which we were happy to neglect).20 Applying the
envelope theorem to this problem yields

                                               ~
                                               V                      2U
                                                   = pt,s - µ                                           t ,s ,
                                               t,s            t ,s
                                                                   ct,s ct ,s                      c0


where   0 is the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier on the budget constraint, and µ  0 is the
multiplier on the marginality constraint. A little reflection shows that provided the market
value of the project is small, both constraints are binding (i.e.,  > 0, µ > 0), and the
associated cost benefit rule becomes

             ~ ( ) - V
                     ~ (0                                                        µ                   2U
             V          0) > 0                                      pt,s t,s -                                        t,s t ,s > 0.            (19)
                                                              t,s
                                                                                     t,s   t ,s
                                                                                                  ct,s ct ,s     c0


The first term in this expression is again the market value of the project, and the new second
term, which is non-negative, reflects the value of a small relaxation of the marginality
constraint. The expression in (19) makes is clear that positive market value is sufficient,
but not necessary, for a project to pass the cost-benefit test. In general both prices and
  20                                                                                                                      2U
       By assumption the matrix of second derivatives with elements H(t,s),(t ,s ) =                                   ct,s ct ,s        is negative
                                                                                                                                    c0
semi-definite, so the sums in (18) are non-negative. The marginality constraint is required for the problem
to be well-posed. If it were not present the optimal solution would require unbounded values of      ~ , thus
again violating marginality.


                                                                             23
the planner's preferences may be important, even if markets are perfect. We will return to
a detailed discussion of the issues involved in specifying planner preferences in Section 3.


2.4     Market imperfections and their implications
Up until now our discussion of the relationship between prices and SDRs has rested on
generous market perfection assumptions. Yet in the real world markets are not perfect.
The list of standard critiques of the perfect market paradigm is long and well known;
it includes information asymmetries, market power, incompleteness, externalities, non-
convexities, and issues of distributive justice. What are the consequences of these market
failures for social discounting?
    At first sight it may seem that market imperfections pose no special difficulties for the
relationship between prices and consumption discount rates that we laid out in Section
2.1. Setting concerns about the welfare significance of current consumers' preferences
aside, all that was required to identify consumer's marginal rates of substitution with
(ratios of) state prices in that analysis was that consumers choose optimal consumption
bundles taking prices as given. This assumption may hold even in imperfect economies, for
example, in the presence of externalities, market incompleteness, or market power. Market
equilibria in these cases will generically not be efficient, but at the inefficient equilibrium
marginal values still coincide with consumer prices. Can we thus conclude that observed
prices still contain all the information that is necessary for setting social discount rates,
even in imperfect economies? We discuss two issues that suggest that things are unlikely
to be so simple: missing prices, and the informational requirements of non-marginal policy
instruments.

2.4.1   Missing prices

A critical assumption of our analysis in Section 2.1 was that markets are complete, i.e.,
a market for each time and state contingent Arrow-Debreu security exists. This is an
extremely demanding assumption. With N goods, S states of the world, and T + 1 time
periods (with no uncertainty at t = 0), completeness requires N (T S +1) markets to operate
at time t = 0, when trading occurs. However, the Arrow-Debreu model we discussed can be
reformulated as a model of sequential trading of goods on spot markets, with a single Arrow
security that enables wealth transfers across times and states traded at t = 0 (assuming
that agents have rational expectations about future prices). In this reformulation the


                                              24
number of markets that need to operate is only T S + 1 + N . Even in this parsimonious
reformulation however, moderately large values of T and S lead to a very large number of
markets.21
    As Geanakoplos (1990) observed in 1990, "For a quarter of a century, scores of economists
have complained about the absurdity of allowing all agents...to meet together at one mo-
ment in time, and to trade assets that allow for every conceivable contingency, for all future
time." His survey points out that there are many reasons why market incompleteness is
inevitable. Asymmetric information may mean that the occurrence of a state is not visible
to both parties to a potential transaction, so that the transaction cannot occur. Many in-
terested traders may not have access to the markets, either because they are not yet born,
or because they are not well-informed about market opportunities or because they do not
have access to liquidity. Finally, if the market is thin, the transaction costs of establishing
and maintaining a market may be too great for the operation to be profitable (recall that
most major markets are run by for-profit corporations).
    These observations imply that when markets are incomplete there are no prices for
states that are not spanned by the available assets in the economy. By definition, the
market has nothing to say about how payoffs that occur in those states should be dis-
counted. For example, as the longest maturity government bonds are typically 30 years,
there is arguably no way of pricing risk-free payoffs at greater maturities.22 Our discussion
of the empirical estimation of discount rates from certain real estate markets shows that it
may be possible to get some bounds on long-run rates, but these estimates are necessarily
limited by the fact that real estate is a risky asset with a particular risk profile. What is
needed is a set of assets that spans the payoff space, and that is almost certainly beyond
practical reach.

2.4.2    Prices, preferences, and non-marginal policy instruments

As we noted at the beginning of this section, the presence of market failures does not
necessarily imply that prices are devoid of welfare content. Prices capture current con-
sumers' marginal rates of substitution at the existing, inefficient, market equilibrium, and
are thus relevant but not necessarily decisive inputs for the cost-benefit analysis of marginal
  21
     This is especially true if we interpret the state space as representing dynamic uncertainty, i.e., un-
certainty about which sequence of events will unfold in the future. In that interpretation (discussed in
Footnote 2), the relevant state space grows exponentially with the number of time periods in the model,
and quickly becomes astronomically large.
  22
     Indeed, even if there were a liquid market in much longer maturity bonds, their prices would reflect
non-negligible default risks in even the most stable countries.

                                                    25
projects. And yet this argument may leave some readers uneasy: what is the welfare sig-
nificance of observed prices if they do not decentralise efficient allocations? Put another
way, perhaps observed prices are simply `wrong' ?
    If the market equilibrium is inefficient, a social planner will clearly want to intervene to
correct the inefficiency using non-marginal policy instruments. These instruments will alter
prices and consumption discount rates. The key question for our purposes is whether all
the information that is required to choose these corrective instruments is contained in the
competitive prices that we observe before the planner intervenes. If it is then the planner
can in principle correct inefficiencies without asking any more detailed questions about the
appropriate social objective. Social discount rates could then be chosen to reflect the prices
that are observed after market failures have been corrected. However, if ex-ante prices do
not contain all the information needed to correct market failures, the tight connection
between market observables and social discount rates at the social optimum breaks down.
    Standard microeconomic theory should immediately make us suspicious about whether
the state prices that we observe at a point in time can tell us what we need to know to choose
instruments to correct market failures. In general, determining the optimal level of these
instruments will require knowledge of consumers' preferences. Under certain conditions23
preferences can in principle be inferred from Walrasian demand functions, i.e. observations
of demand as a function of prices and income. But at any fixed moment in time we only
observe a single point on the demand function: demand at the equilibrium price. This is
not enough information to reconstruct preferences, and hence also not enough information
to determine optimal corrective instruments, or social discount rates at the optimum.
    To make this point more concrete, let's consider a simple model of an intertemporal
externality due to climate change. Externalities, of course, mean that the private and
social costs of an activity differ; in the absence of government intervention competitive
equilibria are inefficient in this case. For the sake of analytical convenience we'll present a
continuous time model; our previous expressions for e.g. consumption discount rates can
easily be extended to this case.
    Suppose that there is a continuum of identical consumers with unit mass, and that they
have standard discounted utilitarian time preferences. Production generates CO2 emissions
that accumulate in the atmosphere, and alter the climate. Temperature change depends on
aggregate emissions in the economy, and affects utility directly through a damage function.
  23
    See Mas-Colell et al. (1995, pp 75-78) for an elaboration of the so-called `integrability' conditions for
reconstructing preferences from demand functions.



                                                     26
We write the planner's problem in this model as:
                        
            max                                               t = f ( kt ) - c t ,
                           u (ct ) (1 - D (Tt )) e-t dt s.t. k                          Tt = f (kt )   (20)
              ct    0


where ct and kt are per-capita consumption and capital at time t, f (k ) is a production
function, Tt is the change in global mean temperature at time t from its reference value at
t = 0, D (Tt ) is an increasing and convex damage function from temperature change, and
 is the product of the emissions intensity of output and the temperature change per ton
of CO2 emissions.24 A necessary condition for a social optimum in this model is

                                             µt                     c
                                                                    t              D  (Tt )
                    f  ( kt ) 1 - -                 =  +  ( ct )       + f (kt )            .          (21)
                                             t                      ct           1 - D (T )

where  (c) = -cU  (c)/U  (c), and t and µt are the co-state variables associated with the
state variables k and T respectively. The left hand side of this equation is the instantaneous
rate of return on investment at time t, adjusted for the social cost of the emissions associ-
ated with a marginal unit of production at t, i.e., -f  (kt ) µt
                                                                t
                                                                  > 0 . The right hand side is
                                                           d
the rate of change of marginal utility at time t, i.e., - d log u (c ) (1 - D (T )) e-  =t .
At the social optimum these two quantities must be equal for all times t, otherwise it would
be possible to increase social welfare by changing the quantity of investment.
    Now compare this with what occurs in a competitive equilibrium. As consumers are
infinitesimal, they treat the trajectory of temperature change as exogenous ­ they neglect
the effect of their actions on the climate, and on the welfare of others. Denoting the rental
price of capital at time t by rt , consumers solve:
                                      
                                                                          dkt
                        max              u (ct ) (1 - D (Tt )) e-t dt         = rt kt - c t            (22)
                            ct    0                                       dt

Firms' profit maximization conditions yield rt = f  (kt ), and we find that a necessary
condition for a competitive equilibrium in this problem is:

                                                           c
                                                           t              D  (Tt )
                                 f  ( kt ) =  +  ( c t )      + f (kt )             .                  (23)
                                                           ct           1 - D (Tt )
  24
    In more complex models emissions contribute to CO2 concentrations, and temperature responds to
increases in CO2 concentration with some inertia. However, this simple model turns out to be a surprisingly
good approximation to the latest models from climate science, which show that temperature change is an
approximately linear function of cumulative emissions.




                                                            27
The return on investment in the competitive equilibrium is the left hand side of (23).
This differs from the socially optimal return on investment in (21) by the external cost of
a marginal unit of investment, i.e., -f  (kt ) µ  t
                                                   t
                                                     . In both cases the return on investment
coincides with consumption discount rates on the relevant path for the economy, but only
in the latter case are these discount rates immediately identifiable from market observables.
    Which of the expressions (21) or (23) should be used to set social discount rates?
If we are at the inefficient competitive equilibrium, and no instruments are available to
correct the externality, then (23) is the correct expression. Even though this equilibrium
is inefficient, consumption discount rates are given by observed private rates of return on
capital at this equilibrium. All we need to do is read off the rental price of capital rt = f  (kt )
                                                                                    t 
on the equilibrium path, and set the discount rate at maturity t equal to 1      t 0
                                                                                     f (k )d .
    Now consider the case of a government that takes action to correct the externality by
taxing emissions. The government can internalise the externality by making producers pay
a tax t = - µ    t
                  t
                    per unit of output at time t. In this case the private return on investment
at time t is (1 - t )f  (kt ), and we can set the social discount rate at maturity t equal to
1 t
 t 0
     (1 -  )f  (k )d . Now here is the punchline: the correct value of the Pigouvian tax t ,
and hence the correct value of the consumption discount rate in the presence of this tax, is
not revealed by market prices in the competitive equilibrium. The Pigouvian tax t is the
ratio of the shadow price of temperature (µt ) to the shadow price of capital (t ). Crucially,
shadow prices are not equal to market prices in the presence of externalities. The market
price of temperature changes is zero in the competitive equilibrium, but the shadow price
of temperature changes is negative.
    In order to calculate the Pigouvian tax t , the government must know consumers'
preferences, firms' technologies, and the nature of the externality. None of these quantities
is generically revealed by observed prices at a point in time. Rental prices of capital in the
competitive equilibrium only reveal combinations of preference parameters, endogenous
consumption growth rates, and climate damages via (23). These equations cannot be used
to uniquely identify preferences, since for each value of t there is one equation, but several
unknowns, including two preference parameters ( and  (ct )) and the unobserved future
value of consumption growth. Some parameters may of course be calibrated by restricting
the form of the utility function and damage function and calibrating on past data, and this
is often what is done in practice. But this procedure will invariably introduce errors into
the calculation of the Pigouvian tax, as in general no simple parametric forms for these
functions will be able to match observed rates of return for all t. The tight link between


                                                28
currently observed prices and consumption discount rates that we had at the competitive
equilibrium is broken when the government seeks to intervene to correct the externality.
    It's important to be clear about exactly what is being said in this discussion. It may
seem that any mention of Pigouvian taxes is out of place in a discussion of social discount
rates, as these are non-marginal instruments, whereas the social discount rate captures
consumers' relative valuations of marginal consumption changes. Our point, however, is
that when the government seeks to correct market failures with non-marginal instruments
consumption discount rates will change. Since optimal non-marginal instruments depend
on information that is not generically captured in ex-ante prices at a point in time, so
too do consumption discount rates after the government acts. Ultimately, the government
must ask questions about the appropriate notion of welfare that cannot be answered by
reading off market observables at a fixed point in time.25
    This point is not specific to externalities; it applies to other market failures as well.
Consider the case of incomplete markets, discussed in the previous subsection. The the-
ory of general equilibrium with incomplete markets shows that competitive equilibria are
generically not constrained Pareto efficient in this context: even the assets that do exist in
the economy are not used efficiently (Geanakoplos & Polemarchakis, 1986). This implies
that government intervention, e.g. in the form of long-run public investments that are not
available to private investors, could lead to Pareto improvements. But to know how to
intervene in the market, we need information that is not revealed by prices. That informa-
tion will also be an indirect ingredient of social discount rates after the intervention has
been implemented.


3      Normative discounting
In the previous section we presented several reasons for skepticism about whether market
prices should determine social discount rates. An argument that is sometimes made, ei-
ther implicitly or explicitly, is that markets provide the `least bad' solution to the problem
­ if not via markets, how else are we to choose discount rates? This section deals with
precisely that question ­ it discusses an alternative approach to social discounting that
  25
    An objection to this point could be that we have restricted attention to a single observation of prices
and demand, whereas a planner may have access to many observations of demand at different prices.
However, Afriat's theorem shows that if finite demand data are rationalizable, there are in general many
well-behaved utility functions that can explain the data. See Varian (1982) for a discussion of bounds on
specific classes of utility functions from demand data.



                                                    29
does not rely solely on market data. This approach is often referred to as the `normative
approach'. By contrast, the approach to discounting that exclusively uses market observ-
ables (prices) is referred to as the `positive approach'. Both terms are highly misleading.
The `positive' approach is in truth highly normative, as we saw in our discussion in Section
1. It requires us to make judgements about how to aggregate project consequences across
different individuals (either via Kaldor-Hicks or an explicit social welfare function), and
relies on a specific interpretation of the welfare significance of market prices. In addition,
the `normative approach' is not independent of `positive' data, as we shall see. Rather
than being `positive' or `normative', these approaches are distinguished by how seriously
they take the issues raised in the previous section.


3.1    Welfarism & Planner Preferences
What is to be done if we take the possibility that prices may not capture the information
needed for welfare analysis seriously? There are essentially two approaches in the literature.
One is to maintain an evaluation framework that aims to reflect the welfare consequences
of policy changes for diverse agents. The problem then becomes one of estimation and ag-
gregation: we need to estimate how policies affect individual wellbeing using non-market
methods, and aggregate heterogeneous policy effects, being careful to acknowledge the nor-
mative choices that are involved in that exercise. We refer to this as a `welfarist' approach,
as the data that are relevant for policy evaluation in this case are individual wellbeings.
The second approach does not hinge on measuring individuals' welfare and aggregating
per se. In this approach we imagine a social planner who has some a priori ethical prefer-
ences over alternative distributions of goods across time and states that may or may not
be explicitly tied to individuals' wellbeings, and place `reasonable' constraints on these
preferences by imposing certain properties on them. These constraints come in the form of
axioms, in much the same way that axioms are used to motivate decision-theoretic models
of consumer behaviour. In practice the line between these two approaches is often blurred
by the invocation of a representative agent with preferences of a specified form. Such an
agent's preferences are intended to be a welfarist measure of diverse individuals' wellbeing.
However, as the form of the representative agent's preferences is often highly specialised
and implicitly motivated by axiomatic criteria (e.g. discounted utilitarian preferences), and
the conditions for representative agents to exist are highly stringent (Gorman, 1953), this
interpretation stretches credulity. Far better to acknowledge that in this arena economics
comes into close contact with philosophy.

                                             30
    A common objection to the `planner preferences' approach is that it is paternalistic ­ the
planner imposes his or her own ethical stance on society, irrespective of its consequences
for individuals' abilities to pursue the lives that they value.26 That view is accurate, if
somewhat lacking in nuance. While it is true that reduced form models of planner pref-
erences need not be tied to individuals' wellbeing, the models themselves are silent on
the data that planners may draw on to justify values for the parameters of a particular
preference representation. In practice, calibrating normative parameters may, at least par-
tially, draw on facts relating to individuals' wellbeing. In addition, this critique downplays
the normative choices that are required in the welfarist approach ­ even if we do define
an evaluation framework that reflects individuals' wellbeing, aggregating those wellbeings
requires normative judgements that are independent of the wellbeing measures themselves.
These are not dissimilar to the kinds of judgements that need to be made to specify a priori
planner preferences. Finally, while it seems clear that the welfarist approach is more com-
prehensive and ethically defensible than the reduced form planner preferences approach,
it places a very high informational burden on the analyst; implementing this approach in
practice requires detailed models of the lives and deaths of myriad individual agents. The
planner preferences approach, by contrast, usually deals with a single preference relation
that depends on only a small number of sufficient statistics that summarise the state of
the economy (e.g. aggregate consumption growth), and a small number of parameters that
aim to capture key normative tradeoffs.
    Because of its wide deployment in the academic and policy literature on social discount-
ing, the remainder of this section will largely focus on `planner preferences'. A casualty
of this narrow focus is that we once again largely neglect distributional issues across indi-
viduals. We also abstract from controversial, but important, issues relating to population
change, and its implications for normative welfare criteria.27 For an excellent detailed
treatment of both these issues we refer the reader to Fleurbaey & Zuber (2015).
  26
     Of course, hybrid approaches, in which an ethical planner interacts with private agents with different
preferences, are also possible. See e.g. Barrage (2018).
  27
     For the most part our consumption values can be interpreted as consumption per capita, so that we
implicitly adopt some form of average utilitarianism. We are well aware of the difficulties with this criterion
in a variable population context (see Millner, 2013), but have chosen to focus on other issues in this paper.




                                                      31
3.2      Normative discount rates for expected discounted utilitari-
         ans
By far the most commonly deployed model of planner preferences in the literature on social
discounting is the standard expected discounted utilitarian model. In this model the value
of a consumption bundle c at any time  is
                                                        t
                                               1                    ( )
                              V (c) =                              qt,s U (ct,s ),          (24)
                                        t=0
                                              1+               s

          ( )
where qt,s is the subjective probability of state s at time  + t, conditional on information
available at time  . It is crucial to understand from the beginning that the function
defined in (31) should be interpreted as a normative evaluation principle, and not as a
positive description of choice. We should think of (31) as a reduced form intertemporal
social welfare measure, which aims to capture some of the key normative tradeoffs that
are relevant to making intertemporal choices at a high level of aggregation. We begin
this section with a derivation and discussion of the consumption discount rates that follow
from (31). After that we discuss the assumptions that are implicit in this representation
of planner preferences, and alternatives to them.
    Applying the formula (4) for the consumption discount rate in state (t, s) to the pref-
erences in (31) immediately yields:
                                                    t
                                               1               U  ((1 + gt,s )t c0 )
                          (1 + t,s )-t =                qt,s                         .
                                              1+                     U  ( c0 )

where we have defined the consumption growth rate gt,s in state (t, s) via ct,s = c0 (1 +
gt,s )t , and dropped the  superscript on qt,s for convenience. This expression is easier to
manipulate in the continuous time limit.28 In this limit we find

                                                        U  (c0 egt,s t )
                                   e-t,s t = e-t qt,s                    .
                                                          U  ( c0 )

Assuming that U (c) is concave and twice continuously differentiable, define the elasticity
of marginal utility:
                                             U  (c)
                                    (c) = -c  .
                                              U (c)
 28
      In this limit we send t,s  t,s t,    t, gt,s  gt,s t, t  t/t, and take the limit as t  0.



                                                 32
Treating this definition as a differential equation for U  (c), we find that
                                                                                      c
                                                                                           (x)
                                        (U ) (c) = K exp -                                     dx .
                                                                                  0        x
                                                                                                              
for some constant K . Make the change of variables x = c0 egt ,s t in the integral in the expo-
nent, evaluate (U ) (c) at c = c0 egt,s t , and impose the initial condition limt0 U  (c0 egt,s t ) =
U  (c0 ) to find
                                                                                               t
                                       gt,s t                                                                    
                        ( U ) ( c0 e            ) = U (c0 ) exp -gt,s                               (c0 egt,s t )dt .
                                                                                           0

Hence,
                                                                 t                
                                             (c0 egt,s t )dt 1  0
                            t,s =  + gt,s                   - ln qt,s .
                                                 t            t
These state-dependent discount rates are rarely used in practice ­ most applications focus
on the risk-free rate, or risk-adjusted rates that reflect correlations between project payoffs
and discount factors in close analogy with our discussion of the CCAPM in (12).
   The risk-free social discount rate t is calculated as
                                                                                  t
                       - t t        -t                                                                    
                   e           =e                      qt,s exp -gt,s                  (c0 egt,s t )dt
                                                s                             0
                                                                                                   t
                          1                                                                                         
                    t =  - ln                                 qt,s exp -gt,s                            (c0 egt,s t )dt   .   (25)
                          t                               s                                0


This is a general formula for the risk-free consumption discount rate when preferences are
given by (31). It shows that discount rates are related to properties of planner preferences
­ the pure rate of social time preference  and elasticity of marginal utility  (c) ­ and to
empirical forecasts of consumption growth (qt,s ).
    Most applications of this formula usually impose a lot more structure on the model. It
is commonly assumed that  (c) =  , a constant. In this case we find

                                                         1
                                  t =  -                   ln            qt,s exp (-gt,s t)) .
                                                         t           s


Defining the cumulant generating function X (t) for the random variable X as

                                                       X (y ) = ln [E exp(yX )] ,



                                                                         33
where E is the expectation operator, we can write the risk-free rate in this case as

                                                 1
                                           t =  - gt (-t).
                                                 t

Assuming that the cumulant generating function for growth rates has a Taylor expansion
at zero, we can write it as:
                                                  (t)
                                                 kn n
                                  gt ( y ) =          y
                                             n=0
                                                  n!
                             (t)
The Talyor coefficients kn are known as the cumulants of the distribution for gt . They are
                          (t)
related to the moments µn of this distribution. The first few cumulants are given by:

                                     (t)
                                   k0 = 0
                                     (t)    (t)
                                   k 1 = µ1
                                     (t)    (t)    (t)
                                   k 2 = µ2 - µ1
                                     (t)    (t)      (t ) (t )       (t )
                                   k3 = µ3 - 3µ2 µ1 + 2(µ1 )3

If we truncate the Taylor expansion for gt (y ) at second order, we see that

                                                  1
                                      t   +  Egt -  2 tVargt .
                                                  2

Noting that gt  1
                t
                  ln(ct /c0 ), we can write this expression as

                                1                 1
                           t   +  E(ln(ct /c0 )) -  2 Var(ln(ct /c0 )).
                                t                 2t

This formula is the Ramsey Rule for the risk-free consumption discount rate when the
utility function is iso-elastic. The first term is the utility discount rate, or pure rate of
social time preference ­ this captures the planner's impatience with respect to utility flows.
The second term is a wealth effect; it captures the planners' aversion to intertemporal
consumption inequalities. Since the utility function is concave by assumption,  > 0,
and hence marginal consumption changes in high consumption states are worth less than
equivalent changes in low consumption states. This wealth effect is usually the dominant
term in empirical calibrations of the Ramsey rule. The third term is a precautionary
effect. Since Planners with iso-elastic utility have positive prudence29 their appetite for
 29
      The coefficient of relative prudence is -cU  /U  =  + 1 > 0.



                                                   34
precautionary savings is increased when the future is risky. This effect reduces the risk-free
discount rate in proportion to the riskiness of future consumption.
    In the classical case where ct follows a geometric Brownian motion, this expression can
be simplified further. In this case we have

                                          ct
                                     ln       N (µt,  2 t)
                                          c0

and hence
                                                    1
                                    t =  + µ -  2  2 .                                    (26)
                                                    2
As third order and higher cumulants of gt are zero when consumption is log-normally
distributed, this expression is in fact exact. It is worth repeating the assumptions that
got us here: expected discounted utilitarian preferences, iso-elastic utility, and a geometric
Brownian motion for consumption.
    Equation (26) has played an influential role in discussions of social discounting. Gollier
(2012) uses a calibration of this equation to motivate his baseline recommendation for
social discount rates. His preferred parameter values for the preference parameters are
 = 0,  = 2, while for the empirical parameters he uses summary statistics from empirical
studies of consumption growth in the Western world to suggest µ = 2%/yr,  2 = (0.036)2 .
This leads to a baseline recommendation that the risk-free rate be set at 3.6%/yr. The UK
`Greenbook' uses a deterministic version of this equation (i.e., with  2 = 0) to motivate
the discount rates the UK government uses for project evaluation. Its preferred values are
 = 1.5%/yr,  = 1, g = 2%/yr, leading to a discount rate of 3.5%/yr for maturities of less
than 30 years. Although these quantitative recommendations are very similar, notice that
they arise from markedly different values for the preference parameters.
    While (26) is the simplest and most widely known version of the Ramsey rule, it clearly
relies on some very strong normative and empirical assumptions. The core empirical as-
sumptions relate to the model of consumption growth. In the geometric Brownian motion
model consumption growth rates are independent and identically normally distributed. A
large literature in both asset pricing and social discounting has studied variations of this
model that allow for serial correlations in growth rates, uncertainty about the underlying
growth process that fattens the tails of the distribution of growth rates, rare disasters, and
several other effects. These effects can have qualitatively and quantitatively important
consequences for discount rates ­ term structures are no longer flat when growth rates are
serially correlated, and fat-tailed distributions for growth rates can dramatically inflate


                                               35
the magnitude of the precautionary term in (26). In addition, the role of the iso-elastic
utility assumption has been interrogated. It has been shown that if d (c)/dc < 0, and
consumption growth rates are non-negative and independently and identically distributed,
then the term structure of risk-free rates is declining. This can be seen directly by inspec-
tion of the general formula in (25). Thus the finding of a flat term structure in (26) is
not robust either to the model of consumption growth, or to the choice of utility function.
Gollier (2012) presents a comprehensive overview of these issues; we refer the reader there
for further details.
    It is worth pausing briefly to emphasise the difference between the approach we have
adopted in this section and that in Section 2. There is not a single price in any of the
formulae in this section ­ all the results follow from a direct assessment of the impact of a
public project on a welfare measure that represents the planner's normative intertemporal
preferences. Prices are only relevant to the extent that they play an implict role in any
underlying model of consumption growth. In practice however, the applied literature tends
to focus on exogenous time series models for consumption. While it is possible to interpret
these models as equilibrium behaviour that emerges from some underlying model of the
economy, that connection is seldom made explicitly in practical applications of discounting
formulae. If it were, the implications for choosing discount rates might be quite different.
For example, as in our discussion in Section 2.3.4, normative planners may still find it
beneficial to use markets to redistribute project payoffs across time and states. If that
is feasible (i.e., if the payoff streams from public projects are at least partially tradable),
prices still determine opportunity costs, and may still be important inputs to cost benefit
analysis.


3.3    Properties of discounted utilitarian time preferences
The discounted utilitarian time preferences that underpin the Ramsey rule are so familiar
that it is easy to forget what the justification for using them was in the first place. In
this section we drill down into the axiomatic properties of discounted utilitarian time
preferences. Our purpose in doing this is to understand the precise assumptions that are
implicit in this commonly used tool, and in so doing evaluate their normative credibility.
Our discussion will show that, while discounted utilitarian preferences have a number of
convenient and attractive features, they are arguably far from being the only plausible
model of normative intertemporal preferences.
    We begin with a discussion of the famous axiomatic foundation for discounted utili-

                                              36
tarianism due to Koopmans (1960). Let c = (c0 , c1 , . . .) be an infinite stream of future
consumption, and let (c|t c ) denote a future consumption stream that consists of the el-
ements of stream c for the first t time periods and the elements of stream c thereafter.
Let h be an arbitrary history of consumption. We denote preferences over future con-
sumption streams c at a history h by Vh (c). Since preferences over consumption streams
are conditioned on histories h we admit the possibility that they may differ at different
histories.
    The two most important of Koopmans' axioms are as follows:

   · Independence ­ For all consumption streams c, c , c    ~, all t > t, and all histories
                                                         ^, c
     h:
                      ^|t c) Vh (c |t c
              Vh (c|t c                                ~|t c) Vh (c |t c
                                      ^|t c )  Vh (c|t c               ~ | t  c ) .   (27)

   · Stationarity ­ For all consumption values x, consumption streams c, c , and all
     histories h:
                        Vh (x, c) Vh (x, c )  Vh (c) Vh (c ).                   (28)

Koopmans also assumes some other technical axioms (including a continuity axiom). Note
that both these axioms concern preferences at a fixed history h. They say nothing about
the relationship between preference at different histories.
    The Independence Axiom is responsible for the additive separability of preferences. It
is easy to show that if Vh (c) takes the form

                                   h            h            h
                         Vh (c) = U0 ( c 0 ) + U1 ( c 1 ) + U2 ( c2 ) + . . .

then Independence is satisfied. With some further technical axioms, this representation of
Vh (c) can be shown to be necessary for Independence. Additive separability is a strong
property ­ it says that the relative value of a marginal unit of consumption in any two
periods only depends on those periods. Formally, separability implies that for any i, j, k ,
where i = j = k :
                                         Vh /ci
                                                   = 0.
                                   ck Vh /cj
In a nutshell, the value of an additional mouthful of Spam for dinner, relative to its value
at breakfast time, does not depend on how much Spam you ate for lunch.
    Stationarity is actually also a kind of independence property of preferences. It says
that if two consumption streams share a common `beginning', then our preferences be-


                                                 37
tween them should be the same as our preferences between two modified consumption
streams that are the same as the original pair, but with their common beginning deleted.
Stationarity is also a strong property. For example, it implies that for an arbitrary infinite
stream c,

                      (Star Wars I, c)  (Star Wars II, c)
                 (Star Wars I, Star Wars I, c)  (Star Wars I, Star Wars II, c)

That is, if I prefer watching Star Wars I to Star Wars II, and then continuing with my
life (c), I should also prefer watching Star Wars I twice in a row to watching Star Wars
I followed by Star Wars II, and then continuing with my life.30 Clearly there are some
situations in which stationarity may not capture important aspects of the interactions
between successive consumption values, although it may arguably be a less objectionable
property to assume of social preferences over a composite consumption variable.
     To see (roughly) that Stationarity and Independence imply discounted utilitarianism,
consider two consumption streams c, c , where Vh (c)  Vh (c ). By independence this means

                  h          h          h                  h          h          h 
                 U0 (c0 ) + U1 (c1 ) + U2 (c2 ) + . . . > U0 (c0 ) + U1 (c1 ) + U2 ( c2 ) + . . .

The Stationarity axiom now says that Vh (c0 , c)  Vh (c0 , c )  Vh (c)  Vh (c ), so setting
c0 = c0 we have

  h         h                h        h                h        h                h        h 
U1  (c1 )+U2  (c2 )+. . . > U1 (c1 )+U2 (c2 )+. . .  U0  (c1 )+U1 (c2 )+. . . > U0 (c1 )+U1 (c2 )+. . .
                                                                                                 (29)
It is clear that a sufficient condition for this to hold is

                                        Uth                -1 h
                                          +1 (c) = (1 + h ) Ut (c).                                 (30)

for some h > 0. This can be verified be substituting (30) into the left inequality in (29).
With the use of some other technical axioms, Koopmans shows that (30) is necessary, as
well as sufficient. Solving (30) explicitly as a function of time, we arrive at our old friend
discounted utilitarianism:                 
                                       Vh (c) =         (1 + h )-t U h (ct ).                       (31)
                                                  t=0

  30
       This example is taken from Machina (1989).



                                                         38
    Although the Koopmans' axiomatics lead to a discounted utilitarian representation of
preferences, one further assumption is needed to get to the standard (deterministic) formula
in (31). The key observation is that nothing so far in our discussion tells us how preferences
at different histories are related. Thus, if a decision maker obeys the Koopmans axioms,
she could have a different discounted utilitarian preference relation at each point in time.
To get to the standard result we must impose one of two additional conditions:

   · Time consistency: For all histories h, consumption values x, and future consump-
     tion streams c, c :

                        Vh ((x, c))   Vh ((x, c ))  V(h,x) (c)    V(h,x) (c )            (32)


Time consistency rules out preference reversals, and implies that if an optimal plan is
implemented today, it will remain optimal to follow it tomorrow. In order to understand the
constraints this requirement places on preferences, it is helpful to see how time consistency
interacts with Stationarity. Notice that the left hand sides of (28) and (32) are the same,
so if we impose time consistency on stationary preferences, it must also be the case that
the following property holds:

   · Time Invariance: For all histories h, consumption values x, and future consumption
     streams c, c ,
                       Vh (c) Vh (c )  V(h,x) (c) V(h,x) (c )                      (33)

Time invariance is a property that is logically distinct from time consistency and station-
arity, but is implied by their conjunction. In fact, it is easy to see that any two of these
properties ­ time consistency, stationarity, and time invariance ­ implies the third. Thus
we could equally have imposed time invariance in addition to the Koopmans axioms, and
derived time consistency as a consequence.
    Time invariance requires that preferences over future consumption streams be indepen-
dent of translations of the time axis ­ shifting preferences forwards or backwards in time
has no effect on rankings of future consumption streams. An immediate consequence of
time invariance is that preferences are history independent ­ historical consumption can-
not have any effect on the ranking of future consumption streams. We have shown that
stationary preferences that obey the independence axiom are discounted utilitarian. In
addition, if these preferences are to be time consistent they must be time invariant. This
implies that discounted utilitarian preferences are time consistent if and only if they are

                                             39
the same in each history ­ i.e. the utility function U (c) and the utility discount rate 
cannot vary with the passage of time.
    This discussion has shown that although discounted utilitarian preferences are by far
the most commonly used in the literature, they are actually highly restrictive. Not only do
they severely constrain how interactions between consumption at different points in time
can affect our preferences, they also require us to be entirely ahistorical in our evaluations
of future consumption streams.
    Our discussion thus far has emphasised time, and not risk/uncertainty. A detailed
discussion of axiomatic approaches to intertemporal choice in the presence of risk and/or
uncertainty would take us too far afield for our present purposes. We refer the reader
to e.g. Hammond & Zank (2014); Ghirardato (2002) for detailed treatments. We note
however that two of the standard constraints on rational dynamic choice do not imply
expected discounted utilitarian preferences. Dynamic consistency is an extension of the
time consistency property above to a stochastic context. It requires plans that are made
today about how to act at future nodes of a decision tree that depend on the realisation
of chance events are in fact carried out if those events are realised. Consequentialism says
that preferences at each node of a decision tree should depend only on those nodes that are
reachable from the current node. While each of these properties is appealing, combining
them does not require that choices be represented by the discounted utilitarian preferences
in (31). Johnsen & Donaldson (1985) show that these two criteria together imply that
preferences must have a recursive representation, but significantly more structure is re-
quired for them to be additively separable across both time and states of the world, and
a stationarity axiom is still required to generate exponential utility discount factors. The
occasionally heard claim that (31) is required for consistent dynamic choice is manifestly
incorrect.
    Given that the constraints on planner preferences in (31) are highly restrictive, it is
natural to explore the implications of alternative preferences for normative consumption
discount rates. It is straightforward to extend the analysis in Section 3.2 to other pref-
erences. See e.g. Bansal & Yaron (2005); Traeger (2014) for a discussion of discount
rates derived from Epstein-Zin preferences, Traeger (2014); Gierlinger & Gollier (2017);
Collard et al. (2018) for discount rates that account for ambiguity aversion, and Camp-
bell & Cochrane (1999) for discount rates in the presence of habit formation.31 Backus
  31
    Gollier (2010); Traeger (2011); Gueant et al. (2012) provide discussions of discount rates for multi-
attribute utility functions, but these do not require us to deviate from the standard time- and state-
separable framework.


                                                   40
et al. (2004) is a handy reference for so-called `exotic' preferences and their applications.
While there are important discussions to be had about which (if any) of these alternative
preference formulations has normative appeal for social discounting, we hope that this
section illustrates that those discussions should also be had about the standard expected
discounted utilitarian paradigm.


3.4    Calibrating  and  : ethical arguments
Representation theorems such as that of Koopmans pin down the functional form of planner
preferences, subject to us accepting the axioms they rely on. But to operationalize these
representations for social discounting applications we need to specify the free normative
parameters of these functional forms. In the case of discounted utilitarianism, this means
choosing a utility function U (c), and a utility discount rate  .
     In applications the utility function is often chosen to be iso-elastic. Iso-elastic utility
makes income effects very simple ­ the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is a constant,
and equal to 1/ . Iso-elastic utility is also required for balanced growth paths to exist in
standard economic growth models ­ see e.g. Acemoglu (2008). In the time and state-
separable model in (31),  also captures risk attitudes; it is the coefficient of relative
risk aversion, which is again constant for iso-elastic utility functions. The preferences in
(31) do not permit a separation between attitudes to risk and attitudes to intertemporal
consumption smoothing. Although iso-elastic utility functions have a number of very
convenient properties, it is important to be aware that it is an essentially arbitrary choice
from a normative perspective. Ultimately the main reason for the focus on this utility
function is analytic simplicity.
     How should we interpret and calibrate  for social discounting applications? Gollier
(2018) reviews the various methods that have been used in this arena. Positive approaches
to calibrating  include empirical estimates of risk aversion from laboratory and field ex-
periments and studies of societal inequality aversion as reflected in observed income tax
schedules. A more purely normative approach uses simple examples to inform intuition
about ethically appropriate values for  . For example, consider a $1 transfer from an indi-
vidual with consumption 2c to someone with consumption c. If we weight these individuals'
utilities equally, the maximum fraction x of this transfer that can be `lost in transit', while
still making the transfer socially desirable, satisfies

                        U  (2c) × 1 = U  (c) × (1 - x)  x = 1 - 2- .


                                              41
For example, if we feel that it is acceptable to lose at most 25% of the transfer, we should
set  = - log2 (3/4)  0.4. If 75% is an acceptable maximum loss, we should set  = 2.
This example shows how  captures inequality aversion, and can help to form intuition
for `reasonable' values. Clearly however, there is room for a wide range of opinions on
the ethically acceptable value of x, and hence inequality aversion  . Commonly deployed
values lie in the range 1-4.
    Similarly, the value of  is often chosen either to fit empirical data on the rate of return
on capital, or from normative equity considerations. We have already discussed the reasons
to be skeptical about attempts to calibrate  based on market observables, and thus focus
on the normative arguments here.
    If the time periods in the discounted utilitarian model represent different generations,
e.g. we are making choices about something like climate change, it is natural to allow
normative fairness considerations to influence our choice of  . A commonly advocated
choice is  = 0, i.e. intergenerational equity. There are many good arguments for this
value, going all the way back to Sidgwick (1874) and Ramsey (1928). Broome (2014) and
Greaves (2017) provide recent surveys. In a nutshell, arguments for  = 0 turn on the
undeniably compelling claim that ethical principles should be impartial, i.e., accidents of
birth or circumstance should play no role in a sound theory of distributive justice. Since
positive  implies that a util experienced today is worth substantially more than the same
util experienced by agents who happen to live their lives in the distant future, it must
surely violate any meaningful notion of impartiality.32
    Since the impartiality arguments for  = 0 are quite straightforward, and are by now
very well-covered ground, we will focus on arguments against  = 0. A seminal result in
this arena is the impossibility theorem of Diamond (1965):

Theorem 1. Social welfare orders (i.e. complete, transitive, reflexive relations) defined
over infinite bounded utility streams, and that satisfy:

    · Strong Pareto: If ct  ct for all t, and there exists  such that c > c , then c  c .

    · Continuity: The order is continuous in the sup norm topology.

    · Equity: The order is indifferent between utility streams that are finite permutations
      of one another.
  32
     Advocates of this impartiality argument (e.g. Stern, 2007) still sometimes adopt a slightly positive value
of  intended to reflect a constant `extinction probability' per unit time. From an empirical perspective
both the assumed value of this probability (e.g. 0.1%/year), and its constancy over time, are somewhat
arbitrary.

                                                      42
do not exist.

    This result has been strengthened over the years ­ see Asheim (2010) for a review of
recent developments. So, if we want to define complete, continuous, social preferences over
infinite consumption streams that are also equitable, we have to give up Strong Pareto, a
property that is usually considered as an uncontroversial efficiency requirement. Alterna-
tively, we can admit Strong Pareto and Equity, but then we'd have to give up completeness.
There is thus a very deep conflict between the desire for impartial, sensitive evaluation cri-
teria, and the notion of a numerically representable social relation of the kind we are used
to.
    A second argument against  = 0 is that it can give rise to the so-called `paradox of the
indefinitely postponed splurge'. To see an example of this, consider the following optimal
intergenerational savings problem:


                             
                    max            (1 +  )-t U (ct ) s.t. kt+1 = (1 + r)(kt - ct ),
                     {ct }
                             t=0


where
                                                     ln c    =1
                                         U (c) =     c1-
                                                     1-
                                                              = 1,
and we assume that   0, r > 0,   0. Standard calculations (see e.g. Dasgupta, 2008)
show that an optimal program exists in this problem if and only if (1 + r)1- < 1 +  . This
condition is always satisfied when  > 1, but may not be when   1. When an optimum
exists, the optimal savings rate st = (kt - ct )/ct is constant, and given by:
                                                       -1
                                       s = (1 + r)-         (1 +  )- .                   (34)

Consider the case  = 1. In this case, as   0, the optimal savings rate s  1 in every
generation. Thus each generation values the future so highly that it starves itself today
for the sake of future generations. This is true of every generation, so no one ever benefits
from this selfless altruism. Hence the paradox. While this result is clearly unpalatable, it
is not a generic feature of optimal programs as   0; it relies on the fact that utility is
unbounded above for  = 1. In fact, we can see from (34) that when  > 1 (i.e., utilities
are bounded above), s  (1 + r)-(-1)/ < 1 as   0. Nevertheless, efficient savings
rates in this limit may still be unpalatably high. For example, if r = 5%/yr,  = 2, we


                                                     43
have s  97.6% when   0 ­ this still seems an excessively burdensome prescription.
The fact that very low values of  tend to favour very high savings rates is symptomatic
of a broader set of concerns about `excessive sacrifice'.33
     Consider a project that yields a small utility benefit  to the next T generations. If
 = 0, then no matter how small we make , there is always a T large enough so that the
project is welfare improving, even if it costs the current generation all of its utility. This is
the real heart of the `excessive sacrifice' line of complaint against  = 0. The deep tension
between impartiality and the obligations we owe to ourselves is eloquently summarised
by Arrow (1999): `I do not think that this dilemma arises merely out of the specifically
utilitarian formulation that welfare economists find so congenial. It is a conflict between a
basic property of morality...that of universalizability, and a principle of self-regard, of the
individual as an end and not merely as a means to the welfare of others. In a favourite
quotation of mine, Hillel, the first-century rabbi, asked,"If I am not for myself, then who
will be for me? If I am not for others, then who am I? If not now, when?" One can only
say that both the universal other and the self impose obligations on an agent.'
     It is tempting to object that both the `non-existence' and `excessive sacrifice' arguments
against  = 0 are an artefact of the assumption of an infinite time horizon. Certainly it
is a mathematical fact that both problems, conceived in their narrowest sense, evaporate
in a model with a finite time horizon. It is also a physical fact that humanity will almost
certainly cease to exist in finite time. However, these observations merely deflect attention
from the conceptual concerns raised by these arguments. The excessive sacrifice concern
emerges approximately for very large time horizon models, or for models where  > 0
but arbitrarily small ­ optimality may still require sacrifices that are unpalatable in such
models. Similarly, while an undiscounted intertemporal welfare function avoids all the
difficulties of Diamond's theorem with a finite time horizon, the ranking of consumption
streams can depend very strongly on where the temporal cutoff is set when  = 0. Since any
choice for the time horizon is essentially arbitrary, or at best highly uncertain, this seems
an undesirable feature for a normative criterion. One might then invoke the principle that
the time horizon should be large enough that the terminal conditions (i.e., the assumed
final values of state variables) of any intertemporal optimization problem we are interested
in should not have much influence on the optimal solution, since any choice of terminal
  33
     In general, Asheim & Buchholz (2003) observe that any efficient and increasing consumption stream
is the optimal path for some undiscounted welfare function, so it is perfectly possible to find undiscounted
objectives that favour arbitrary savings patterns. The question then becomes whether those objectives
satisfy other desirable normative criteria.



                                                    44
values will be arbitrary. But this requirement is, to all intents and purposes, identical to
requiring a very large, if not infinite, time horizon when  = 0. It seems that when it
comes to equitable evaluation of very long utility streams there is no free lunch.
    One final argument against  = 0 is, of course, that it may not reflect the intertemporal
objectives of currently living consumers, both with respect to their own consumption, and
with respect to their concern for their distant descendants. Supporters of this argument
see an imposition of  = 0 as a deeply paternalistic move. From an ethical perspective
this view can be critiqued for confusing an `is' with an `ought': the fact that agents
behave a certain way does not imply that this behaviour should be lifted to the status
of a normative principle for social decisions. Nevertheless, for commentators who adopt
a narrow normative framework that identifies the social good with the satisfaction of the
preferences of currently living consumers,  = 0 does not seem a plausible value.
    We take up the theme of disagreements about normative parameters once more in
Section 4, but now turn to practical issues that arise when evaluating public projects in
imperfect economies.


3.5     Project evaluation in imperfect economies
Thus far our discussion has focussed entirely on the consumption impacts of public projects.
Of course, projects may be financed by a variety of means that do not involve direct
consumption changes, and they may also have effects on other economic variables, e.g.
private investment. When markets are perfect all these effects can be handled using a
unified approach, as consumption discount rates coincide with market rates of return on all
margins. This is no longer the case when there are distortions in the economy. An extensive
literature discusses project evaluation in such second-best situations.34 The central issue is
whether there are general rules governing project evaluation in these cases, or whether the
outcomes are specific to the distortions that operate in the economy. We close this section
with a small digression from our discussion of the `pure' normative approach to discuss
this issue. We show that there are some general principles, though their implementation
is not always straightforward.
    To see the basic idea in a simple example consider Figure 2. This represents a two-
period economy, with present consumption on the horizontal axis and future consumption
on the vertical axis. Think of the vertical axis as representing a composite of all future
  34
   Classic contributions on this topic in a general equilibrium setting include Arrow & Kurz (1970);
Sandmo & Dreze (1971). We discuss some of the partial equilibrium literature below.


                                                45
consumption. The intertemporal production frontier is shown as a red line and the blue
lines are indifference curves for a representative consumer, or social planner. Clearly the
first best is the point A where an indifference curve is tangent to the frontier. Here the
consumer's marginal rate of substitution and the producer's marginal rate of transformation
are equal ­ the consumption rate and the rate of return on investment are the same. Now
suppose however there are distortionary taxes in the economy which drive these two rates
apart: then the system will be at a point like B, which is inefficient. At such a point, what
rate should be used to evaluate a small change in the economy's configuration? Clearly
a change is beneficial if and only if it is feasible and it moves the economy above the
indifference curve through B, and for small changes this is true if and only if the proposed
(feasible) change has positive value at the prices given by the slope of the tangent to the
indifference curve at B, which means positive value at the consumption discount rate. So
a move from B to C is beneficial, even though neither B nor C is efficient. Note that the
slope of the production frontier at B has no role to play in evaluating a project in this case.
So here at least using the consumption discount rate is the right approach. How robust is
this conclusion?
    The answer is that it is robust, provided that we can accurately identify all of the
consequences of a project and value them appropriately. In case this sounds trivial let




              Figure 2: Appraising marginal projects in distorted economies.


                                              46
us illustrate the possible complexities. Consider an investment in wind power, which will
provide carbon-free electricity for thirty years. This investment may be paid for by a
government or by a private company. In the former case it might be financed by issuing
bonds, or by a tax on profits, labor income or sales. In the latter case it could be financed
by issuing corporate bonds or equity, or from retained earnings. Clearly the implications of
these seven alternatives could be quite different, both now and in the future. An income tax
would reduce savings and consumption, and hence reduce output and profits. Financing via
government bonds might reduce private investment and hence future output and profits,
and so on. In terms of Figure 2, each of these would be represented by a different movement
from B, even though they all lead to the same wind farm. However, provided that we
identify precisely what these effects are, and value them with the appropriate shadow
prices, we can keep discounting using the consumption discount rate.
    The literature sometimes distinguishes between the direct and indirect effects of a
project. In the case of a wind farm financed by an income tax, the direct effects would be
the generation of power by the farm and the employment in constructing and operating
the farm, together with the drops in consumption and savings resulting from the tax. The
indirect effects would include the change in the consumers' work-leisure tradeoff because
of the lower effective wage rate, the change in producers' outputs because of the drop in
demand, and any consequences of the reduction in consumer savings. The direct effects
are obvious to the managers of the project, whereas the indirect effects may be hard to
evaluate. It is these that make it hard to be sure where a project starting at a point such
as B in Figure 2 will actually take us. It is certainly possible that a project could have
positive value if we consider the direct effects only, but negative value when all effects are
taken into account - or vice versa.
    To illustrate more formally how project evaluation proceeds in a non-optimal economy,
consider a deterministic model in which the planner's intertemporal preferences are given
by
                                  V (c) = V (c0 , c1 , c2 , . . .),

and suppose that some non-optimal resource allocation mechanism operates in the econ-
omy. We represent this mechanism as a general (non-optimal) mapping between consump-
tion and investment at time t, and consumption and investment at all prior times  < t:

                           ct = Ct (ct-1 , it-1 , ct-2 , it-2 , . . . , c0 , i0 )        (35)
                            it = It (ct-1 , it-1 , ct-2 , it-2 , . . . , c0 , i0 )       (36)


                                                     47
for some set of functions Ct (·), It (·). Now consider valuing a public project that leads to
direct marginal changes in consumption and investment at time t, denoted by dct and
dit respectively. We can compute the total effect of this project by totally differentiating
(35­36), holding consumption and investment values at times 0, . . . , t - 1 fixed as they are
in the past when the project's payoffs are realized:

                                    -1                         -1
                                         Ct+                  Ct+
                        dct+ =                  dct+ -n +                dit+ -n                      (37)
                                  n=1
                                         ct+ -n           n=1
                                                              i t +  - n
                                   -1                         -1
                                         It+                  It+
                       dit+ =                   dct+ -n +            dit+ -n .                        (38)
                                  n=1
                                         ct+ -n           n=1
                                                              it+ -n

To understand all the indirect consequences of this project on consumption and investment
at future times t +  for   1, we need to solve this linear system of difference equations
forwards in time, given the stated initial conditions at  = 0. Let t, (dct , dit ) be the time
series of consumption changes that emerges from this procedure, given initial conditions
(dct , dit ). By linearity, we have t, (dct , dit ) = t, (1, 0)dct + t, (0, 1)dit . Defining the
shadow price of investment at time t as

                                                    V
                                                    ct+
                                          t =       V
                                                          t, (0, 1),
                                                 =1 ct


the appropriate cost benefit rule for a project that gives rise to a sequence of marginal
consumption and investment changes given by (dct , dit )t=0,..., is:
                                                                        
          dct (1 + t )-t +             (1 + t+ )-(t+ ) t, (1, 0)dct +         (1 + t )-t t dit > 0.   (39)
    t=0                      t=0  =1                                    t=0


The first term in this expression accounts for the direct effect of the project on consump-
tion, the second term for indirect consumption effects, and the third term for changes in
investment, valued at appropriate shadow prices.
    The shadow prices and indirect consumption effects in (39) are of course dependent
on the resource allocation mechanisms that operate in the economy. If the economy is
at an intertemporal welfare optimum, the envelope theorem implies that only the first
term of (39) is non-zero. However, in an economy with distortions, all the terms in (39)
are relevant. This analysis illustrates the complexity of this exercise in general. A series
of early papers examined the implications of these complexities for project appraisal in


                                                     48
various simplified cases, see e.g. Marglin (1963); Feldstein (1964); Baumol (1968); Bradford
(1975). See also Dreze & Stern (1987); Arrow et al. (2003) for discussions of shadow
prices and their role in policy appraisal in imperfect economies. Notice that although the
empirical consequences of market imperfections are somewhat formidable, the approach
here is conceptually straightforward: keep track of all the indirect effects of consumption
changes, and convert all project consequences for investment into consumption equivalents
using appropriate shadow prices, before discounting using the consumption discount rate
as normal.


4     Rapprochement: Social choice and social discount-
      ing
Our discussion of the market based approach to social discounting showed that there are a
number of serious concerns about whether observed market prices are the only information
that is needed to perform cost benefit analysis of intertemporal projects, especially if those
projects affect outcomes in the distant future where markets are likely incomplete, and
externalities due to e.g. climate change are highly relevant. The alternative to the market
approach is to try to estimate the welfare consequences of public projects directly, via a
normative social discount rate. However, our discussion of that approach showed that it
too suffers from some serious difficulties and indeterminacies. These arise when one asks
which normative axioms are most appealing as foundations of `planner preferences'. In
addition, even supposing that we agree on a given representation for planner preferences
(e.g., discounted utilitarianism) there are still free parameters that must be specified based
on a combination of normative reasoning and empirical estimation. For example, given the
tradeoffs involved in choosing appropriate values for  and  in the discounted utilitarian
paradigm, it is no surprise that informed opinions on their values vary widely. This is
amply demonstrated in Figure 3, which plots the results of a recent survey (Drupp et al.,
2018) that asked economists who have published papers on social discounting which values
of  and  are most appropriate for public project appraisal.
    The variation in this figure is truly astonishing when we translate it into estimates of
the social value of payoffs in the distant future. For example, assuming that consumption
growth is a deterministic 2%/yr, the value of a $1,000,000 payoff in 100 years is $1,000,000
if (,  ) = (0, 0) (bottom left of Figure 3), or $2 if (,  ) = (6%/yr, 4) (top right of Figure 3).
These two economists disagree about the value of 100 year payoffs by a factor of 500,000!

                                               49
                                                 6




                                                 5
            Elasticity of Marginal Utility ( )




                                                 4




                                                 3




                                                 2




                                                 1




                                                 0
                                                     0   1    2         3         4          5         6     7   8
                                                             Pure Rate of Social Time Preference, %/yr ( )



Figure 3: Values of  and  recommended by a sample of economists who have published
papers on social discounting. Data from Drupp et al. (2018).

This is an extreme example, but even much more modest differences of opinion about these
parameters become highly significant at long maturities.
    There are at least three possible responses to this diversity of opinion. One is to
conclude that economics has little of value to say about how long-run projects should be
evaluated. Since essentially any policy can be justified by appealing to an appropriate (,  )
pair, and deciding between these values is not a question that can be settled definitively by
objective means, there is, in this view, little more to be said. A second response would be
to insist that there is only one (,  ) pair that is `correct', and those who deviate from this
value are making an ethical or methodological mistake. A third response is to accept that
judgements of the kind that are required to settle on values for (,  ) are invariably subject
to good-faith disagreements, and to attempt to find tools that can aid policy analysis
despite these disagreements.
    The first of these responses is excessively pessimistic about the role of analytical and
moral reasoning in debates about intertemporal social decision-making. The second re-
sponse captures the views of many commentators on social discounting. For example,

                                                                                50
advocates of the `impartiality' argument for  = 0 (including e.g. Pigou, Solow, Stern,
and Gollier) seem to believe that any positive value of  constitutes, in Harrod's words, `a
polite expression for rapacity and the conquest of reason by passion', and give short shrift
to alternative views. The difficulty is that there is also a group of equally thoughtful and
well-informed commentators (including e.g. Arrow, Samuelson and Nordhaus), for whom
the `excessive sacrifice', `non-existence', or `paternalism' critiques of  = 0 are persuasive
arguments against this value. It is hard to believe that any of these commentators is guilty
of any rudimentary conceptual errors. Rather, it seems more likely that each of them is
grappling with the conflicting obligations to the self and to others, and finding some com-
promise between them that they find attractive based on their methodological proclivities
and moral intuitions.
    This brings us to the third response to the normative disagreements illustrated in
Figure 3. Instead of asking what the `correct' values of normative parameters are, we
could ask how to proceed given persistent good-faith ethical disagreements. Is there a set
of principles for aggregating across normative opinions that gives each its due, but leads
to a fair compromise solution? That is the topic of this section.
    Pivoting from seeking a single `correct' normative theory to asking how to deal with
persistent normative disagreements is not without precedent in the literature. In his mag-
isterial work `The Idea of Justice', Amartya Sen argues that there is often a plurality of
(mutually inconsistent) ethical theories that may be brought to bear on a given issue, each
of which may have something to recommend it. Importantly, this pluralist viewpoint does
not mean that `anything goes' ethically. Sen (2010, p. x) explains that "There is a need
for reasoned argument, with oneself and with others, in dealing with conflicting claims,
rather than for what can be called `disengaged toleration', with the comfort of such a lazy
resolution as: `you are right in your community and I am right in mine'. Reasoning and
impartial scrutiny are essential. However, even the most vigorous of critical examination
can still leave conflicting and competing arguments that are not eliminated by impartial
scrutiny." The methods of social choice may be viewed as a rationality technology for ad-
judicating between those ethical claims that survive a process of public `reasoned scrutiny'.
These methods may themselves be inherently plural, but this is not a reason for pessimism
about their potential for dealing productively with normative disagreements. There is a
difference in kind between debates about the rationality principles that social choice proce-
dures should obey, and debates about basic ethical principles or normative parameters of a
single planner's preferences. Moreover, as we shall see, some important conclusions may be


                                             51
reasonably robust across several different social choice approaches. With this background
in mind, we now turn to some specific proposals that have been discussed in the recent
literature.


4.1     Utilitarian aggregation and voting
In this section we discuss issues that arise when we apply standard tools from social choice
theory and welfare economics to aggregate diverse normative theories of intertemporal so-
cial welfare. The primitives of the analysis are a set of N theories of intertemporal social
welfare that boil down to numerically representable preference relations on (aggregate)
                            (i)                  (i)
consumption streams: {Vh (c)}i=1...N . Here Vh (c) denotes a cardinal representation of
theory i's normative ranking of future consumption streams c at history h. We assume in
                     (i)
addition that the Vh (·) are `interpersonally comparable'.35 We are interested in aggrega-
tion rules h which also deliver a cardinal preference relation Wh over future consumption
                                            (1)      (2)         (N )
streams at each history h: Wh (c) = h (Vh (c), Vh (c), . . . , Vh (c)). We will assume that
the individual theories Vhi are of the discounted utilitarian form (we again specialise to the
deterministic case for simplicity):
                                                
                                   (i)                 (i)            (i)
                                 Vh (c) =             Uh (ct )(1 + h )-t .
                                               t=0


In this section we specialize to `utilitarian' aggregation rules in which h is a linear function.
These rules are only utilitarian in form, not interpretation; recall that V (i) represents
intertemporal welfare according to theory i, and not a measure of individual wellbeing. In
this case, we have
                                         N            
                                                (i)          (i)            (i )
                             Wh (c) =          wh           Uh (ct )(1 + h )-t .                        (40)
                                         i=1          t=0

                                                                                   (i)     (j )
To avoid non-generic cases, we assume there exist i = j such that wh > 0, wh > 0 and
 (i)   (j )
h = h .
  35                                                                                              (i)
     Technically, we require social preferences to be unaffected by transformations of the form Vh (c) 
   ( i)
Vh (c) + i for any  > 0, i  R. The assumption of interpersonal comparability across theories is not
innocuous ­ see Harsanyi (1955) for the definitive discussion of how this requirement may be interpreted.




                                                       52
4.1.1    Stationarity, time consistency, and time invariance in a collective context

An important feature of the preferences in (40) is that they no longer satisfy the stationarity
axiom (28). This is obvious in the context of our discussion of the Koopmans axioms ­ there
we showed that continuous preferences that satisfy the independence axiom are stationarity
if and only if they are discounted utilitarian. This never occurs in (40) as long as there
          (i )                              (i)
are two Vh with non-identical values of h that have positive weight. Suppose that we
now impose an additional assumption on (40) ­ time invariance. In this case we have
   (i )             (i)         (i)
Uh (·) = U (i) (·), h =  (i) , wh = w(i) for all histories h. Since Stationarity and Time
Invariance together imply Time Consistency, we have

                NOT Stationary  NOT Time Invariant OR NOT Time Consistent.

As we have assumed time invariance, the fact that (40) is not stationary leads to a violation
of time consistency. This is essentially the content of the results in Jackson & Yariv (2015),
who claim that continuous aggregation rules that respect unanimity (i.e., the Strong Pareto
principle applied across the V (i) ), the independence axiom, and time consistency do not
exist. One can find similar claims in a wide range of classic and contemporary literature
(see e.g. Marglin, 1963; Feldstein, 1964; Adams et al., 2014). And yet, time consistent
utilitarian aggregation is possible. Millner & Heal (2018b) show that the `impossibility' of
time consistent utilitarian aggregation relies critically on the assumption of time invariance.
If we drop time invariance it is a trivial matter to find time consistent versions of (40). If
                                (i)
we assume that the weights wh only depend on calendar time  and not the full history
of consumption, a necessary and sufficient condition for time consistency is:

                                                 (i )
                                      (i)      w0 (1 +  (i) )-
                                     w    =         (j )
                                                                    .                                (41)
                                                          (j ) -
                                                j w0 (1 +  )

         (i )            (i)
where w0  0, i w0 = 1. Millner & Heal (2018b) provide a critical discussion of the
role of time invariance in collective intertemporal choice, arguing that it is a normatively
and descriptively problematic assumption when a fixed group of agents decide on resource
allocation over time.36
    Time invariance is however a more compelling modeling assumption if we are attempt-
  36
     If we view the model as one of consumers' wellbeing the weights in 41 can be interpreted as requiring
us to account for agents' total lifetime wellbeing when computing social welfare (Millner & Heal, 2018b).
Calvo & Obstfeld (1988) come to a related conclusion in a model in which cohorts of agents are born in
each instant and face some hazard rate of death that depends on their age.

                                                    53
ing to model conflicts between different groups of decision-makers, as might occur in in-
tergenerational decision-making. In that case we can think of the time invariant version
of (40) as a principle that each generation uses to aggregate the normative intertemporal
preferences of its constituents. The core assumption in this approach is that the only thing
that is relevant for decision making within a given generation is the degree of concern
that current agents exhibit towards the future. The concerns of past or future generations
are not accounted for explicitly; they are only relevant to the extent that they implicitly
influence the normative judgements of current agents. If we assume that the distribution
of normative views does not vary with time we end up with a model in which aggregate
preferences over future consumption streams at all histories h are given by:
                                              
                               Wh (c) =             ~ (ct )(1 + 
                                                    U           ~t )-t ,                        (42)
                                              t=0


where
                                     N
                           ~ (c) =
                           U               w(i) U (i) (c)                                       (43)
                                     i=1
                                         N                           -1
                                                                      t

                              ~t =
                                             w(i) (1 +  (i) )-t            - 1.                 (44)
                                       i=1


    We begin our discussion of these preferences with an examination of their implications
for the risk-free consumption discount rate. Our analysis has some similarities to Gollier
& Zeckhauser (2005); Jouini et al. (2010); Heal & Millner (2014). After that we discuss
some of the broader issues that arise when social preferences are time inconsistent.

4.1.2   Implications of utilitarian aggregation for discounting

From the aggregated utility function in (43), we can define the aggregate elasticity of
marginal utility
                               N    (i) (i)                  N                        
                               i=1 w U      (c)              i=1   w(i)  (i) (c)U (i) (c)
                  ~(c) = -c
                               N
                                                      =            N
                                                                                            .   (45)
                                    (i) (i) (c)
                                           
                                                                         w(i) U (i) (c)
                               i=1 w U                             i=1




                                                    54
                                       (i)
Assuming that U (i) (c) = c- , and writing ct = c0 egt t we simplify further to find that

                                                           N     (i) (i) - (i) gt t
                                                           i=1 w  e
                                       ~(c0 egt t ) =
                                                             N      (i) - (i) gt t
                                                             i=1 w e


    Again taking the continuous time limit for analytical convenience, and focussing on a
deterministic model for simplicity, we see from (25) that the risk-free consumption discount
rate at maturity t in this model is given by,
                                                                 t
                                             t = ~t + gt             ~(c0 e g )d.
                                                                                                        (46)
                                                      t      0


Notice that

                                             d~            ~t = min  (i) .
                                                t < 0, lim 
                                             dt        t         i


Moreover, if the growth rate is constant, i.e. gt = g for all t, and defining ~t (g ) = ~(c0 egt ),
it is straightforward to show that

                          d                                                     mini  (i) g > 0
                 sgn         ~t (g )    = - sgn(g ), lim ~t (g ) =
                          dt                             t                      maxi  (i) g < 0.

The aggregate pure rate of social time preference          ~t is a generalized mean of the { (i) }, and
declines with maturity to the lowest value in the infinite future. Similarly, the aggregate
elasticity of marginal utility    ~t (g ) is a weighted average of the { (i) }, with weights that
vary with maturity in such a way that          ~t (g ) declines with maturity if g > 0, or increases
with maturity if g < 0. Putting these pieces together, it is easy to see that when consump-
tion growth is constant, the risk-free rate t declines with maturity to a limiting value of
mini { (i) +  (i) g }.
    We illustrate the maturity dependence of the utilitarian risk-free discount rate in Figure
4. In this figure we have calibrated the values of  (i) and  (i) to the survey data in Figure
                              (i)
3, chosen weights w(i) =  (i) ,37 and used equations (44 ­45) to compute the aggregate
                             i
discount rate for different constant consumption growth rates g . The most striking differ-
ence between the discount rates in Figure 4 and those that follow from the `single theory'
Ramsey rule (26) is that now the risk-free rate has a declining term structure. This is a
  37
    This choice of weights ensures that agents with different values of  (i) contribute equally to the aggre-
                                                         ¯ -  (i) t       ¯
gate welfare function on constant utility paths, since 0 U  e       dt = U(i) .




                                                           55
                                                                                                 g = 1%/yr
                                                                                                 g = 2%/yr
                                                                                                 g = 3%/yr
                                      6
               Discount rate (%/yr)




                                      5




                                      4




                                      3




                                      2
                                          0   20   40   60   80        100     120   140   160     180       200
                                                                  Maturity (yrs)



Figure 4: Risk-free consumption discount rate under utilitarian aggregation of the survey
data in Figure 3, assuming constant deterministic consumption growth rate g .

direct consequence of utilitarian aggregation across theories.

4.1.3   Time inconsistency, non-marginal policies, and voting

The fact that time invariant utilitarian aggregation leads to a time inconsistency problem
might seem like a knockdown argument against this approach. Yet in the context of
intergenerational choice there is no reason to insist on time consistency in general ­ we are
modeling the collective normative preferences of successive groups of people, and it seems
excessively demanding to require that these be aligned across groups who may be separated
by decades or centuries. Time consistency is perhaps a reasonable constraint to impose on
an idealized normative planner who accounts for the interests of all generations, into the
indefinite past and future, in every time period. But the problem we are concerned with
here focusses on a more limited, pragmatic, notion of normativity, i.e., one that emphasizes
the normative views of those agents who have agency over current choices.
    As a practical matter, time inconsistency poses no real difficulties for marginal policy
analysis. Consumption paths are exogenous in this case, so the discount rates derived in
the previous section can be applied at each point in time given an estimate of consumption

                                                                     56
growth. Things do however become more complex if we aim to use the utilitarian aggre-
gation approach for non-marginal analysis. Thinking about intertemporal equilibrium in
models of time inconsistent preferences leads us to treat the interaction between succes-
sive groups as a dynamic game. This follows since rational groups will choose the best
available action given their beliefs about the actions of future groups, whose preferences
are different from their own. We are in equilibrium if all groups best respond given their
conjectures about the actions of future groups, and their conjectures are correct. This
approach to handling time inconsistency goes back to Phelps & Pollak (1968), and is now
a conventional part of the behavioral economist's toolkit (Laibson, 1997). This is one area
where these tools may also have something to contribute to normative analysis.
    Millner & Heal (2018a) present an analysis of a linear production economy in which
consumption is chosen by a sequence of utilitarian `committees' that are constituted afresh
in each period. Each committee aggregates its members' views on the appropriate value of
 in each period, and chooses the value of consumption in that period only. The equilibrium
of this model can only be characterized analytically if committee members share a common
logarithmic utility function. In this case the equilibrium consumption path is equivalent to
the optimal path according to a single discounted utilitarian agent with pure rate of time
preference given by the weighted harmonic mean of the individual's  s:
                                                               -1
                                  ^=
                                               (i )
                                              w [ ]   (i) -1
                                                                    .                     (47)
                                          i


    From the perspective of a committee in any period  , the equilibrium summarized in
(47) is inefficient. There exist feasible consumption paths that would increase its aggregate
welfare measure W . However, owing to the time inconsistency of committees' preferences,
these paths are not implementable. Any future committee at time   >  can increase
its welfare measure by deviating from the time  committee's optimal plan. The time 
committee knows this, anticipates the behavior of all future committees, and reacts opti-
mally to this knowledge. Since all committees behave this way, the resulting equilibrium
is inefficient, but fully rational. The fact that utilitarian committees choose inefficient
consumption plans in equilibrium suggests that alternative methods for aggregating mem-
ber's opinions could improve on utilitarian aggregation. The most natural alternative to
consider is majoritarian voting.
    Since consumption paths are high dimensional objects, standard voting theory suggests
that it will be difficult to come up with workable voting rules. Indeed, this is the content of


                                              57
a second result in Jackson & Yariv (2015) ­ they show that under a `local non-dictatorship'
condition (i.e., whenever all but one agent prefers c to c , the voting rule does too), voting
over consumption streams is generically intransitive. There is however a way around this
negative result. Instead of considering a once-off vote over a full consumption stream,
we can consider a sequence of votes over current consumption. Millner & Heal (2018a)
observe that if each committee votes over their consumption choice only, but anticipates
the outcome of the votes of future committees, then there is a well-defined equilibrium.
The equilibrium consumption path in this case corresponds to the optimal path of the
median committee member (see also Boylan & McKelvey, 1995).
    One can also show that all committee members have single-peaked preferences over
optimal discounted utilitarian consumption paths. Combining this fact with the fact that
the utilitarian equilibrium is observationally equivalent to a discounted utilitarian optimal
path, and employing the properties of single-peaked preferences (Downs, 1957), we see
that a majority of agents will always prefer the voting equilibrium to the equilibrium
implemented by the utilitarian committee, regardless of how preferences are aggregated in
the utilitarian welfare function. Moreover, the voting method can dominate the utilitarian
aggregation method according to the utilitarian committee's own welfare function. If utility
functions are logarithmic, and the aggregation weights wi are again chosen equitably (i.e.,
wi = ii ), a sufficient condition for this to occur is:
        i


                                            -1
                          1        (i) -1                     1
                                  [ ]            < median <            (i) .
                          N   i
                                                              N   i


That is, the harmonic mean must be less than the median, which must be less than
the arithmetic mean. Since the harmonic mean is always less than the arithmetic mean,
this is really only a constraint on the median ­ it is satisfied for most positively skewed
distributions, and in particular for the data sample in Figure 3. This finding can also be
shown to hold for other iso-elastic utility functions (Millner & Heal, 2018a).

4.1.4       Intergenerational Pareto

In Section 4.1.1 we observed that the time consistency of utilitarian aggregation can be
restored if we abandon time invariance. In this section we consider a method for restoring
time consistency with time invariance due to Feng & Ke (2018). These authors adopt the
normative position of the `idealised intergenerational planner' we mentioned above, i.e., a


                                                 58
planner who accounts for the views of all agents in current and future generations at once.
Their key insight is that applying a version of the Pareto property across generations,
rather than just within the current generation, gives one much more freedom in the form
of the aggregate preference relation. Indeed, there is so much freedom that one can con-
struct examples where the aggregate intergenerational planner has exponential discounted
utilitarian time preferences, and is hence time consistent.
    We consider the simplest version of their model. Feng & Ke (2018) assume history
independent preferences, so we can index all preferences by time  . Within each gen-
eration individual i is assumed to have preferences over (lotteries over) future aggregate
consumption given by
                                              T
                                V(i) (p) =         (1 + i )-(s- ) ui (ps ).                       (48)
                                             s=

Here p = (p0 , p +1 , . . . , pT ) is a sequence of lotteries over aggregate consumption, i is
individual i's utility discount rate, ui (p ) is individual i's assessment of the expected social
utility of the (static) lottery p , and T is the time horizon.38 In addition, they assume that
the planner's preferences W (p) are exponential discounted utilitarian:

                                             T
                                W (p) =           (1 + W )-(s- ) u(ps ).                          (49)
                                             s=


       The main axiom their results rely on is:

       · Intergenerational Pareto: Social preferences W (p) satisfy intergenerational Pareto
                                                                         (i)      (i)
         if in each period  , and for any sequences of lotteries p, p , V +s (p) V +s (i)(p ) for
                                                      (i)         (i)
         all i, s  0 implies W (p) W (p ), and V +s (p)  V +s (p ) for all i, s  0 implies
         W (p)  W (p ).

Unlike the unanimity (i.e., Strong Pareto) property that motivated (40), and acted across
types within the current period, Intergenerational Pareto acts across all types in all future
periods at once. Applying some well known results of Harsanyi (1955), it can be shown
that W (p) satisfies Intergenerational Pareto iff

                                                  T    N
                                                           (i) (i)
                                   W (p) =                 ,s Vs (p)                              (50)
                                                  s= i=1

  38
     The analysis in Feng & Ke (2018) assumes that T is finite, but their results have been extended to
infinite T in Feng et al. (2020).


                                                      59
                    (i)                                                               (i)
for some weights ,s  0. Note that instead of the N weights w that we had in (40),
planner preferences in period  now depend on N × (T + 1 -  ) weights. This additional
freedom in the representation is at the heart of the results in Feng & Ke (2018). The non-
                           (i)
negativity of the weights ,s in the representation of planner preferences places constraints
on the possible values of the planners' discount factor W . Suppose for example that all
individuals have the same utility function, but their discount rates differ. In this case
the planner's preferences satisfy intergenerational Pareto if and only if there are weights
  (i)
s  0 and a constant utility discount factor W > 0 such that for t,

                                                   t    N
                                     -(t-1)                 (i)
                          (1 + W )            =             s   (1 +  (i) )-(t-s) .
                                                  s=1 i=1


It is relatively straightforward to show that this implies W < maxi  (i) . This is not much
of a constraint on the planner's discount rate, but it turns out that the upper bound can
be very considerably strengthen if individuals have different utility functions. The main
result in Feng & Ke (2018) shows that if the individual utility functions u(i) (p) are linearly
independent, then W (p) respects intergenerational Pareto if and only if the aggregate
planner's instantaneous utility function is a (strict) convex combination of individuals'
utility functions, and
                                        W < min  (i) .
                                                        i

Thus, when individuals' utility functions are linearly independent (surely the generic case),
the upper bound on the planner's discount rate jumps from the maximum to the minimum
of individuals' discount rates. These results show that if we impose discounted utilitarian
preferences on the aggregate planner, she must exhibit more patience than any individual
within a generation. From our discussion of the Koopmans axioms, we know that we could
have arrived at the same conclusion if instead of imposing discounted utilitarian preferences
directly, we imposed time consistency and time invariance on (50). Thus, extending our
concept of which agents have standing for current decisions beyond the current generation,
and imposing time consistency and time invariance, seems to require us to be extremely
patient when making intergenerational decisions.

4.1.5   `Robust' aggregation weights

One potential operational difficulty with the utilitarian approach to aggregating intertem-
poral preferences is that it introduces an additional set of normative parameters, i.e., the


                                                       60
                          (i)
aggregation weights wh . In the analysis in Figure 3 we specified the aggregation weights
by appealing to an intuitive fairness criterion ­ welfare functions with different values of 
should contribute equally to aggregate welfare when utility streams are constant and com-
mon to all theories. In Section 4.1.4 the weights were partially, but not totally, constrained
by the requirement that the aggregate welfare function be discounted utilitarian. Is there
some other, more systematic, way of specifying aggregation weights?
    A partial affirmative answer is provided in a paper by Chambers & Echenique (2018).
They consider the case where individuals share a common utility function but favour
different utility discount rates. They then write down a set of plausible axioms ­ versions of
Strong Pareto, continuity, interpersonal comparability, and an intergenerational inequality
aversion axiom ­ under which
                                        N                   
                                                    (i)
                        W (c) = min           wi                  U (ct )(1 +  (i) )-t ,
                                   w
                                        i=1
                                                 1 +  (i)   t=0


where w = (w1 , w2 , . . . , wN ), N
                                   i=1 wi = 1, and  is a convex set of possible weight vectors
w. Thus according to this rule we should evaluate utilitarian welfare using the most
pessimistic aggregation weights in the set .39 Crucially, the most pessimistic weights will
vary with the consumption sequence c, and will depend on the set  of plausible weight
vectors. Nevertheless, this approach provides a principled way of choosing the wi that is
robust to some `uncertainty' about how different theories should be weighted.


4.2     Non-dogmatic social discounting
The previous subsection took an approach to the problem of aggregating diverse theories
of intertemporal social welfare based on classical social choice theory. We hypothesise
some aggregate preference relation that somehow combines each of the theories, place
reasonable constraints on it, and see what follows from these constraints. Implicit in
all these approaches is some `meta-planner' whose authority is acknowledged by devotees
of all theories. All actors cede authority to this meta-planner, who makes a collective
choice on their behalf. In this section we discuss an alternative approach to dealing with
normative disagreements about intertemporal welfare functions. The model we discuss in
this section dispenses with any meta-planner; agents retain complete sovereignty over their
own normative judgements, and are free to choose all the normative parameters of their
  39
   This result is analogous to the results in Gilboa & Schmeidler (1989) in the context of decision under
ambiguity.

                                                    61
welfare functions idiosyncratically. We only require them to exhibit a certain openness
of mind ­ advocates of each normative theory are required to admit the possibility of a
future change of heart, and to form their current normative judgements with one eye on
their possible future selves. Following Millner (2020), planners who do this will be called
`non-dogmatic'.
    More formally, we once again assume a set of N history-independent theories of in-
                                                                      (i)
tertemporal social welfare, represented by the welfare functions V (c). Non-dogmatic
social time preferences can be written in the following recursive form:

                      Vi = F i c , V1+1 , . . . , VN     1              N
                                                   +1 , V +2 , . . . , V +2 , . . . ,


where there exists a t > 0 such that the functions F i are strictly increasing in Vj+t for
all j = 1 . . . N . The interpretation of this restriction on preferences is as follows: each
planner at time  favors her own idiosyncratic theory of intertemporal social welfare, but
admits the possibility that her normative views may change in the future, i.e., a future
self may advocate one of the other plausible theories. Each planner is non-dogmatic ­
instead of imposing their current preferred theory on their future selves, they internalize
the preferences of future selves. Current welfare depends directly on the welfare measures
that future selves may advocate, and not just on future consumption values according
to the current self's preferred theory. Finally, non-dogmatism is persistent: planners are
always non-dogmatic. Internalization and persistence together yield a recursive preference
system in which current preferences depend on future preferences, each of which is in turn
recursively defined. Note that although non-dogmatic planners are required to admit the
possibility of a future change of heart and internalize future preferences, the functions F i (·)
are idiosyncratic. Non-dogmatic planners are thus free to advocate their preferred theory
of intertemporal social welfare unequivocally.
    If we assume further that preferences are additively time separable the functions F i (·)
can be shown to be linear, i.e.,

                                                             N
                                                                     ij j
                                Vi       i
                                     = U ( c ) +         i
                                                         s          ws V +s                 (51)
                                                   s=1       j =1

        i        ij
where s   > 0, ws   > 0 for all s = 1 . . . , i, j = 1 . . . N , and the intratemporal weights
 ij           N     ij
ws satisfy j =1 ws     = 1 for all i. This interdependent preference system defines time
preferences that are complete on the set of bounded utility streams, and are increasing in


                                                   62
                                   i
all utilities, if the coefficients s satisfy maxi     i
                                                  s=1 s < 1. We assume this condition from
now on. The central result of Millner (2020) is as follows:

Theorem 2. Assume that planners' preferences satisfy (51), and let i
                                                                   s be the social dis-
count rate at maturity s according to planner i. Then

                                             lim i       j
                                                 s = lim s
                                            s             s


for all i, j  {1, . . . , N }.

    In words, all non-dogmatic planners agree on the long-run social discount rate, despite
                                                  i    ij
arbitrary disagreements about the coefficients s    , ws  and utility functions U i (·).40
    Although this result may be surprising at first, it has an intuitive origin. Suppose
                                                                                           i
that the planners only place positive weight on selves one time step ahead, i.e. s           = 0
for s > 1. To understand these planners' attitudes to consumption at some future time
 + s, notice that only planners at  + s care directly about consumption in that period.
Planners at time  + s - 1 care directly about consumption in period  + s - 1, but indirectly
about consumption in period  + s via a mixture of the preferences of the selves at time
 + s. After s steps back to the present, planners' concerns about  + s are mediated
through s iterates of a mixing operator that blends their intertemporal weights, and acts
on utilities at time  + s. As s becomes large, this mixing process converges, and all
planners' utility weights decline at the same geometric rate. In addition, marginal utilities
at large maturities are dominated by the planner whose marginal utility function decreases
slowest for large (small) consumption values if asymptotic consumption growth is positive
(negative). Thus, in the limit as s  , all planners agree on both the rate of decline of
utility weights, and on the rate of decline of marginal utility, i.e., they agree on the social
discount rate.
    Figure 5 demonstrates the effects of non-dogmatism on disagreements about discount
rates at different maturities. The analysis in this figure calibrates the model in (51) to the
survey data in Figure 3, and calculates the distribution of recommended discount rates at
each maturity as a function of a parameter x that measures the `degree' of non-dogmatism.
The value of x is the probability that each planner sticks with their preferred theory in the
next year, so e.g. x = 97.5% corresponds to a change in views roughly once every 40 years
on average. The figure shows that even with this mild degree of humility built into the
  40
     Millner (2020) presents an explicit formula for the consensus long-run social discount rate, but this is
not needed for our current purposes.


                                                     63
                                          7
                                                                                                 x = 80%
                                                                                                 x = 90%
                                          6                                                      x = 95%
                                                                                                 x = 97.5%
                                                                                                 x=1
           5-95% range of r i(s) (%/yr)




                                          5


                                          4


                                          3


                                          2


                                          1


                                          0
                                              0   20   40   60   80    100     120   140   160    180    200
                                                                 Maturity s (yrs)


Figure 5: Effects of non-dogmatism on disagreements about discount rates. The figure
depicts the 5-95% range of recommended values for the (risk-free) social discount rate, as a
function of maturity (s), and the `degree' of non-dogmatism (x). Reproduced from Millner
(2020).

preferences of diverse planners, non-dogmatism may still yield very substantial reductions
in disagreement about how to value payoffs at medium to long maturities. As it is precisely
at these long maturities where normative disagreements have the biggest effect on project
evaluation, non-dogmatism achieves consensus where it is needed most.


5    Conclusion
There are not many easy take aways from our presentation of the issues involved in setting
social discount rates ­ if anything our discussion shows that this task is in some ways more
freighted with technical, ethical, and practical challenges than is commonly appreciated.
Nevertheless, the needs of policy analysis trump any intellectual paralysis that these chal-
lenges may induce ­ we must grapple with them, for the sake of our descendants. We close

                                                                      64
with some brief recommendations that summarise our findings.
    First, the market based approach is unlikely to be fit for purpose, especially when it
comes to setting discount rates for payoffs that occur in the distant future. We showed
that this approach entails substantive normative assumptions ­ about how to aggregate
payoffs across individuals, the welfare significance of prices in a dynamic context, and
the consequences of heterogeneous beliefs ­ even in the highly optimistic case of perfect
markets. Moreover, the perfect market assumption itself is almost surely untenable; market
incompleteness and the presence of externalities are, in our view, very serious challenges
to this assumption in the context of long-term discounting. Nevertheless, if governments
insist on using this approach despite its shortcomings, they should do so in a manner that
is consistent with the basics of asset pricing. Discount rates should reflect current market
prices (e.g. the current yield curve for index-linked government bonds), should very likely
vary with maturity, and to the extent possible, should adjust for the correlations between
project-specific risks and aggregate consumption risks.
    Second, while the normative approach avoids the pitfalls of market perfectionism, it too
suffers from serious implementation difficulties. While arguments for appropriate values
of normative parameters (e.g.  and  in the discounted utilitarian framework) are some-
times presented as fait accomplis, we believe that the debate on these matters within the
community remains largely unresolved for a reason: this is the kind of thing about which
reasonable people can reasonably disagree. Indeed, in some ways the debate about the
appropriate values of normative parameters is arguably too narrow ­ should intertemporal
social preferences even be expected discounted utilitarian, and if not which alternatives
might be more attractive? There are many developments in decision theory and welfare
economics ­ e.g. on the treatment of uncertainty ­ that are relevant to this question, but
not often discussed in this context. The normative approach closes the door on one source
of contention, but opens several windows on others.
    Third, the zoo of potential options for making normative distributive judgments across
time should not intimidate us. Rather, we should recognise the irreducible nature of
disagreements on these issues, and seek methods for achieving consensus that respect in-
dividual views, but still provide practical tools for policy analysis. The methods of social
choice ­ broadly conceived ­ hold promise for this endeavour, but there is much still to be
done to flesh them out and apply them to this crucial problem. One quite robust finding
of existing aggregation methods is that long-run risk-free discount rates should likely be
very low. Indeed, three of the models we discussed ­ utilitarian aggregation, intergenera-


                                            65
tional Pareto, and non-dogmatic discounting ­ require that one or both of the normative
parameters that enter the standard Ramsey rule should be as low as, or lower than, the
lowest value that is recommended by any individual.41 With so many arrows pointing in
the same direction, the burden of proof required to overturn this recommendation is likely
substantial.


References
D. Acemoglu (2008). Introduction to Modern Economic Growth. Princeton University
  Press.

A. Adams, et al. (2014). `Consume now or later? Time inconsistency, collective choice,
  and revealed preference.'. American Economic Review 104(12):4147­4183.

P. Antras, et al. (2017). `Globalization, inequality, and welfare'. Journal of International
  Economics 108:387­412.

K. Arrow, et al. (2013). `Determining Benefits and Costs for Future Generations'. Science
  341(6144):349­350.

K. J. Arrow (1999). `Discounting, morality, and gaming'. In P. R. Portney & J. P. Weyant
  (eds.), Discounting and Intergenerational Equity. Resources for the Future.

K. J. Arrow, et al. (2014). `Should Governments Use a Declining Discount Rate in Project
  Analysis'. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 8(2):145­163.

K. J. Arrow, et al. (2003). `Evaluating Projects and Assessing Sustainable Development
  in Imperfect Economies'. Environmental and Resource Economics 26(4):647­685.

K. J. Arrow & M. Kurz (1970). Public investment, the rate of return, and optimal fiscal
  policy. RFF Press.

K. J. Arrow & R. C. Lind (1970). `Uncertainty and the Evaluation of Public Investment
  Decisions'. The American Economic Review 60(3):364­378.
  41
   This finding is anticipated in the prescient but somewhat controversial and informal analysis of Weitz-
man (1998). We have chosen to focus on rigorous frameworks rooted in formal welfare theory in this
paper.




                                                   66
G. B. Asheim (2010). `Intergenerational Equity'. Annual Review of Economics 2(1):197­
  222.

G. B. Asheim & W. Buchholz (2003). `The malleability of undiscounted utilitarianism as
  a criterion for intergenerational justice'. Economica 70:405­422.

D. K. Backus, et al. (2004). `Exotic Preferences for Macroeconomsits'. NBER Macroeco-
  nomics Annual 19(319-390).

L. Bakkensen & L. Barrage (2018). `Flood risk belief heterogeneity and coastal home price
  dynamics: going under water?'. NBER Working paper no. 23854 .

R. Bansal & A. Yaron (2005). `Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
  pricing puzzles'. Journal of Finance 59(4):1481­1509.

L. Barrage (2018). `Be careful what you calibrate for: Social discounting in general equi-
  librium'. Journal of Public Economics 160:33­49.

W. J. Baumol (1968). `On the Social Rate of Discount'. American Economic Review
 58(4):788­802.

S. Benartzi & R. Thaler (2007). `Heuristics and Biases in Retirement Savings Behavior'.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(3):81­104.

B. D. Bernheim (1989). `Intergenerational altruism, dynastic equilibria, and social welfare'.
  Review of Economic Studies 56:119­128.

C. Blackorby & D. Donaldson (1990). `A review article: The case against the use of the
  sum of compensating variations in cost-benefit analysis'. Canadian Journal of Economics
  23(3):471­494.

R. T. Boylan & R. D. McKelvey (1995). `Voting over Economic Plans'. The American
  Economic Review 85(4):860­871.

D. F. Bradford (1975). `Constraints on Government Investment Opportunities and the
  Choice of Discount Rate'. American Economic Review 65(5):887­899.

J. Broome (2014). Climate Matters: Ethics in a Warming World. W. W. Norton &
  Company, New York, NY London.



                                             67
M. K. Brunnermeier, et al. (2014). `A welfare criterion for models with distorted beliefs'.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4):1753­1797.

G. A. Calvo & M. Obstfeld (1988). `Optimal Time-Consistent Fiscal Policy with Finite
  Lifetimes'. Econometrica 56(2):411­432.

J. Y. Campbell & J. H. Cochrane (1999). `By Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based Expla-
   nation of Aggregate Stock Market Behaviour'. Journal of Political Economy 107(2):205­
   251.

A. Caplin & J. Leahy (2004). `The Social Discount Rate'. Journal of Political Economy
  112(6):1257­1268.

C. P. Chambers & F. Echenique (2018). `On Multiple Discount Rates'. Econometrica
  86(4):1325­1346.

J. Cohen, et al. (2020). `Measuring time preferences'. Journal of Economic Literature
  58(2).

F. Collard, et al. (2018). `Ambiguity and the historical equity premium'. Quantitative
  Economics 9(2):945­993.

M. L. Cropper, et al. (2014). `Declining Discount Rates'. American Economic Review:
 Papers & Proceedings 104(5):538­543.

P. Dasgupta (2008). `Discounting climate change'. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty
  37(2):141­169.

P. Dasgupta, et al. (1972). Guidelines for project evaluation. United Nations, New York.

P. A. Diamond (1965).      `The Evaluation of Infinite Utility Streams'.     Econometrica
  33(1):170­177.

A. Downs (1957). An economic theory of democracy. New York: Harper Collins.

J. Dreze & N. Stern (1987). `The theory of cost-benefit analysis'. In A. Auerbach &
  M. Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, vol. II. North-Holland.

M. Drupp, et al. (2018). `Discounting Disentangled'. American Economic Journal: Eco-
 nomic Policy 10(4):109­134.


                                            68
E. F. Fama & K. R. French (2004). `The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Theory and
  Evidence'. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(3):25­46.

E. Farhi & I. Werning (2007). `Inequality and Social Discounting'. Journal of Political
  Economy 115(3):365­402.

M. S. Feldstein (1964). `The Social Time Preference Discount Rate in Cost Benefit Anal-
 ysis'. The Economic Journal 74(294):360.

T. Feng & S. Ke (2018). `Social Discounting and Intergenerational Pareto'. Econometrica
  86(5):1537­1567.

T. Feng, et al. (2020).   `Utilitarianism and Social Discounting with Countably
  Many Generations'. Working paper, https: // drive. google. com/ file/ d/ 1btQz_
  U4oi0xcJgKps-DqyYadnPv6t5MD/ view .

M. Fleurbaey & S. Zuber (2015). `Discounting, risk and inequality: A general approach'.
 Journal of Public Economics 128:34­49.

J. Geanakoplos (1990). `An introduction to General Equilibrium with incomplete asset
  markets'. Journal of Mathematical Economics 19:1­38.

J. D. Geanakoplos & H. M. Polemarchakis (1986). `Existence, regularity, and constrained
   suboptimality of competitive allocations when the asset market is incomplete'. In Un-
   certainty, information, and communication: Essays in honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, Vol
   III. Cambridge University Press.

P. Ghirardato (2002). `Revisiting Savage in a Conditional World'. Economic Theory
  20(1):83­92.

J. Gierlinger & C. Gollier (2017). `Do interest rates decline when there is ambiguity about
   growth?'. Working Paper .

S. Giglio, et al. (2015a). `Very Long-Run Discount Rates'. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 130(1):1­53.

S. Giglio, et al. (2015b). `Climate Change and Long-Run Discount Rates: Evidence from
  Real Estate'. Working Paper 21767, National Bureau of Economic Research.

I. Gilboa, et al. (2014). `No-Betting-Pareto Dominance'. Econometrica 82(4):1405­1442.

                                            69
I. Gilboa & D. Schmeidler (1989). `Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior'. Journal
   of Mathematical Economics 18(2):141­153.

C. Gollier (2010). `Ecological discounting'. Journal of Economic Theory 145(2):812­829.

C. Gollier (2011). `Le calcu du risque dans les investissements publics'. Tech. rep., Centre
  d'Analyse Strategique.

C. Gollier (2012). Pricing the Planet's Future: The Economics of Discounting in an Un-
  certain World. Princeton University Press.

C. Gollier (2018). Ethical Asset Valuation and the Good Society. Kenneth J. Arrow Lecture
  Series. Columbia University Press.

C. Gollier (2019).    `The welfare cost of ignoring the beta'.      Working Pa-
  per https: // www. tse-fr. eu/ sites/ default/ files/ TSE/ documents/ doc/ by/
  gollier/ forget4. pdf .

C. Gollier & J. K. Hammitt (2014). `The Long-Run Discount Rate Controversy'. Annual
  Review of Resource Economics 6(1):273­295.

C. Gollier & R. Zeckhauser (2005). `Aggregation of Heterogeneous Time Preferences'.
  Journal of Political Economy 113(4):878­896.

W. Gorman (1953). `Community Preference Fields'. Econometrica 21(1):63­80.

H. Greaves (2017). `Discounting for public policy: A survey'. Economics and Philosophy
  33(3):391­439.

B. Groom & C. Hepburn (2017). `Reflections--Looking Back at Social Discounting Pol-
  icy: The Influence of Papers, Presentations, Political Preconditions, and Personalities'.
  Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 11(2):336­356.

B. Groom, et al. (2005). `Declining Discount Rates: The Long and the Short of it'.
  Environmental and Resource Economics 32(4):445­493.

O. Gueant, et al. (2012). `Ecological intuition vesus economic "reason"'. Journal of Public
  Economic Theory 14(2):245­272.




                                            70
P. J. Hammond & H. Zank (2014). `Rationality and Dynamic Consistency under Risk and
  Uncertainty'. In Handbook of the Economics of Risk and Uncertainty, vol. 1, pp. 41­97.
  Elsevier.

J. C. Harsanyi (1955). `Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal Com-
   parisons of Utility'. The Journal of Political Economy 63(4):309­321.

F. A. Hayek (1945). `The Use of Knowledge in Society'. The American Economic Review
  35(4):519­530.

G. Heal (2005). `Intertemporal Welfare Economics and the Environment'. In K. M¨  aler
  & J. R. Vincent (eds.), Handbook of Environmental Economics, vol. 3, pp. 1105­1145.
  Elsevier.

G. M. Heal & A. Millner (2014). `Agreeing to disagree on climate policy'. Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences 111(10):3695­3698.

N. Hendren (2019). `Efficient Welfare Weights'. Working Paper, https: // scholar.
  harvard. edu/ files/ hendren/ files/ eww. pdf .

M. O. Jackson & L. Yariv (2015). `Collective Dynamic Choice: The Necessity of Time
 Inconsistency'. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7(4):150­78.

T. H. Johnsen & J. B. Donaldson (1985). `The Structure of Intertemporal Preferences
  under Uncertainty and Time Consistent Plans'. Econometrica 53(6):1451­1458.

E. Jouini, et al. (2010). `Discounting and divergence of opinion'. Journal of Economic
  Theory 145(2):830­859.

T. C. Koopmans (1960). `Stationary Ordinal Utility and Impatience'. Econometrica
  28(2):287­309.

D. Laibson (1997). `Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting'. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 112(2):443­478.

R. C. Lind (ed.) (1982). Discounting for Time and Risk in Energy Policy. RFF Press.

I. M. D. Little & J. A. Mirrlees (1974). Project appraisal and planning for developing
   countries. Heinemann.



                                          71
M. J. Machina (1989). `Dynamic Consistency and Non-Expected Utility Models of Choice
 Under Uncertainty'. Journal of Economic Literature 27(4):1622­1668.

S. A. Marglin (1963). `The Social Rate of Discount and The Optimal Rate of Investment'.
   The Quarterly Journal of Economics 77(1):95­111.

A. Mas-Colell, et al. (1995). Microeconomic theory. Oxford University Press, New York ;
  Oxford.

A. Millner (2013). `On welfare frameworks and catastrophic climate risks'. Journal of
  Environmental Economics and Management 65(2):310­325.

A. Millner (2020).    `Nondogmatic Social Discounting'.      American Economic Review
  110(3):760­775.

A. Millner & G. Heal (2018a). `Discounting by committee'. Journal of Public Economics
  167:91­104.

A. Millner & G. Heal (2018b). `Time consistency and time Invariance in collective in-
  tertemporal choice'. Journal of Economic Theory 176:158­169.

A. Millner & H. Ollivier (2016). `Beliefs, Politics, and Environmental Policy'. Review of
  Environmental Economics and Policy 10(2):226­244.

P. Mongin (2016). `Spurious unanimity and the Pareto principle'. Economics and Philos-
  ophy 32(3):511­532.

E. S. Phelps & R. A. Pollak (1968). `On Second-Best National Saving and Game-
  Equilibrium Growth'. The Review of Economic Studies 35(2):185­199.

P. R. Portney & J. P. Weyant (eds.) (1999). Discounting and Intergenerational Equity.
  RFF Press.

E. Quinet (2013). `Cost benefit assessment of public investments'. Tech. rep., Commissariat
  general a la strategie et a la prospective.

F. P. Ramsey (1928).     `A Mathematical Theory of Saving'.       The Economic Journal
  38(152):543­559.

K. L. Ricke & K. Caldeira (2014). `Maximum warming occurs about one decade after a
  carbon dioxide emission'. Environmental Research Letters 9(12):124002.

                                            72
A. Sandmo & J. H. Dreze (1971). `Discount Rates for Public Investment in Closed and
  Open Economies'. Economica 38(152):395­412.

A. Sen (2010). The idea of justice. Penguin, London.

C. Severen, et al. (2018). `A forward-looking Ricardian approach: Do land markets capila-
  tize climate change forecasts?'. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
  89:235­254.

H. Sidgwick (1874). The method of ethics. Macmillan and Co.

J. Skinner (2007). `Are you sure you're saving enough for retirement?'. Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 21(3):59­80.

S. Solomon, et al. (2009). `Irreversible climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions'.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(6):1704­1709.

N. H. Stern (2007). The economics of climate change : the Stern review. Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge.

R. H. Strotz (1955). `Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization'. The
  Review of Economic Studies 23(3):165.

C. P. Traeger (2011). `Sustainability, limited substitutability, and non-constant social
  discount rates'. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 62(2):215­228.

C. P. Traeger (2014). `Why uncertainty matters: discounting under intertemporal risk
  aversion and ambiguity'. Economic Theory 56(3):627­664.

A. Tsyvinski & N. Werquin (2018). `Generalized Compensation Principle'. Working
  paper, https: // economics. yale. edu/ sites/ default/ files/ files/ Faculty/
  Tsyvinski/ Compensation% 2003% 2022% 202018. pdf .

F. van der Ploeg (2020). `Discounting and Climate Policy'. CESifo Working Papers (8441).

H. R. Varian (1982). `The Nonparametric Approach to Demand Analysis'. Econometrica
  50(4):945­973.

H. R. Varian (1992). Microeconomic Analysis. W. W. Norton & Company, 3 edn.

M. L. Weitzman (1998). `Why the Far-Distant Future Should Be Discounted at Its Lowest
 Possible Rate,'. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 36(3):201 ­ 208.

                                            73
