                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                         ARBITRAGE CAPITAL OF GLOBAL BANKS

                                         Alyssa G. Anderson
                                             Wenxin Du
                                          Bernd Schlusche

                                        Working Paper 28658
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28658


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2021

Previously circulated under the title "Money Market Fund Reform and Arbitrage Capital." We
thank Isha Agarwal, Nina Boyarchenko, John Campbell, Nicola Cetorelli, Mark Carlson, Douglas
Diamond, Victoria Ivashina, Anil Kashyap, Hanno Lustig, Thomas Mertens, Alan Moreira, Bill
Nelson, Romain Ranciere, Marc Saidenberg, Asani Sarkar, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar,
Jeremy Stein, David Thesmar, Judit Temesvary, Adrien Verdelhan, Kairong Xiao, Yao Zeng; seminar
participants at Arrowstreet Capital, Boston University, Chicago Booth/Economics Department, CREI-
UPF, Duke Fuqua, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard
Business School, MIT Sloan, London Business School, UT Austin, University of Washington; and
conference participants at the AFA, the Columbia-BPI Conference on Banking Regulations, the
Columbia Junior Macro Conference, the ECB Conference on Money Markets and Central Bank
Balance Sheets, the Federal Reserve System Day Ahead Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Reserve System Committee on Financial Institutions,
Regulation and Markets, NBER IFM, the NYU Stern WAPFIN conference, the Oregon Summer
Finance Conference, the SFS Cavalcade, the UCLA Anderson Fink Center Conference on Financial
Markets, and the WFA for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper uses data licensed from
DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation. Neither DTCC
Solutions LLC nor any of its affiliates shall be responsible for any errors or omissions in any DTCC
data included in this paper, regardless of the cause and, in no event, shall DTCC or any of its
affiliates be liable for any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, costs, expenses, legal
fees, or losses (including lost income or lost profit, trading loses and opportunity costs) in connection
with this paper. We thank Anya Clowers for excellent research assistance.The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the
views of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person associated
with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. All remaining
errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alyssa G. Anderson, Wenxin Du, and Bernd Schlusche. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Arbitrage Capital of Global Banks
Alyssa G. Anderson, Wenxin Du, and Bernd Schlusche
NBER Working Paper No. 28658
April 2021
JEL No. E4,F3,G2

                                          ABSTRACT

We show that the role of unsecured, short-term wholesale funding for global banks has changed
significantly in the post-financial-crisis regulatory environment. Global banks mainly use such
funding to finance liquid, near risk-free arbitrage positions--in particular, the interest on excess
reserves arbitrage and the covered interest rate parity arbitrage. In this environment, we examine
the response of global banks to a large negative wholesale funding shock as a result of the U.S.
money market mutual fund reform implemented in 2016. In contrast to past episodes of wholesale
funding dry-ups, we find that the primary response of global banks to the reform was a cutback in
arbitrage positions that relied on unsecured funding, rather than a reduction in loan provision.


Alyssa G. Anderson                               Bernd Schlusche
Federal Reserve Board                            Federal Reserve Board
20th and Constitution Ave. NW                    20th and C Streets
Washington, DC 20551                             Washington DC 20551
alyssa.g.anderson@frb.gov                        bernd.schlusche@frb.gov

Wenxin Du
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
Wenxin.Du@chicagobooth.edu
                    Arbitrage Capital of Global Banks

                                                                                                        
      Alyssa Anderson                         Wenxin Du                        Bernd Schlusche
   Federal Reserve Board              Chicago Booth and NBER                  Federal Reserve Board

                                                March 2021

                                                 Abstract
       We show that the role of unsecured, short-term wholesale funding for global banks
       has changed significantly in the post-financial-crisis regulatory environment. Global
       banks mainly use such funding to finance liquid, near risk-free arbitrage positions--
       in particular, the interest on excess reserves arbitrage and the covered interest rate
       parity arbitrage. In this environment, we examine the response of global banks
       to a large negative wholesale funding shock as a result of the U.S. money market
       mutual fund reform implemented in 2016. In contrast to past episodes of wholesale
       funding dry-ups, we find that the primary response of global banks to the reform
       was a cutback in arbitrage positions that relied on unsecured funding, rather than
       a reduction in loan provision.

Keywords: Money Market Mutual Funds, Wholesale Funding, Arbitrage
JEL Classifications: G2, F3, E4
   
     Previously circulated under the title "Money Market Fund Reform and Arbitrage Capital." We
thank Isha Agarwal, Nina Boyarchenko, John Campbell, Nicola Cetorelli, Mark Carlson, Douglas Di-
amond, Victoria Ivashina, Anil Kashyap, Hanno Lustig, Thomas Mertens, Alan Moreira, Bill Nelson,
Romain Ranciere, Marc Saidenberg, Asani Sarkar, Philipp Schnabl, Antoinette Schoar, Jeremy Stein,
David Thesmar, Judit Temesvary, Adrien Verdelhan, Kairong Xiao, Yao Zeng; seminar participants
at Arrowstreet Capital, Boston University, Chicago Booth/Economics Department, CREI-UPF, Duke
Fuqua, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard Business School,
MIT Sloan, London Business School, UT Austin, University of Washington; and conference participants
at the AFA, the Columbia-BPI Conference on Banking Regulations, the Columbia Junior Macro Con-
ference, the ECB Conference on Money Markets and Central Bank Balance Sheets, the Federal Reserve
System Day Ahead Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Board, Federal Re-
serve System Committee on Financial Institutions, Regulation and Markets, NBER IFM, the NYU Stern
WAPFIN conference, the Oregon Summer Finance Conference, the SFS Cavalcade, the UCLA Anderson
Fink Center Conference on Financial Markets, and the WFA for helpful comments and suggestions. This
paper uses data licensed from DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing
Corporation. Neither DTCC Solutions LLC nor any of its affiliates shall be responsible for any errors
or omissions in any DTCC data included in this paper, regardless of the cause and, in no event, shall
DTCC or any of its affiliates be liable for any direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, costs,
expenses, legal fees, or losses (including lost income or lost profit, trading loses and opportunity costs) in
connection with this paper. We thank Anya Clowers for excellent research assistance. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or any other person associated with the Federal
Reserve System. All remaining errors are our own.
    
     Anderson: Federal Reserve Board, 20th and C Streets NW, Washington, DC 20551. Email:
alyssa.g.anderson@frb.gov. Du: University of Chicago Booth School of Business and NBER, 5807 South
Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. Email: wenxin.du@chicagobooth.edu. Schlusche: Federal Reserve
Board, 20th and C Streets NW, Washington, DC 20551. Email: bernd.schlusche@frb.gov.
1    Introduction

In addition to deposits, banks rely on short-term wholesale funding markets, such as the
markets for federal funds, Eurodollars, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, and repos
to finance their operations.1 In contrast to deposits, which are often insured, wholesale
funding is more "fragile" and subject to sudden dry-ups (for example, Pérignon, Thesmar,
and Vuillemey, 2018; Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2013). Such large negative wholesale
funding shocks have led to fire sales of assets, significant contractions in credit supply, and
elevated financial distress (for example, Diamond and Rajan, 2009; Shin, 2009; Schnabl,
2012; Chernenko and Sunderam, 2014; Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein, 2015).
    In this paper, we document an important transformation of the role of unsecured
short-term wholesale funding for global banks in the post-financial-crisis regulatory envi-
ronment. In particular, many large global banks have transitioned to a business model in
which they mainly use unsecured wholesale funding to finance liquid assets as part of near
risk-free arbitrage positions. In other words, short-term wholesale funding has become
arbitrage capital for global banks. Through our analysis, we uncover about $1.5 trillion
of potential arbitrage capital for global banks. As a result of this business model, global
banks have become more resilient to negative wholesale funding shocks, as they can swiftly
reduce their arbitrage positions in response to wholesale funding dry-ups. However, the
use of wholesale funding as arbitrage capital also reduces the usefulness of short-term
wholesale funding in spurring lending to the real economy.
    The changing nature of unsecured wholesale funding occurs against the backdrop of
significant regulatory reforms to the banking sector since the Global Financial Crisis
(GFC). Importantly, to address global banks' vulnerability due to over-reliance on un-
secured wholesale funding, Basel III introduced the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) re-
   1
     When we refer to "banks", we mean the entire banking organization, not strictly the commercial
banking arm.



                                                1
quirement. The LCR requires banks to hold a stock of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)
at least equal to 100 percent of the expected net cash outflows during a 30-day stress sce-
nario. Under the LCR, the use of unsecured wholesale funding for liquidity and maturity
transformation is heavily penalized in the sense that most short-term unsecured wholesale
funding borrowed from financial institutions has an assumed outflow rate equal to 100
percent under distress. In contrast, stable insured deposits have an assumed outflow rate
of only 3 percent. Therefore, if a bank obtains one dollar of unsecured short-term funding
from a financial institution, in order not to worsen its LCR, the bank's only choice is to
invest the dollar in HQLA.
   Why would the bank borrow if it cannot lend? Beyond maturity and liquidity trans-
formation, persistent violations of the textbook no-arbitrage principle give rise to an
important new role for unsecured wholesale funding. Unsecured wholesale funding can
be used to finance arbitrage positions consisting of liquid assets, neutral to the LCR. We
focus on two types of arbitrage positions funded by unsecured borrowing. The first type
is interest on excess reserves (IOER) arbitrage, in which banks obtain unsecured, short-
term dollar funding and hold the proceeds as reserves at the Federal Reserve, earning the
spread between the IOER rate and their cost of short-term funding (Bech and Klee, 2011;
Keating and Macchiavelli, 2017; Banegas and Tase, 2020). The second type is covered
interest rate parity (CIP) arbitrage, in which banks borrow unsecured, short-term dollar
funding from the cash market and then lend the dollars in the FX forward/swap mar-
kets (for example, Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan, 2018). Both arbitrage strategies contain
very little risk and have persisted after the GFC. The ability of banks to engage in these
types of arbitrage crucially depends on their ability to obtain wholesale dollar funding
at attractive terms as well as the total leverage constraint banks face in scaling up the
arbitrage activities.
   Using granular daily bank-level supervisory data on various wholesale funding instru-
ments and reserve balances, our paper provides the first systematic account of potential

                                            2
arbitrage capital and arbitrage positions for U.S. banks and foreign banking organizations
(FBOs) in the United States.2 For each wholesale funding instrument, we observe infor-
mation on the issuers, volumes, and interest rates. Such detailed information on the U.S.
dollar wholesale funding market is not available in existing studies. Another key novelty
of our datasets is that, in contrast to the bulk of empirical banking research that uses
quarter-end bank reports, we observe banks' activities outside of quarter-end regulatory
reporting dates. This feature is essential to accurately gauge the size and time variations
of banks' arbitrage activities, as banks window dress their quarter-end balance sheets in
order to improve their reported regulatory capital ratios.
       Our sample comprises 58 highly-rated global banks that frequently trade with U.S.
prime money market funds (MMFs)--the primary lenders in unsecured wholesale funding
markets.3 We measure the potential arbitrage capital for the IOER and CIP arbitrages
as the amount of unsecured, short-term wholesale funding raised below the IOER rate
and the implied dollar rates from the dollar-yen swap markets, respectively. We find that
the overwhelming majority of unsecured wholesale dollar funding of our sample banks can
be used as arbitrage capital, with about 95% of the total funding raised at a rate below
the implied dollar interest rate from the dollar-yen swap and about a third of the total
funding raised at a rate below the IOER rate.
       With this arbitrage capital perspective of unsecured wholesale funding in mind, we
study the impact of a recent wholesale funding dry-up on global banks. As a result of
a major regulatory reform of the U.S. MMF industry introduced by the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), prime MMFs reduced their supply of wholesale funding to
global banks by more than $800 billion between October 2015 and October 2016. We find
that the primary response of global banks to this negative wholesale funding shock was a
   2
     Throughout the paper, we use the terms "foreign banking organizations," "foreign banks," and "U.S.
branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations" interchangeably.
   3
     These institutions are the global banks with the highest credit quality because U.S. MMFs are required
to invest the bulk of their portfolios in top-quality issuers.



                                                    3
reduction in their arbitrage positions funded by their unsecured wholesale borrowing. In
contrast to the traditional bank lending channel, banks did not reduce their loan provision.
       To establish a causal relationship between funding supply from MMFs and banks' ac-
tivities, our identification relies on the cross-sectional variations in reductions in unsecured
funding from prime MMFs and changes in banks' outcome variables over the one-year pe-
riod prior to the reform implementation deadline. To isolate the effect of the funding
supply shock from any changes in banks' demand for funding, we construct a Bartik-style
shift-share instrument for MMFs' cutback in funding supply to banks.4 We closely follow
the recommended diagnostic tests proposed by Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift
(2020) to justify the validity of our instrumental variable approach.
       We find that the MMF reform significantly reduced the availability of potential arbi-
trage capital for banks. For a 1% decline in unsecured funding from prime MMFs as a
share of total assets, potential arbitrage capital as a share of total assets declines by 0.9%
on average. In addition, using data on daily reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve,
we construct a proxy for the IOER arbitrage position as the minimum of the excess reserve
balances and the amount of funding obtained at a rate below the IOER rate. We show
that this proxy for the IOER arbitrage position as a share of total assets also declines by
about 0.8% in response to a 1% reduction in unsecured prime MMF funding.
       In contrast to the strong response of potential arbitrage capital and reserve balances,
this large negative funding supply shock had no significant impact on banks' loan provi-
sion. We first examine changes in the loan positions on the balance sheets of the U.S.-based
bank entities of our sample banks using weekly bank-level balance sheet data. Second, we
use Dealscan data on the U.S. dollar-denominated syndicated loan issuance of the entire
banking organization. We find consistent evidence across the two data sources that the
   4
    The Bartik instrument, first proposed by Bartik (1991), has been widely used in the applied mi-
croeconomics literature. Our setting is analogous to the "immigration enclave" setting in Card (2009).
Applications of the Bartik instrument in finance are less common. A few recent examples are Greenstone,
Mas, and Nguyen (2020) and Xu (2020).



                                                  4
negative wholesale funding shock triggered by the MMF reform did not translate into a
significant reduction in loan supply. In contrast, using a similar methodology, we find
that the sharp decline in global banks' unsecured funding from MMFs during the peak
of the European debt crisis in 2011-2012 reduced banks' loan origination, consistent with
the evidence presented in Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein (2015), as this shock occurred
before the implementation of the Basel III liquidity regulations.
   In addition to documenting the average effect across all sample banks, we also ex-
amine heterogeneous responses to the reform depending on differences in banks' business
models. We show that banks that specialize in the IOER arbitrage, as indicated by a
high correlation between daily changes in unsecured funding and daily changes in ex-
cess reserve balances, cut down significantly more IOER arbitrage. Beyond balance sheet
adjustments, we show that the loss of funding due to the MMF reform also increases
banks' wholesale funding costs. The effect on funding costs is less pronounced for IOER
arbitrageurs than for non-IOER arbitrageurs, consistent with a more elastic demand for
dollar funding among IOER arbitrageurs.
   Furthermore, we show that the reform led to more muted quarter-end effects at-
tributable to declines in unsecured funding around quarter-ends. Given that both the
IOER and CIP arbitrages are balance sheet intensive, banks in foreign jurisdictions have
incentives to scale down their arbitrage activities on quarter-end regulatory reporting
dates. We observe smaller drops in potential arbitrage capital on quarter-ends after the
MMF reform, suggesting that banks reduced their intra-quarter arbitrage activities. We
find strong evidence that the quarter-end effects in total unsecured funding outstanding
and unsecured funding borrowed from prime funds have both declined significantly after
the reform. Instead, secured funding plays an increasingly important role in quarter-end
dynamics. These findings support the view that the MMF reform has reduced arbitrage
activities funded by unsecured borrowing.



                                            5
   Finally, we examine the relationship between arbitrage capital and arbitrage profits.
In general, we find that reductions in arbitrage capital are associated with increases in
arbitrage profits, which is evidence that supply shocks to arbitrage capital matter for
the variation in equilibrium arbitrage profits. This negative relationship is stronger on
quarter-ends when banks' balance sheet capacity is more constrained. In addition, for
the IOER arbitrage, we find a stronger negative correlation between arbitrage capital and
arbitrage profits after the MMF reform implementation.
   The arbitrage capital perspective of wholesale funding has important implications for
monetary policy. In an environment with abundant reserves, the IOER arbitrage profits
earned by global banks anchor overnight unsecured funding rates, including the effective
federal funds rate--the Federal Reserve's policy rate. The CIP arbitrage profits determine
the offshore dollar funding costs, which directly affect the international transmission of
U.S. monetary policy. As such, the dynamics of the IOER and CIP arbitrage activity by
global banks is crucial for monetary policy implementation and transmission.
   Our results also have important implications for financial regulations. Further reforms
to the MMF industry are being actively discussed by regulators in light of another run on
prime MMFs during the peak of the COVID-19-induced financial distress in March 2020.
The resilience of large global banks to the pandemic-induced wholesale funding crunch is
again consistent with the changing nature of unsecured wholesale funding. As large global
banks improve their liquidity profiles under Basel III regulations, the likely migration of
liquidity risks from large global banks to smaller banks and non-bank financial institutions
is an important area of future research.
   Our paper contributes to the literature by providing a new perspective on the role
of short-term wholesale funding for global banks. Existing theoretical models, such as
Calomiris and Kahn (1991) and Diamond and Rajan (2011), provide reasons for banks
to have a maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities, as they borrow from whole-
sale lenders to support loan growth. However, a large strand of literature highlighted

                                             6
the fragility of wholesale funding. In particular, fragility during the GFC has been doc-
umented for many wholesale funding markets, including the market for federal funds
(Afonso, Kovner, and Schoar, 2011), commercial paper (Kacperczyk and Schnabl, 2013;
Duygan-Bump et al., 2013), and repo (Gorton and Metrick, 2012; Copeland, Martin, and
Walker, 2014). This fragility affects providers of wholesale funding, such as MMFs, as
shown by Kacperczyk and Schnabl (2010) during the GFC and by Chernenko and Sun-
deram (2014) during the European debt crisis. Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein (2015)
and Correa, Sapriza, and Zlate (2016) find a significant contraction in dollar lending by
global banks following the negative funding supply shock from MMFs during the Euro-
pean debt crisis. Our findings differ given the significant transformation of the role of
wholesale funding after the implementation of post-GFC regulations. In an environment
in which a large portion of wholesale funding is used to support liquid arbitrage positions,
the primary response of banks to a funding shock is a reduction in arbitrage positions
rather than loan provision.5
       In addition, the arbitrage capital perspective of short-term wholesale funding connects
our paper to the recent literature on no-arbitrage violations and the implications of post-
GFC financial regulations on arbitrage activities. To our knowledge, we provide the first
direct empirical measure of the quantity of dollar arbitrage capital for global banks across
different wholesale funding markets. Keating and Macchiavelli (2017) and Banegas and
Tase (2020) study the dynamics of the IOER arbitrage. Munyan (2017) and Anbil and
Senyuz (2018) document regulatory-driven repo window dressing activities. Du, Tepper,
and Verdelhan (2018) show persistent CIP violations and their quarter-end dynamics due
to banks' window dressing activities on regulatory reporting dates. A growing literature
   5
     A few other papers also examine the impact of the 2016 MMF reform from different perspectives.
Cipriani and Spada (2021) focus on estimating the premium for "money-like" assets. Gissler and Nara-
jabad (2017a,b,c) and Sundaresan and Xiao (2018) examine the growing role of the Federal Home Loan
Banks (FHLBs) following the reform and other post-crisis liquidity regulations. Since foreign banks can-
not borrow from FHLBs and U.S. banks source very little arbitrage capital to begin with, the growing
role of the FHLBs does not directly affect the arbitrage capital of global banks.



                                                   7
has been examining the frictions in the global dollar intermediation that help explain the
persistence of these CIP violations (for example, Borio, McCauley, McGuire, and Sushko,
2016; Avdjiev, Du, Koch, and Shin, 2019; Rime, Schrimpf, and Syrstad, 2017; Aldasoro,
Ehlers, and Eren, 2019). Understanding these money market dynamics is also crucial to
the implementation of monetary policy (Ihrig, Meade, and Weinbach, 2015; Duffie and
Krishnamurthy, 2016; Anderson and Kandrac, 2017; Correa, Du, and Liao, 2020).
      The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the various data sources
used in the paper and provide some background on the MMF reform. In Section 3, we
describe the IOER and CIP arbitrage strategies as well as our measures of arbitrage and
present some stylized facts regarding global banks' arbitrage activities. In Section 4, we
discuss our identification approach and present our main empirical results on the effects
of the MMF reform as a negative wholesale funding shock for global banks. In Section 5,
we document the relationship between arbitrage capital and arbitrage profits. Section 6
concludes.


2      Data and Background on the MMF Reform

2.1     Data and Sample

An important contribution of the paper is that we provide insights into the wholesale dollar
funding profiles of domestic banks and FBOs in the United States at a daily frequency. To
obtain funding profiles that are as comprehensive as possible, we compile our dataset from
a host of confidential data on various wholesale funding instruments at the transaction
level. Compared with datasets based on banks' quarter-end regulatory filings, our data
offers much more granular information on various wholesale funding instruments and,
importantly, it allows us to examine fluctuations in wholesale funding activities on days
outside of quarter-ends. In addition to detailed wholesale funding information, we obtain
daily data on banks' reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve as well as weekly balance

                                              8
sheet information on some broad categories of bank business operations. Finally, we
observe security-level information on MMFs' holdings of bank securities at a monthly
frequency, which is collected by the SEC and made publicly available.6 We now briefly
discuss each of these data sources and the construction of our sample.
       First, we compile a transaction-level dataset for various wholesale funding instruments,
including certificates of deposit (CD), commercial paper (CP), Eurodollars (ED), federal
funds (FF), and tri-party repos (RP). Each data entry includes the instrument type (CD,
CP, ED, FF, or RP), the borrower name, the trade date, the maturity of the instrument,
the borrowing amount, and the borrowing rate. We obtain CP transactions from the
Depository Trust and Clearing Corporation (DTCC)--the national clearinghouse for the
settlement of securities trades and a custodian for securities.7 For FF, ED, and CD,
we use transaction-level data from the FR 2420 Report of Selected Money Market Rates,
which, starting in April 2014, collects daily issuance data on FF, ED, and CD from U.S.
banks and FBOs that meet certain size requirements.8 For RP, we use position-level data
from the tri-party repo market, which are reported to the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York.9 While we do not have detailed data on the bilateral repo market, the tri-party
repo market captures virtually all repo lending from MMFs during our sample period.
       In addition to the detailed information on banks' wholesale funding instruments, we
obtain weekly data on bank balance sheet items from the FR 2644 Weekly Report of
Selected Assets and Liabilities of Domestically Chartered Commercial Banks and U.S.
   6
     Throughout the paper, we use the term "securities" loosely to refer to any type of wholesale funding
instruments.
   7
     DTCC performs these functions for almost the entire domestic CP market.
   8
     The FR 2420 report collects data from (1) domestically chartered commercial banks and thrifts
with $18 billion or more in total assets, or $5 billion or more in assets and meeting certain unsecured
borrowing activity thresholds, and (2) U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks with total third-party
assets of $2.5 billion or more (Federal Reserve Board, Instructions for Preparation of Report FR 2420).
The ED transactions in the FR 2420 report include offshore borrowing by U.S. banks and FBOs through
their offshore branches (mainly in the Caribbean) and domestic borrowing of offshore funding through
international banking facilities (IBF). Before October 2015, the FR 2420 report only captures offshore
borrowing by U.S. banks, but not by FBOs or by IBFs.
   9
     These data include all activity on the tri-party platform, including collateral deposits and borrow
pledges, so somewhat overstate strict tri-party repo activity.


                                                   9
Branches and Agencies of Foreign Banks. The FR 2644 report parallels the quarterly
bank Call Reports, but, while available at a higher frequency, it is far less detailed. In
addition, we obtain daily data on banks' reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve.
       Finally, MMFs are among the most important suppliers of short-term wholesale fund-
ing to global banks. The two main types of MMFs in the United States are prime funds
and government funds. Prime funds can hold short-term debt securities with maturities
of up to one year across different types of issuers, whereas government funds can only
hold government securities and repos backed by government securities. We use data on
U.S. MMFs' month-end portfolio holdings from the N-MFP Monthly Schedule of Portfolio
Holdings of Money Market Funds provided by the SEC. The N-MFP schedule discloses
portfolio holdings of each MMF at the security level as well as the fund's AUM for every
month-end since 2011.
       From these datasets, we construct a sample of 58 global banks that frequently trade
with U.S. MMFs.10 These banks account for about 90% of the total prime fund holdings
of bank securities. Since U.S. MMFs are required to invest the bulk of their portfolios in
top-quality issuers, our sample only includes top-tier global banks in terms of credit risk.
Table A1 provides a full list of our sample banks and the country of their headquarters.


2.2      Wholesale Funding Shock as a Result of the 2016 MMF reform

In 2014, the SEC introduced a package of reforms of the U.S. MMF industry to be
implemented by October 14, 2016. The reform mainly targeted prime funds and left
regulations regarding government funds largely unchanged. Prior to the reform, both
prime and government funds used a constant net asset value (NAV) to value their assets,
which allowed investors to redeem their MMF shares at par, on demand. The reform
requires institutional prime MMFs to use a floating NAV to value their assets and allows
  10
    We require a sample bank to have at least 100 transactions with all U.S. MMFs (including both
secured and unsecured transactions) between 2014 and 2017 and to have total assets equal to at least
$100 billion in 2014.


                                                10
all prime funds to implement redemption gates and liquidity fees to limit outflows. In
contrast, government funds can still use constant NAVs and are largely not subject to
gates and fees. Overall, the reform made prime MMFs less "money-like" and triggered
large flows of AUM from prime to government funds (Cipriani and Spada, 2021). As
illustrated in Panel A of Figure 1, between the reform announcement date on July 23,
2014 and the implementation deadline on October 14, 2016, prime funds lost about $1
trillion in AUM, whereas government funds gained about $1 trillion in AUM. Most of the
changes in AUM occurred in the year prior to the implementation deadline.11
         The $1 trillion reduction in prime funds' AUM resulted in a large negative funding
supply shock for global banks. As shown in Panel B of Figure 1, our sample banks experi-
enced a loss of secured and unsecured funding from prime funds of more than $800 billion,
far exceeding the losses of funding from prime MMFs' during the peaks of the European
debt crisis (Chernenko and Sunderam, 2014) and the GFC after Lehman's bankruptcy
(Duygan-Bump et al., 2013) of about $200 billion and $400 billion, respectively.


3         Arbitrage Capital: Measurements and Stylized Facts

We consider two types of risk-free arbitrage strategies based on unsecured funding: IOER
                                   12
arbitrage and CIP arbitrage.            The ability of banks to engage in these arbitrages crucially
depends on their ability to borrow wholesale dollars at attractive terms. We first describe
the two arbitrages and the measurement for arbitrage capital, and then present some new
stylized facts.
    11
     U.S. MMFs are only allowed to hold debt securities with remaining maturities less than one year.
Therefore, the effect of the reform shows up one year before the implementation deadline. We refer to
the period from October 2015 to October 2016 as the MMF reform implementation period.
  12
     We focus on unsecured funding as arbitrage capital to better align with the textbook-version of
arbitrage, which has zero initial costs. Secured funding can also be used for arbitrage, but the arbitrageur
needs to finance the collateral first.




                                                    11
3.1     IOER Arbitrage

First, banks can engage in IOER arbitrage by raising unsecured dollar funding from
the FF, ED, CD, and CP markets, and directly depositing the proceeds at the Federal
Reserve, earning the spread between the IOER rate and the unsecured funding rate. Since
a deposit at the Federal Reserve is the safest and most liquid asset, IOER arbitrage based
on unsecured funding is a textbook version of risk-free arbitrage. Banks do not scale up
this trade more and arbitrage away the profits because such arbitrage positions expand
the size of a bank's balance sheet and make the Basel III leverage ratio requirement more
binding. Separately, non-depository institutions either do not earn IOER on the balances
they hold at the Federal Reserve or cannot hold balances at the Federal Reserve at all,
and therefore cannot engage in this arbitrage (Bech and Klee, 2011). These features led
to a consistently positive profit for IOER arbitrage in our sample period from 2015 to
2017.13
                                                                                   IOER
      We measure the amount of potential arbitrage capital for bank i at time t, Yi,t   , as
the total outstanding amount of unsecured wholesale funding borrowed at a rate below
the IOER rate:
                             IOER                                              IOER
                           Yi,t   =          yi,n,k,t [yi,n,k,t |ri,n,k,t-n < rt -n ],                   (1)
                                       n,k

where yi,n,k,t denotes the outstanding amount at time t for unsecured funding instrument
k with a remaining maturity of n days issued by bank i, and ri,n,k,t-n denotes the issuing
                                                             IOER
rate of the same instrument on the issuance date t - n, and rt -n denotes the IOER rate
on the issuance date.
      In addition to measuring potential arbitrage capital, we can also calculate a proxy for
IOER arbitrage positions. As IOER arbitrage is limited by both the amount of funding
  13
     The spread between IOER and overnight funding rates remained positive until October 2018, and
then became zero and later negative beginning in early 2019, amid falling reserve balances as a result of the
Federal Reserve's balance sheet normalization. However, the spread once again turned positive following
the large increase in reserve balances resulting from the Federal Reserve's response to the COVID-19
pandemic in March 2020.


                                                      12
obtained at a rate less than IOER and the amount actually earning IOER at the Federal
Reserve, a proxy for IOER arbitrage positions can be computed by taking the minimum
of excess reserves and potential IOER arbitrage capital for each sample bank:


                         QIOER
                          i,t
                                                           IOER
                               = min(ExcessReservesi,t , Yi,t   ),


where ExcessReservesi,t denotes the amount of reserve balances held in excess of required
reserve balances at the Federal Reserve by bank i at time t.


3.2     CIP Arbitrage

Second, banks can engage in CIP arbitrage by raising unsecured dollar wholesale funding,
and then lending these dollars in the FX forward/swap markets, thereby earning any
deviation in CIP. As shown in Du, Tepper, and Verdelhan (2018), there are large and
persistent CIP deviations for all G10 currencies vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. For currencies
with low nominal interest rates, such as the euro, Japanese yen, and Swiss franc, there
are risk-free arbitrage profits when borrowing dollars in cash markets, investing in the
foreign currency, and hedging the exchange rate risk using FX forwards and swaps.
      We use the Japanese yen as a benchmark currency to gauge the potential capital for
CIP arbitrage. The dollar-yen is one of the most liquid FX currency pairs, and banks
and real-money investors (e.g., pension funds and life insurers) in Japan have a strong
demand for dollar funding and hedging services, therefore becoming natural counterparties
for global banks' CIP arbitrage positions. We use the Japanese overnight index swap
(OIS) curve to measure the risk-free interest rates that global banks earn on their yen
investments. We obtain very similar results if we instead use T-bill or repo rates, or the
deposit rate at the Bank of Japan's deposit facility. One advantage of using the OIS curve
is that it has a very granular maturity breakdown (overnight, 1-week, 2-week, 3-week, 1-




                                            13
month, 2-month, ..., 12-month), which allows us to more precisely match the OIS tenor
with the corresponding maturity of the dollar funding leg.
       To calculate the potential arbitrage capital for the CIP arbitrage, we first calculate
                                              $
the swapped yen rate expressed in dollars, rn,t :


                                              $           -$
                                           rn,t = rn,t - n,t ,


                                                                          $
where rn,t denotes the yen OIS interest rate with a tenor of n days, and n,t denotes
the FX forward premium to swap yen into dollars. Analogous to equation (1), we can
measure the amount of potential capital for the CIP arbitrage as the total outstanding
amount of funding obtained at a rate below the swapped yen rate upon issuance:


                             CIP                                               $
                           Yi,t  =         yi,n,k,t [yi,n,k,t |ri,n,k,t-n < rn,t-n ].               (2)
                                     n,k


       As we have balance sheet information only for U.S.-based entities, we are missing
information on the investing leg of the CIP arbitrage, which would generally show up on
the balance sheets of foreign affiliates. This makes calculating a proxy for CIP arbitrage
positions difficult. However, in Section 4.6, we discuss how we use intra-office flows to
shed light on some CIP arbitrage activities.14


3.3      Stylized Facts on Arbitrage Capital of Global Banks

We now provide some stylized facts on arbitrage capital and arbitrage activities of global
banks. First, almost every dollar raised from unsecured wholesale funding markets by our
sample banks can potentially be used for IOER or CIP arbitrage. The total amount of
observed potential arbitrage capital averages about $1.5 trillion ahead of the October 2016
implementation date. Panel A of Figure 2 plots unsecured wholesale funding outstanding
  14
    Correa, Du, and Liao (2020) use excess reserve balances in foreign central banks and the net reverse
repo lending in foreign currency as a proxy for dollar lending in the FX swap market.


                                                     14
by rates. The red area indicates funding issued at rates below the IOER rate, that
is, potential arbitrage capital for IOER arbitrage. The yellow area indicates funding
issued above the IOER rate, but below the swapped yen rate in dollars. The blue area
indicates funding issued above the swapped yen rate in dollars, which can therefore not
be employed for either arbitrage. We can see that more than 95% of our sample banks'
short-term unsecured wholesale funding can be used for IOER or CIP arbitrage. These
results confirm that IOER and CIP arbitrage opportunities are readily available for large
global banks based on their actual wholesale borrowing costs.
       Second, MMFs are an important supplier of potential arbitrage capital to banks, but
their importance significantly declined after the MMF reform. As shown in Panel B of
Figure 2, as of October 2015, the total potential arbitrage capital for the IOER and CIP
arbitrages combined was around $1.5 trillion, of which about $1 trillion was borrowed
from MMFs. After the MMF reform in October 2016, the total potential capital fell to
about $1.2 trillion, with funding from MMFs comprising only about $300 billion of the
total. That is, the share of total potential arbitrage capital coming from MMFs fell from
about two-thirds to about one-quarter.
       Third, the size of arbitrage capital is large for foreign banks and rather insignificant
for U.S. banks. As shown in Table 1, foreign banks' average total potential arbitrage
capital between October 2015 and June 2017 of $1.2 trillion amounts to 46% of their total
assets within the United States. Even though the arbitrage capital is relatively small as a
share of foreign banks' global assets (2.5%), it accounts for 17% of their estimated global
U.S. dollar-denominated assets.15 In contrast, U.S. banks' average total arbitrage capital
of $0.2 trillion only accounts for 3% of U.S. banks' assets within the United States, 1.8%
of U.S. banks' global assets, and 2.1% of U.S. banks' assets denominated in U.S. dollars.
  15
    Based on the BIS Locational Banking Statistics for France, Japan, Netherlands, Switzerland, and the
United Kingdom (where the currency composition of total bank balance sheets is available), we estimate
that 15% of global assets of foreign banks are denominated in U.S. dollars.




                                                  15
       The large difference between U.S. and foreign banks' dollar-denominated arbitrage
capital can be attributed to a couple of key regulatory differences. First, foreign banks
face a lower leverage ratio requirement compared to large U.S. banks. Both IOER and CIP
arbitrage involve borrowing and lending, thereby increasing the size of the balance sheet
and making the leverage ratio requirement more binding. A more stringent leverage ratio
requirement can disincentivize these low-margin and balance sheet intensive arbitrage
activities.16 Second, while U.S. banks also face a deposit insurance fee on all of their
wholesale funding after the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) broadened the
assessment base in 2011, foreign branches generally cannot raise FDIC-insured deposits
and therefore are exempt from the fees (Kreicher, McCauley, and McGuire, 2014; Kandrac
and Schlusche, forthcoming). The exact fee for a U.S. bank varies according to the size
and complexity of the bank, but can be around 8 basis points for a large bank like JP
Morgan (Whalen, 2011; Kreicher, McCauley, and McGuire, 2014). These fees erode the
arbitrage profits for U.S. banks, leading to disproportionately large arbitrage activities by
foreign banks.
       Finally, the IOER arbitrage capital largely corresponds to the IOER arbitrage posi-
tion. Figure 3 shows that our proxy for the IOER arbitrage position closely tracks IOER
arbitrage capital for U.S. and foreign banks, respectively. Foreign banks account for about
$300 billion of the IOER arbitrage, on average, in our sample, whereas the U.S. banks
only account for about $50 billion on average.17 Even though the IOER arbitrage is of-
ten known as the IOER-federal funds arbitrage, the total amount of the IOER arbitrage
position is significantly larger than the total size of federal funds market ($60-80 billion
  16
      Prior to Basel III, foreign banks did not face a non-risk-weighted total leverage ratio requirement,
whereas U.S. banks had an existing 3% leverage ratio requirement. Under Basel III, foreign banks now
face a 3% leverage ratio requirement, whereas U.S. banks' leverage ratio requirement increases to 5-6%
under the supplementary leverage ratio rule.
   17
      In calculating IOER arbitrage capital, we do not take into account the FDIC deposit insurance fee.
If we do take into account the fee, foreign banks' potential arbitrage capital and position will largely be
unaffected, and U.S. banks' IOER arbitrage capital and position would be even smaller.




                                                    16
outstanding), because banks also borrow IOER arbitrage capital from ED and short-term
CP markets.


4        Effects of the 2016 MMF Reform on Global Banks

With this new perspective of unsecured wholesale funding being used as arbitrage capital
in mind, we now examine the effects of a large negative unsecured wholesale funding shock
as a result of the 2016 MMF reform. We first present some summary statistics on banks'
balance sheet adjustments during the reform implementation period. We then discuss our
empirical identification strategy and present the empirical results.


4.1      Summary Statistics on the Balance Sheet Adjustments

Before presenting our formal empirical methodology and regression results, we provide
some summary statistics on global banks' wholesale funding, loan provision, and reserve
balances over the reform implementation period. Panel A of Figure 4 plots the amount
of unsecured wholesale funding by foreign and U.S. banks, respectively, along with prime
funds' holdings of that funding. Overall, our sample banks lost about $700 billion in
unsecured funding from prime funds, banks were only able to partially offset that funding
loss by unsecured borrowing from other sources and, as a result, their total unsecured
funding fell by about $300 billion. Foreign banks account for the majority of the decline
in both unsecured funding outstanding and unsecured funding from prime funds. In
contrast, U.S. banks have very little unsecured funding outstanding and rely very little
on borrowing from prime MMFs. We explained the differences between U.S. and foreign
banks' reliance on unsecured funding through the lens of arbitrage activities in Section
3.3.18
    18
   Another important reason that U.S. banks rely less on unsecured wholesale dollar funding than foreign
banks do is that U.S. banks have much broader access to the dollar deposit base.




                                                  17
       It is possible that banks could have compensated for their loss of unsecured funding
by sourcing secured funding in the form of repos. However, even though prime and
government MMFs' holdings of repos issued by foreign banks increased somewhat, total
repo funding of both foreign and U.S. banks remained quite flat (Panel B of Figure 4).
Taken together, banks did not offset the decline in unsecured borrowing by increasing
their secured funding.
       On the asset side, as shown in Panel A of Figure 5, foreign banks did not decrease
their loan provision despite the large declines in unsecured funding. Weekly loan positions
for foreign banks remained quite stable over the reform implementation period. Mean-
while, as shown in Panel B of Figure 5, the decline in unsecured funding was correlated
with a decline in excess reserve balances held by foreign banks. While the aggregate level
of reserves is beyond the control of banks, they can determine the allocation of existing
reserves. During our sample period, aggregate reserves were decreasing, in part due to
a steady growth of currency in circulation and changes in Treasury's cash management
practices, which led to a higher Treasury General Account balance. However, the aggre-
gate decline in reserves was primarily borne by foreign banks rather than domestic banks
since they could more easily accommodate the decline by scaling down their arbitrage
positions, as discussed further in the next section.19
       In summary, during the reform implementation period, foreign banks lost large amounts
of unsecured funding from prime funds, and reduced their overall unsecured wholesale
funding outstanding, but did not increase their repo outstanding. Interestingly, the large
funding loss did not translate into declines in loan provision, but rather a large reduction
in reserve balances at the Federal Reserve. These results motivate us to study the effect
of unsecured wholesale funding shocks on banks' arbitrage activities.
  19
    Furthermore, in Section 4.4.2, we establish parallel pre-trends across banks using reserves as the
outcome variable for our empirical identification.




                                                 18
4.2      Methodology and Identification

We now formally examine the impact of the funding supply shock stemming from the
MMF reform on banks' business activities. Our empirical strategy exploits the cross-bank
variation in the size of the funding supply shocks and changes in bank-level outcomes. We
start with the baseline OLS regressions of changes in bank i's outcome variable (Yi,t )
on changes in prime funds' holdings of bank i's unsecured debt securities (holdU nsec 20
                                                                               i,t   ):


                         Yi,t /Asseti,0 =  +  holdU nsec
                                                  i,t    /Asseti,0 +           i,t .




We normalize Yi,t and holdU nsec
                          i,t    by total assets of the bank holding company in 2014
from SNL Financial, Asseti,0 , so that the changes are expressed as percentages of total
pre-reform assets. We focus on changes between October 2015 and October 2016 to
capture the effects over the reform implementation period. To increase the power of our
regressions and, at the same time, avoid issues related to quarter-end window dressing,
we use the four quarterly changes from October 2015 to January 2016, January 2016 to
April 2016, April 2016 to July 2016, and July 2016 to October 2016.
       However, one concern with this empirical approach is that changes in equilibrium
quantities could be driven by both funding supply shocks from MMFs and funding demand
shocks by banks. To isolate the effects of funding supply shocks from MMFs, we use a
Bartik-style shift-share instrument for our independent variable, holdU nsec
                                                                      i,t    /Asseti,0 :


                ~i,t =
                B             Sharei,j,0 × Shiftj,t =       (si,j,0 /Asseti,0 ) × aumj,t .    (3)
                          j                             j



where si,j,0 denotes the lagged (pre-reform) share of bank i in fund complex j 's portfolio,
and aumj,t denotes the change in the AUM of all prime funds within fund complex
  20
    We use the same methodology when analyzing other bank-level outcome variables beyond unsecured
funding later in the paper. The arguments made here also apply to those later analyses.



                                                   19
j . We define the lagged bank share as of May 2014, just before the MMF reform was
announced in July 2014.21
                                                 si,j,0
       The "share" component, Sharei,j,0 =      Asseti,0
                                                         ,   captures the pre-reform exposure of bank
i to prime funds in complex j .22 The "shift" component, Shiftj,t = aumj,t , captures
changes in the AUM of prime funds in complex j , which are not attributable to the
specific funding demand of bank i. The exclusion restriction of the Bartik instrument
can either be justified by quasi-random "shares" (Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift,
2020) or quasi-random "shifts" (Adao, Kolesár, and Morales, 2019; Borusyak, Hull, and
Jaravel, forthcoming). In our setting, we follow all the diagnostic tests proposed by
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020) and show that the assumption of quasi-
random "shares" holds up well.
       Intuitively, the Bartik instrument in our application offers a pooled exposure design in
which different banks have different pre-reform exposures to different fund complexes, and
different prime funds experienced different AUM outflows over the reform implementation
period, which resulted in different sizes of funding supply shocks for banks. These funding
supply shocks would be independent of banks' funding demand shocks if the pre-reform
exposures are quasi-randomly assigned (Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift, 2020).
       Next, we present our main empirical results on arbitrage capital and arbitrage ac-
tivities. We then discuss various diagnostic tests for the validity of the instrument in
Subsection 4.4, followed by additional empirical results in Subsections 4.5 through 4.9.
  21
     We chose to use the shares in May 2014, instead of June 2014, in order to avoid effects of quarter-end
window dressing.
  22
     Note that our setting maps almost exactly to the "immigration enclave" example in Card (2009),
where i corresponds to location and j corresponds to the country of origin of the immigrants. As in
Card (2009), these shares do not add up to 1 for a given bank. The sum of all shares equal to one is not
required for the validity of the Bartik instrument.




                                                    20
4.3     Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Positions

Table 2 presents the baseline regression results for arbitrage capital and arbitrage po-
sitions. The OLS estimates are presented in the top panel and the IV estimates are
presented in the bottom panel. Columns 1-3 show that a 1% reduction in unsecured
funding from prime funds leads to a roughly 0.9% decline in arbitrage capital for IOER
and CIP arbitrage, and to a roughly 0.8% decline in our proxy for the IOER arbitrage
position over total bank assets. The OLS and IV coefficient estimates are very similar.
These results suggest that the unsecured wholesale funding shock as a result of the MMF
reform has a strongly significant effect on banks' arbitrage capital and arbitrage positions.
      In addition to estimating the average effects across all sample banks, we also explore
heterogeneous responses to the wholesale funding shock depending on banks' business
models. To that end, we divide our sample banks into two groups based on the intensity of
their arbitrage activities. Specifically, we sort banks based on the correlation between daily
changes in their reserve balances and daily changes in their unsecured wholesale funding
outstanding. We label banks in the top one-third of correlations as "IOER arbitrageurs"
and banks in the bottom two-thirds of correlations as "non-IOER arbitrageurs" (for a
similar concept, see Keating and Macchiavelli, 2017). Column 4 shows that the IOER
arbitrage position of the "arbitrageurs" exhibits a much more significant response to the
funding supply shock.
      As we have seen in Figure 3, foreign banks account for the bulk of the total IOER
arbitrage capital and arbitrage position. We therefore repeat the regression for the IOER
arbitrage position using the sample of only foreign banks in Column 5, and find similar
results compared to our full-sample estimate in Column 3. In the appendix, we offer
several additional robustness checks for this set of benchmark results. We show that the
regressions using annual changes instead of quarterly changes (Table A2), using dollar-
amount changes instead of changes as a share of total assets (Table A3), and including


                                              21
additional bank-level controls, such as the short-term credit rating, return on assets, and
Tier-1 common equity ratio (Table A4) produce qualitatively similar results.


4.4     Unpacking the Bartik Instrument

Having presented the benchmark results for arbitrage capital and arbitrage positions, we
now discuss the validity of the Bartik instrument. We closely follow the diagnostic tests
and visualizations outlined in Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020).
      First, Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020) demonstrate that the Bartik IV
estimator is numerically equivalent to a GMM estimator with all industry shares as instru-
ments. In our application, the "industry" share corresponds to the exposure of individual
                                           si,j,0
bank i to fund complex j , Sharei,j,0 =   Asseti,0
                                                   .   Our sample banks borrow from prime funds
in 84 fund complexes, and thus the Bartik instrument is a weighted average of J = 84
individual instruments, one for each fund complex j . However, not all fund complexes are
equally important. For the validity of the overall identification, it is important to justify
the identifying assumptions of the most important individual instruments.


4.4.1     Rotemberg Weights

To formally rank the importance of the individual instruments, we can perform a Rotem-
berg decomposition of the Bartik IV estimator outlined in Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin,
and Swift (2020). If any particular instrument is misspecified, the Rotemberg weight tells
us how sensitive the overall estimator is to the misspecification of the individual instru-
ment. We illustrate the Rotemberg decomposition based on our benchmark result of the
effect of changes in MMFs' funding supply on the IOER arbitrage position (Column 3 of
Panel B in Table 2). Table 3 shows various summary statistics for the Rotemberg weights
of the Bartik IV estimator. In Panel A, we first note that the Rotemberg weights are
largely positive for all fund complexes. As seen in Panel B, these weights are -0.83 per-
cent correlated with the AUM change at the fund complex level. In other words, the MMF

                                                 22
complexes that experienced the largest AUM outflows are the most important funds for
us to justify our identifying assumptions.23 We identify the top five MMF complexes with
the highest Rotemberg weights,24 and report our benchmark estimate based on individual
instruments constructed using banks' exposure to these top five fund complexes, respec-
tively (Panel C). We can see that the point estimates based on individual instruments
are broadly in line with the benchmark Bartik IV instrument presented in Column 3 of
Panel B in Table 2. These top-five funds account for about 60 percent of the sum of all
Rotemberg weights in the Bartik estimator.
       Figure 6 visualizes the relationship among the Rotemberg weights associated with
each prime fund complex j , the F -statistics for the first-stage regression of changes in
the unsecured funding from prime funds on bank shares in individual complex j , and
the IV estimate, j , of the baseline regression of changes in IOER arbitrage position on
changes in unsecured funding from prime funds using the bank shares in individual fund
complex j as an instrument. In terms of instrumental relevance, Panel A plots the first
stage F -statistic against the Rotemberg weight for individual instruments. We can see
that the F -statistic for instruments with higher Rotemberg weights is generally above 10,
which passes the rule-of-thumb weak instrument test. Panel B plots the j estimate based
on individual instruments against the F -statistic. The coefficient estimates are relatively
close to the value of the overall coefficient reported in Column 3 of Panel B in Table 2
(as denoted by the horizontal dashed line), especially among fund complexes with high
F -statistics.
  23
     The ten fund complexes that experienced the largest prime AUM outflows, based on public N-MFP
data, are: Fidelity (-$247 billion), JP Morgan (-$119 billion), BlackRock (-$108 billion), State Street
Global Advisors (-$81 billion), Federated (-$64 billion), Dreyfus (-$52 billion), Legg Mason (-$51 billion),
Wells Fargo (-$49 billion), Goldman Sachs (-$49 billion), and Vanguard (-$37 billion).
  24
     Due to data agreements, we cannot disclose the top five fund complexes with the highest Rotemberg
weights. Instead, we label these five fund complexes as Fund A, Fund B, Fund C, Fund D, and Fund E.




                                                    23
4.4.2      Instrumental Exogeneity

To assess the exclusion restriction that the "shares" are quasi-randomly assigned, we again
follow Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020) and perform three tasks: first, check
the correlation between fund shares and bank-level characteristics; second, use alternative
estimators and conduct over-identification tests; and third, test for parallel pre-trends.
       Table 4 displays the regression results of the individual "shares" for the highest Rotem-
berg weight fund complexes and the Bartik instrument on bank-level characteristics. We
see that these fund shares are largely uncorrelated with the overall size of the bank,
the bank's classification as an "IOER-arbitrageur" or "Non-IOER arbitrageur", and its
classification as a U.S. or foreign bank. However, there is some evidence that the fund
complexes with the highest weight lend to more "sound" banks with better credit ratings,
higher Tier-1 common equity ratios, and higher returns on assets.25
       To address the concern that the correlation between the fund complex share and the
soundness of banks may bias our results, we compare the coefficient estimates without any
bank-level controls to the coefficients with controls (the credit rating, the Tier-1 common
equity ratio, and the return on assets). Table 5 shows that the coefficients without
(Column 1) and with (Column 2) controls are largely unchanged. The small difference in
coefficients is not statistically significant for 4 out of 5 estimators (Column 3). In addition
to the OLS and Bartik IV estimators, Table 5 also reports three alternative estimators
applied to the case with many instruments. The two-stage least squares (2SLS) row uses
the shares of each fund complex, j , separately as instruments. The modification of the
bias-corrected two-stage least squares (MB2SLS) estimator follows Anatolyev (2013) and
Kolesár et al. (2015). The heteroskedasticity robust version of the Fuller (1977) estimator
(HFUL) is proposed by Hausman et al. (2012). The coefficient estimates are quite similar
across these five estimators. Column 4 conducts the over-identification test based on the
  25
   We assign numerical values to banks' short-term credit rating: 3­A1 (S&P) or P1 (Moody's), 2­A2
(S&P) or P2(Moody's), and 1­Unrated.


                                                24
J -statistic for the 2SLS and the HFUL estimators, which cannot reject the null that all
instruments are exogenous.
       Our pooled exposure design based on the Bartik instrument resembles a difference-
in-differences design. Banks' shares in MMF complexes measure their exposures to the
negative funding shock from the MMF reform. Therefore, it is natural to also test for the
pre-trends in our outcome variables to ensure that the banks' shares are not correlated
with some unobserved confounders that would lead to similar changes in the outcome
variables independent of the MMF funding supply shock. For our benchmark arbitrage
regression on the IOER arbitrage position, we do not have a pre-period because the
expanded collection of the ED data only began in October 2015. However, we have a long
series of reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve, and therefore perform a pre-trend
analysis for changes in reserves of U.S.-based entities prior to the 2016 MMF reform.
       Figure 7 shows the coefficients from the reduced-form regression of running quar-
terly changes in reserves in 2014, 2015, and 2016 on the previously-constructed Bartik-
instrument and on individual instruments for fund complexes with the largest Rotemberg
weights. The coefficients for 2016 (the right-most observations in each panel) correspond
to the reduced-form regression coefficients on changes in reserves on the bank shares as
instruments during the MMF reform implementation period.26 In contrast to the large
and significant coefficient estimates in 2016, the coefficient estimates from the two pre-
periods 2014 and 2015 (the left two observations) are both indistinguishable from zero
in all panels.27 In other words, changes in reserves before the funding shock in 2016 are
  26
     Similar to our baseline estimation, we use 4 quarterly observations for each year that do not include
quarter-ends: October of last year to January, January to April, and April to October.
  27
     Note that the 2016 coefficient in the "Aggregate" panel has the opposite sign and is significantly
smaller in magnitude than the coefficients in the panels for individual funds in Figure 7. This is because
the aggregate panel reports reduced-form coefficients of quarterly changes in reserves on the standard
Bartik instrument, where bank shares in different fund complexes are weighted by "negative" AUM flows
at the fund complex level (measured in billions of USD) during the reform implementation period. In
the other five panels, the instrument is the bank share in each of the top-five fund complexes with the
highest Rotemberg weights, and no scaling of AUM loss at the fund complex level is applied.




                                                   25
uncorrelated with the instruments, which satisfies the parallel trend assumption for our
identification.


4.5     Composition of Banks' Balance Sheets

In addition to studying the effects of the large funding shock due to the MMF reform on
potential arbitrage capital and arbitrage positions, we examine the effects of the funding
shock on the size and composition of banks' balance sheets. The traditional bank lending
channel suggests that a large reduction in banks' funding supply would result in a reduc-
tion in banks' loan provision. Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein (2015) and Correa, Sapriza,
and Zlate (2016) find supporting evidence for the traditional bank lending channel using
the shock in funding from MMFs during the European debt crisis. Contrary to the tra-
ditional bank lending channel, we find that banks' loan provision and securities holdings
were little changed in response to the MMF reform.
      Using the Bartik instrument as discussed above, Table 6 presents IV estimates of the
effects of the funding shock on key asset and liability items for U.S.-based entities--U.S.
banks and FBOs based in the U.S.--from the FR 2644 data. Note that the FR 2644
data are voluntarily reported, and 50 of our 58 sample banks report these data. In the
regressions, all changes in the balance sheet items are scaled by total assets of the bank
holding company in 2014 from SNL Financial.
      We find that a 1% reduction in unsecured funding from MMFs led to a 0.83% reduction
in total assets (Column 1) and a 0.76% reduction in cash balances (Column 2) of U.S.-
based entities. The reduction in cash balances, which mainly consist of reserve balances,
accounts for the majority of the overall reduction in total assets. Columns 3-6 show that
the funding supply shock had little effect on other asset items. The coefficients on loans,
securities holdings, federal funds and reverse repo lending, and other assets are all close
to zero and statistically insignificant.



                                             26
       On the liability side, we find that total liabilities of U.S.-based entities decline by
0.25% in response to a 1% reduction in unsecured funding from MMFs (Column 7), largely
driven by a 0.32% reduction in deposits (including wholesale certificates of deposits). The
difference between the 0.83% response for total assets and the 0.25% response for total
liabilities is explained by a 0.57% change in the net-due-to position (Column 12).28 The
U.S.-based entities significantly contract their net internal borrowing from their foreign
affiliates in response to the negative funding supply shock, which we explain in greater
detail in the next subsection.
       Taken together, these results do not support the presence of the traditional bank
lending channel during the MMF reform implementation period. The large negative
shock on the liability side of banks' balance sheets had limited spillovers to the asset
side, except for a significant reduction in cash positions due to the reduction in reserve
balances, which is consistent with the previous finding of reduced arbitrage activity.


4.6      Intra-office Positions

Existing literature demonstrates that large global banks manage liquidity on a global scale
(Cetorelli and Goldberg, 2012, 2011; Schnabl, 2012; Bräuning and Ivashina, 2020). When
a subsidiary is hit by a negative funding shock, an active internal capital market within
the bank provides liquidity support and insulates the subsidiary from local liquidity con-
ditions. Therefore, it may at first appear puzzling that U.S.-based bank entities reduced
their net borrowing from their non-U.S. affiliates (known as the net-due-to position of
U.S.-based entities) after being directly hit by the negative funding supply shock due to
the MMF reform. We show that the use of ED to fund the IOER arbitrage is the key to
understanding the intra-office flows during the reform implementation period. The lower
amount of the IOER arbitrage position in response to the MMF reform led to a lower
  28
      A positive net-due-to position occurs when the U.S.-based entity is a net borrower from its foreign
affiliates.



                                                   27
net-due-to position of U.S. entities, as a lower ED position is funded offshore and then
transferred to the U.S.-based entities to be parked at the Fed.
       Table 7 compares the regression results for the net-due-to and ED positions in response
to the funding supply shock. As shown in Column 2, the ED position reacts more strongly
than the net-due-to position and declines by 0.78% in response to a 1% reduction in
unsecured prime funding. Furthermore, the strong responses of the net-due-to and ED
positions are entirely driven by IOER arbitrageurs (Columns 4 and 5). These results
suggest that the ED market is a key source from which global banks fund their IOER
arbitrage position. The MMF reform-induced negative funding supply shock came in part
through the ED market. As this funding was lost, the lower ED positions corresponded
to a reduction in the net-due-to position.
       Once we separate out the ED flows from the net-due-to positions, we find some ev-
idence that U.S.-based entities actually increased their net borrowing from (or reduced
their net lending to) their foreign affiliates in response to the negative funding supply
shock (Columns 3 and 6). Even though we do not have any direct measure of the CIP
arbitrage position, a reduction in net lending from the U.S. entities to their foreign af-
filiates is consistent with a reduction in the CIP arbitrage position since this arbitrage
often entails the U.S. entity borrowing dollars and then transferring them to their foreign
affiliates abroad to lend in the FX swap market.


4.7      Additional Evidence from Syndicated Loans

In addition to the loan positions in the FR 2644 data, we also examine new loan origination
using the Dealscan data. In particular, we examine our sample banks' participation in
dollar-denominated syndicated loans as lead arrangers.29
  29
    Following Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein (2015), we identify the lead banks as those with the "Lead
Arranger Credit" or the "Agent Credit" fields equal to "Yes" in Dealscan.




                                                   28
   In Appendix Figure A1, we plot total new dollar loan origination by U.S. banks and
foreign banks in our sample. We do not find any evidence that foreign banks reduced
their dollar loans relative to U.S. banks during the reform implementation period. Using
a similar Bartik instrument as before, Table 8 presents IV regression results of changes in
dollar-denominated loan origination during the reform implementation period (relative to
total loan origination during the previous 12 months) on changes in unsecured prime fund
funding across banks. Column 1 shows regression results for changes measured in dollar
amounts. Column 2 shows regression results for changes scaled by banks' total assets in
2014 from SNL Financial. The regression coefficient is very close to zero and statistically
insignificant for both Columns 1 and 2, which suggests that there is no evidence that the
negative funding supply shock reduced loan origination.
   For comparison, we perform similar regressions for the European debt crisis period
in Columns 3 and 4. For this period, we find evidence that banks reduced their dollar
loan origination in response to the negative funding shock from the MMFs, consistent
with the evidence shown in Ivashina, Scharfstein, and Stein (2015). More specifically,
we regress the change in total dollar loan origination between June 2011 and May 2012
relative to total loan origination during the previous 12 months on the corresponding
change in banks' unsecured borrowing from prime funds. Again, we instrument for the
funding supply shock during the European debt crisis using a similar Bartik instrument as
in equation (3), where si,j,0 measures the share of bank i in fund complex j 's portfolio in
April 2011. Column 3 shows the result based on the dollar amount change, and Column 4
shows the result scaled by banks' total assets in 2011. The regression coefficient is above
0.2 for both columns and statistically significant for the specification based on the dollar
amount change. The contrast in results for dollar loan origination between the MMF




                                            29
reform sample in 2016 and the European debt crisis sample highlights the changing role
of unsecured funding under the Basel III liquidity regulations.30


4.8      Bank Funding Costs

Beyond balance sheet adjustments, the loss of funding as a result of the MMF reform can
also affect banks' funding costs. To test for differential responses in banks' funding costs
to the MMF reform, we run cross-sectional regressions of changes in banks' funding rates
for benchmark tenors on the change in unsecured prime funding from October 2015 to
October 2016.31 In order to ensure that our pricing data comprise only transactions at
market rates, we discard transactions at rates below 5 basis points.32
       Equilibrium funding costs are affected by both the supply of and demand for funding,
so OLS regression estimates may suffer from simultaneity bias. As in previous analysis, to
mitigate concerns about such bias, we provide IV estimates using the Bartik instrument
specified in equation (3). Table 9 reports these IV regression results. In Column 1, we
perform a pooled regression across all tenors, and find a negative, though statistically
insignificant, coefficient on the change in the funding supply. In Column 2, we add an
interaction between the change in funding supply and a long-dated tenor dummy that is
equal to one if the tenor is at least six months. Here, we find that the coefficient on the
interaction term is significantly negative, which implies a larger price effect on longer-
dated tenors. In terms of economic magnitude, a 1% reduction in unsecured funding over
  30
     The Basel LCR became a minimum requirement for Basel Committee Banking Regulations member
countries on January 1, 2015, with a transition period between 2015 and 2017. The actual implementation
deadline was postponed in some jurisdictions. However, it is reasonable to assume that the large global
banks had not adjusted their business models in full accordance with the LCR requirement before the
European debt crisis, but had already taken the LCR into account by the time of the MMF reform.
  31
     The tenors included are overnight, 1-week, 1-month, 3-month, 6-month, 9-month, and 1-year. In-
cluding additional tenors available in the data produces very similar results.
  32
     There are some very low-rate trades in the data that represent intra-bank trades or other non-market
transactions. The rates on these trades do not respond to market conditions, including rate increases by
the Federal Reserve. The 5-basis point cut-off was chosen because, as of October 2015, it was the offering
rate at the Federal Reserve's overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility and therefore the minimum
rate at which most market participants should be willing to lend funds. Alternative approaches to deal
with outliers in the pricing data, such a winsorizing the data, yield very similar results.


                                                   30
total assets leads to an increase in unsecured term funding rates at 6 months and beyond of
about 3.2 basis points. Columns 3 and 4 repeat the specification in Column 2 separately
for IOER arbitrageurs and non-IOER arbitrageurs, as defined in Section 4.3. We find
that the funding costs of longer tenors increase more among non-IOER arbitrageurs than
among arbitrageurs, for a given funding supply shock. This suggests that non-IOER
arbitrageurs have more inelastic demand for term funding, in part to support their non-
arbitrage business activities, which is likely less scalable. Finally, to address the concern
that the U.S. banks have better access to dollar funding markets in general, Column 5
shows that the negative relationship between funding costs and funding supply for longer
tenors also holds within the sample consisting of only foreign banks.


4.9     Quarter-End Effects

In this section, we show that, during the reform implementation period as well as during
the period after the reform implementation deadline, quarter-end effects associated with
unsecured funding have become much more muted, which supports our main result that
the MMF reform has reduced arbitrage funded by unsecured borrowing.
      We first note that the magnitude of quarter-end effects is very informative about the
amount of arbitrage positions outside of quarter-ends. Both the IOER and CIP arbitrage
strategies contain very little risk, but expand banks' balance sheets, and therefore have
a large effect on the leverage ratio under Basel III, which is defined as equity over total
assets regardless of the risk characteristics of the assets. In many foreign jurisdictions,
the leverage ratio is calculated using a quarter-end snapshot of bank balance sheets. As
a result, banks have strong incentives to shed some arbitrage positions on quarter-end
reporting days to improve their reported leverage ratio. A smaller quarter-end decline
could suggest that banks have a smaller arbitrage position prior to quarter-ends, and
therefore less need to window dress.



                                             31
   We observe MMF holdings at a monthly frequency and measure quarter-end effects by
comparing the holdings on quarter-ends to the average holdings on adjacent non-quarter-
end month-ends. Panel 1a of Figure 8 plots MMFs' total holdings of secured (repo)
and unsecured instruments issued by our sample banks. The vertical yellow dashed lines
indicate quarter-ends. We observe a significant drop in MMFs' secured and unsecured
holdings on quarter-ends relative to the adjacent non-quarter-end month-ends. Panel 1b
of Figure 8 displays the quarter-end effects for each quarter calculated as the difference
between the quarter-end holdings and the average holdings on the two adjacent non-
quarter-end month-ends for secured and unsecured instruments, respectively. In addition,
the solid black line in Panel 1b shows the ratio of the unsecured quarter-end effects (red
bars) to the total quarter-end effects (sum of the red and blue bars) over time. Overall,
the total unsecured quarter-end effect in MMF holdings declined from about $170 billion
in 2015Q4 to only about $30 billion in 2016Q4, and the share of unsecured quarter-end
effects relative to total quarter-end effects declined from about 0.6 in 2015Q4 to about
0.1 in 2016Q4.
   Panels 2a and 2b show the analogous results using banks total unsecured and secured
wholesale funding, rather than just that held by MMFs. Since we are not limited to
month-ends in this case, we calculate the quarter-end effect as the difference between the
outstanding amount on the quarter-end date t, and the average outstanding amount two
weeks before and after the quarter-end (t - 14 and t + 14). As we only have meaningful
coverage for ED starting in October 2015, the quarter-end effects can be calculated only
starting in 2015Q4. Despite the short time series, we still observe that the unsecured
quarter-end effects measured using total debt outstanding also declined significantly, from
$200 billion in 2015Q4 to $100 billion 2016Q4. Also, the share of unsecured quarter-
end effects relative to total quarter-end effects trended down notably over the reform
implementation period.



                                            32
5    Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Profits

Finally, we examine the relationship between aggregate arbitrage capital and arbitrage
profits for the IOER and CIP arbitrages. A negative association between the amount
of potential arbitrage capital and arbitrage profits provides support for the notion that
supply shocks to arbitrage capital matter for variation in equilibrium arbitrage profits.
In addition to examining the relationship between prices and quantities over the reform
implementation period, we also examine whether the relationship has changed in the
post-MMF reform period, that is, after October 2016.
    One important caveat to note is that the aggregate amount of arbitrage capital we
capture in our data is only part of the total capital that is available globally for IOER and
CIP arbitrages because we do not observe ED positions of non-U.S. affiliated branches
and subsidiaries of foreign banks. In the case of CIP arbitrage, we also lack data on the
amount of arbitrage capital from non-banks, such as real-money investors. Nevertheless,
since global banks lie at the center of global capital markets and the U.S. market is the
most important wholesale funding market for dollar funding, we capture a significant
portion of global IOER and CIP arbitrage activities.
    We calculate the volume-weighted IOER arbitrage profit as:


                      IOER                         IOER    IOER
                      t    =            (yi,n,k /Yi,t   )(rt -n - ri,n,k,t-n ).
                                i,n,k


Panel A of Figure 9 plots the IOER profit along with the potential IOER arbitrage capital.
We can see notable increases in the IOER arbitrage profits on all month-ends and notable
declines in the potential arbitrage capital on quarter-ends.
    To formally test the relationship between IOER arbitrage profits and arbitrage capital,
we run regressions of daily changes in average arbitrage profits (in basis points) on daily




                                                  33
changes in potential IOER arbitrage capital (in billions of dollars):


              IOER
              t    =  +  YtIOER + P ostt + P ostt × YtIOER + t .                         (4)


We include a time dummy, P ostt , which equals one for observations after October 14,
2016 and zero otherwise, to denote the period after the MMF reform and an interaction
between P ostt and the potential arbitrage capital. We estimate the regression using
data between October 2015 and June 2017. Therefore, the coefficient  measures the
relationship between the price and quantity during the MMF implementation period and
the coefficient  indicates whether the relationship has changed in the post-MMF reform
period. We estimate the regression separately for non-period-end dates and period-end-
dates. In addition to quarter-ends, we also examine month-ends as the Basel III leverage
ratio in some foreign jurisdictions is calculated as the average of the past three month-
ends.
   Panel A of Table 10 shows the regression results for the IOER arbitrage. Column 1
reports the results using daily changes that do not include a month-end. While we do not
find a significant relationship between the IOER arbitrage profit and potential arbitrage
capital over the reform implementation period, the coefficient on the interaction term
between the potential arbitrage capital and the P ostt dummy is negative and statistically
significant, which suggests the negative relationship between arbitrage profits and poten-
tial arbitrage capital became more pronounced after the reform. As shown in Column 2,
if the daily changes include a month-end, then a $10 billion reduction in arbitrage capital
translates into an increase in arbitrage profits of roughly 0.9 basis points. This elasticity
is significantly more negative after the reform, with a $10 billion reduction in arbitrage
capital translating to an increase in arbitrage profits on month-ends of 2 basis points.
As is evident in Columns 3 and 4, the price elasticity is particularly large in magnitude
for non-quarter-end month-ends relative to quarter-ends. Specifically, over the reform


                                             34
implementation period, a $10 billion reduction in arbitrage capital is associated with an
increase in arbitrage profits of 0.8 basis points on quarter-ends and 3 basis points on
non-quarter-end month-ends. The estimates on both quarter-ends and non-quarter-end
month-ends are also more negative after the reform implementation.
   Similarly, we calculate the volume-weighted CIP arbitrage profit as:


                        CIP                     CIP      $
                        n,t =          (yi,k /Yi,t  )(rt- n - ri,n,k,t-n ).
                                 i,k


Due to the term-nature of the CIP arbitrage, we calculate the profit for different bench-
mark maturities: one-week, one-month, and three-month. After constructing these profit
and quantity measures, we perform a regression similar to that specified in equation (4):


                CIP
                n,t =  +  YtCIP + P ostt + P ostt × YtCIP + t .                         (5)


   Panel B of Table 10 presents the regression results. Columns 1 and 2 show the re-
gression results for daily changes in the one-week CIP arbitrage profits that do not cross
quarter-ends and that cross quarter-ends, respectively. A one-week contract starts cross-
ing a quarter-end one week before the end of that quarter. Estimates for coefficients  and
 are both negative, but not statistically significant. Columns 3 and 4 show the regression
results for daily changes in the one-month CIP arbitrage profits that do not cross quarter-
ends and that do cross quarter-ends, respectively. Over the reform implementation period,
the negative relationship between the arbitrage profit and potential arbitrage capital is
present both outside quarter-ends and on quarter-ends, with a stronger relationship on
quarter-ends. Finally, for three-month CIP arbitrage profits (Columns 5 and 6), a $10
billion reduction in arbitrage capital is associated with a 0.4 basis point increase in the
arbitrage profit for contracts that do not cross the year-end and a 1.2 basis point increase




                                                35
in the arbitrage profit for contracts that do cross the year-end. Again, the coefficient on
the interaction is not statistically significant.
    In summary, we find a negative relationship between arbitrage profits and arbitrage
capital over the reform implementation period. The relationship is stronger for contracts
that cross regulatory reporting dates. For the IOER arbitrage, we also find that the
negative relationship is strengthened in the post-reform period.


6    Conclusion

We document a significant transformation of the role of wholesale funding in global banks'
business operations in the post-GFC regulatory environment. Consistent with the vision
of the Basel III liquidity regulations, a significant portion of short-term wholesale funding
is now used to finance liquid asset positions, which makes global banks more resilient
to wholesale funding dry-ups. In this environment, in response to the large negative
wholesale funding shock induced by the 2016 MMF reform, we find that global banks
primarily scale down their arbitrage activities, without reducing their loan provision.
While this new business model significantly reduces banks' liquidity risk, it also implies
that the role of short-term wholesale funding in supporting banks' liquidity and maturity
transformation and therefore their credit provision has become more limited.
    More recently, the resilience of large global banks to the COVID-19-induced wholesale
funding shock in March 2020 is again consistent with the changing nature of unsecured
wholesale funding. Our findings have important implications for the implementation and
transmission of U.S. monetary policy, and help inform the recent debates regarding further
reforms to the MMF industry as well as banking regulations in general.




                                               36
References
Adao, Rodrigo, Michal Kolesár, and Eduardo Morales, 2019, Shift-share designs: Theory
  and inference, Quarterly Journal of Economics 134, 1949­2010.
Afonso, Gara, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar, 2011, Stressed, not frozen: The
  federal funds market in the financial crisis, Journal of Finance 66, 1109­1139.
Aldasoro, Iñaki, Torsten Ehlers, and Egemen Eren, 2019, Global banks, dollar funding,
  and regulation, BIS Working Paper No. 708.
Anatolyev, Stanislav, 2013, Instrumental variables estimation and inference in the pres-
 ence of many exogenous regressors, The Econometrics Journal 16, 27­72.
Anbil, Sriya, and Zeynep Senyuz, 2018, The regulatory and monetary policy nexus in the
 repo market, Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-027.

Anderson, Alyssa G., and John Kandrac, 2017, Monetary policy implementation and
 financial vulnerability: Evidence from the overnight reverse repurchase facility, Review
 of Financial Studies 31, 3643­3686.

Avdjiev, Stefan, Wenxin Du, Catherine Koch, and Hyun Song Shin, 2019, The dollar,
  bank leverage, and deviations from covered interest parity, American Economic Review:
  Insights 1, 193­208.

Banegas, Ayelen, and Manjola Tase, 2020, Reserve balances, the federal funds market and
  arbitrage in the new regulatory framework, Journal of Banking & Finance 118, 105893.

Bartik, Timothy J., 1991, Who benefits from state and local economic development poli-
  cies?, WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Working Paper .

Bech, Morten L., and Elizabeth Klee, 2011, The mechanics of a graceful exit: Interest on
  reserves and segmentation in the federal funds market, Journal of Monetary Economics
  58, 415­431.
Borio, Claudio, Robert N. McCauley, Patrick McGuire, and Vladyslav Sushko, 2016,
  Covered interest parity lost: understanding the cross-currency basis, BIS Quarterly
  Review September.

Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel, forthcoming, Quasi-experimental shift-
  share research designs, Review of Economist Studies .

Bräuning, Falk, and Victoria Ivashina, 2020, Monetary policy and global banking, Journal
  of Finance 75, 3055­3095.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Charles M. Kahn, 1991, The role of demandable debt in
  structuring optimal banking arrangements, American Economic Review 497­513.

Card, David, 2009, Immigration and inequality, American Economic Review 99, 1­21.

                                           37
Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg, 2011, Global banks and international shock
  transmission: Evidence from the crisis, IMF Economic review 59, 41­76.

Cetorelli, Nicola, and Linda S. Goldberg, 2012, Banking globalization and monetary trans-
  mission, Journal of Finance 67, 1811­1843.

Chernenko, Sergey, and Adi Sunderam, 2014, Frictions in shadow banking: Evidence from
  the lending behavior of money market mutual funds, Review of Financial Studies 27,
  1717­1750.

Chernozhukov, Victor, and Christian Hansen, 2008, Instrumental variable quantile regres-
  sion: A robust inference approach, Journal of Econometrics 142, 379­398.

Cipriani, Marco, and Gabriele La Spada, 2021, Investors' appetite for money-like assets:
  The MMF industry after the 2014 regulatory reform, Journal of Financial Economics
  140, 250­269.

Copeland, Adam, Antoine Martin, and Michael Walker, 2014, Repo runs: Evidence from
  the tri-party repo market, Journal of Finance 69, 2343­2380.

Correa, Ricardo, Wenxin Du, and Gordon Y. Liao, 2020, US banks and global liquidity,
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 27491 .

Correa, Ricardo, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate, 2016, Liquidity shocks, dollar fund-
  ing costs, and the bank lending channel during the European sovereign crisis, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Boston Risk and Policy Analysis Unit Paper No. RPA 16-4.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2009, The credit crisis: Conjectures
  about causes and remedies, American Economic Review 99, 606­10.

Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2011, Fear of fire sales, illiquidity seek-
  ing, and credit freezes, Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 557­591.

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2018, Deviations from covered
 interest rate parity, Journal of Finance 73, 915­957.

Duffie, Darrell, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2016, Passthrough efficiency in the Fed's new
 monetary policy setting, in Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the
 Future. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole Symposium , 1815­1847.

Duygan-Bump, Burcu, Patrick M. Parkinson, Eric S. Rosengren, Gustavo A. Suarez,
 and Paul S. Willen, 2013, How effective were the Federal Reserve emergency liquidity
 facilities? evidence from the asset-backed commercial paper money market mutual fund
 liquidity facility, Journal of Finance 68, 715­737.

Fuller, Wayne A, 1977, Some properties of a modification of the limited information
  estimator, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society 939­953.


                                           38
Gissler, Stefan, and Borghan N. Narajabad, 2017a, The increased role of the federal home
  loan bank system in funding markets, part 1: Background, Federal Reserve Board
  Finance and Economics Discussion Notes.

Gissler, Stefan, and Borghan N. Narajabad, 2017b, The increased role of the federal home
  loan bank system in funding markets, part 2: Recent trends and potential drivers,
  Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Notes.

Gissler, Stefan, and Borghan N. Narajabad, 2017c, The increased role of the federal home
  loan bank system in funding markets, part 3: Implications for financial stability, Federal
  Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Notes.

Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift, 2020, Bartik instruments:
 What, when, why, and how, American Economic Review 110, 2586­2624.

Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick, 2012, Securitized banking and the run on repo,
 Journal of Financial Economics 104, 425­451.

Greenstone, Michael, Alexandre Mas, and Hoai-Luu Nguyen, 2020, Do credit market
  shocks affect the real economy? quasi-experimental evidence from the great recession
  and "normal" economic times, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12, 200­
  225.

Hausman, Jerry A., Whitney K. Newey, Tiemen Woutersen, John C. Chao, and Nor-
  man R. Swanson, 2012, Instrumental variable estimation with heteroskedasticity and
  many instruments, Quantitative Economics 3, 211­255.

Ihrig, Jane E., Ellen E. Meade, and Gretchen C. Weinbach, 2015, Rewriting monetary
  policy 101: What's the fed's preferred post-crisis approach to raising interest rates?,
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, 177­98.

Ivashina, Victoria, David S. Scharfstein, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2015, Dollar funding and
  the lending behavior of global banks, Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1241­1281.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Philipp Schnabl, 2010, When safe proved risky: Commercial
 paper during the financial crisis of 2007­2009, Journal of Economic Perspectives 24,
 29­50.

Kacperczyk, Marcin, and Philipp Schnabl, 2013, How safe are money market funds?,
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 128, 1073­1122.

Kandrac, John, and Bernd Schlusche, forthcoming, Quantitative easing and bank risk
 taking: Evidence from lending, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking .

Keating, Thomas, and Marco Macchiavelli, 2017, Interest on reserves and arbitrage in
  post-crisis money markets, Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion
  Series 2017-124.


                                            39
Kolesár, Michal, Raj Chetty, John Friedman, Edward Glaeser, and Guido W. Imbens,
  2015, Identification and inference with many invalid instruments, Journal of Business
  & Economic Statistics 33, 474­484.

Kreicher, L, Robert N McCauley, and Patrick McGuire, 2014, Taxation of the financial
  sector , chapter The 2011 FDIC assessment on banks managed liabilities: interest rate
  and balance-sheet responses (MIT Press).

Munyan, Benjamin, 2017, Regulatory arbitrage in repo markets, Vanderbilt University
 Working Paper.

Pérignon, Christophe, David Thesmar, and Guillaume Vuillemey, 2018, Wholesale funding
  dry-ups, Journal of Finance 73, 575­617.

Rime, Dagfinn, Andreas Schrimpf, and Olav Syrstad, 2017, Segmented money markets
  and covered interest parity arbitrage, BIS Working Papers No. 651.

Schnabl, Philipp, 2012, The international transmission of bank liquidity shocks: Evidence
  from an emerging market, The Journal of Finance 67, 897­932.

Shin, Hyun Song, 2009, Reflections on Northern Rock: The bank run that heralded the
  global financial crisis, Journal of Economic Perspectives 23, 101­19.

Sundaresan, Suresh M., and Kairong Xiao, 2018, Unintended consequences of post-crisis
  liquidity regulation, working paper.

Whalen, Richard Christopher, 2011, What is a core deposit and why does it matter?
 legislative and regulatory actions regarding fdic-insured bank deposits pursuant to the
 dodd-frank act, Networks Financial Institute Working Paper 14.

Xu, Chenzi, 2020, Reshaping global trade: the immediate and long-run effects of bank
 failures, Stanford University Working Paper .




                                           40
                                     Figure 1: MMF Assets Under Management

                                                  (A) AUM by MMF Type




                           2.5
                                                                            Announcement           Deadline



                           2
                   Trillions USD
                          1.5
                           1
                           .5




                             12/31/10      12/31/11   12/31/12   12/31/13   12/31/14   12/31/15   12/30/16

                                                             Prime             Government


                                      (B) Prime MMF Holdings of Bank Securities
                           1200
                           1000
                   Billions of USD




                                                                            Announcement            Deadline
                           800
                           600
                           400




                                12/31/10   12/31/11   12/31/12   12/31/13   12/31/14   12/31/15   12/30/16


Notes: Panel (A) plots total assets under management (AUM) of prime (red) and government (blue)
MMFs in the United States in trillions of dollars. Panel (B) plots prime funds' holdings of bank securities
for our sample banks. The two vertical black lines denote the MMF reform announcement date on July
23, 2014 and the implementation deadline on October 14, 2016, respectively.
Source: N-MFP




                                                                     41
  Figure 2: Unsecured Wholesale Funding Outstanding and MMF Holdings

                                             (A) Unsecured borrowing by rate



                            2000 1500
                 Billions of USD
                       1000 500
                            0




                                        12/31/15    3/31/16     6/30/16   9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17     6/30/17

                                                   above swapped JPY                [IOER, swapped JPY)
                                                   below IOER


                                        (B) Arbitrage capital and MMF holdings
                           2000  1500
                 Billions of USD
                       1000500
                           0




                                        12/31/15    3/31/16     6/30/16   9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17     6/30/17

                                            Arbitrage capital             Prime fund arbitrage capital holding


Notes: Panel (A) plots unsecured wholesale funding outstanding broken down by rate. The red area
denotes outstanding amounts with an issuance rate below the IOER rate. The yellow area denotes
outstanding amounts with an issuance rate at or above the IOER rate and below the swapped yen rate
in dollars. The blue area denotes outstanding amounts with an issuance rate at or above the swapped
yen rate. Panel (B) plots total arbitrage capital (yellow) and the amount of arbitrage capital held by
prime MMFs (orange) in billions of dollars. The vertical line indicates the MMF reform implementation
deadline on October 14, 2016.
Sources: N-MFP; FR 2420; DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing
Corporation.


                                                                     42
      Figure 3: IOER Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Position by Region




                        600
                        500  400
               Billions of USD
              200     300
                        100
                        0




                                   12/31/15   3/31/16     6/30/16     9/30/16   12/30/16     3/31/17      6/30/17

                                        Arb. capital: US Banks                  Arb. position: US Banks
                                        Arb. capital: Foreign Banks             Arb. position: Foreign Banks


Notes: This figure plots potential IOER arbitrage capital--unsecured wholesale funding outstanding
borrowed below the IOER rate--indicated by the dotted lines, and our proxy for the IOER arbitrage
position--the minimum of excess reserves and potential IOER arbitrage capital--indicated by the solid
lines. The arbitrage capital and arbitrage position are broken down by foreign (red) and U.S. (blue)
banks. The vertical line indicates the MMF reform implementation deadline on October 14, 2016.
Sources: FR 2420; DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation




                                                                 43
   Figure 4: Wholesale Funding Outstanding and MMF Holdings by Region

                                                                             (A) Unsecured funding
                                         Unsecured: Foreign Banks                                                                              Unsecured: US Banks
             1500




                                                                                                                1500
                  1000




                                                                                                                     1000
      Billions of USD




                                                                                                         Billions of USD
    500




                                                                                                       500
             0




                                                                                                                0
                         12/31/15     3/31/16    6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17    6/30/17                         12/31/15     3/31/16    6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17    6/30/17

                             Unsecured outstanding                Prime fund unsecured holding                                  Unsecured outstanding                Prime fund unsecured holding




                                                                        (B) Secured funding (repo)
                                         TRP Repo: Foreign Banks                                                                               TRP Repo: US Banks
              900




                                                                                                                 900
                   600




                                                                                                                      600
     Billions of USD




                                                                                                        Billions of USD
    300




                                                                                                       300
              0




                                                                                                                 0




                         12/31/15     3/31/16    6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17    6/30/17                         12/31/15     3/31/16    6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17    6/30/17

                                    Triparty repo outstanding            MMF repo holding                                              Triparty repo outstanding            MMF repo holding




Notes: This exhibit plots total wholesale funding outstanding, along with MMF holdings, broken down
by foreign (left column) and U.S. (right column) banks. Panel (A) plots total unsecured wholesale
funding outstanding (blue) and prime MMFs' unsecured holdings (red). Panel (B) plots secured funding
outstanding (green), specifically total tri-party repo, and repo holdings by prime and government MMFs
(red). The vertical line indicates the MMF reform implementation deadline on October 14, 2016.
Sources: N-MFP; DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation;
FR 2420; FRBNY tri-party repo




                                                                                                  44
                                                Figure 5: Assets and MMF holdings by region

                                                                                          (A) Loans
                                                 Foreign Banks                                                                                      US Banks
              4000




                                                                                                               4000
                    3000




                                                                                                                     3000
    Billions of USD




                                                                                                     Billions of USD
          2000




                                                                                                           2000
              1000




                                                                                                               1000
              0




                                                                                                               0
                           12/31/15   3/31/16   6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17   6/30/17                           12/31/15   3/31/16   6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17   6/30/17

                                       Loans              Prime fund unsecured holding                                                  Loans              Prime fund unsecured holding




                                                                                (B) Reserve balances
                                                 Foreign Banks                                                                                      US Banks
              1200




                                                                                                               1200
      Billions of USD




                                                                                                       Billions of USD
                  800




                                                                                                                   800
    400




                                                                                                     400
              0




                                                                                                               0




                           12/31/15   3/31/16   6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17   6/30/17                           12/31/15   3/31/16   6/30/16    9/30/16   12/30/16   3/31/17   6/30/17

                                 Excess reserves               Prime fund unsecured holding                                       Excess reserves               Prime fund unsecured holding



Notes: This exhibit plots bank assets, specifically total loans and reserve balances, along with MMF
holdings, broken down by foreign (left column) and U.S. (right column) banks. Panel (A) plots total
loans outstanding (purple) and prime MMFs' holdings of banks' unsecured funding (red). Panel (B)
plots total excess reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve (yellow) and prime MMFs' unsecured
holdings (red). The vertical line indicates the MMF reform implementation deadline on October 14,
2016.
Sources: N-MFP; FR 2644; Federal Reserve Board reserves




                                                                                                45
                           Figure 6: Rotemberg Weights, F -statistic and k


                                                    (A) F-statistic vs. Rotemberg weights
                                                                                                    Fund A



                              60
                                                                   Fund E
                   First stage F-statistic




                                                                                      Fund B
                                   40




                                                                            Fund C
                   20




                                                                     Fund D
                              0




                                             -.05      0     .05      .1      .15              .2            .25   .3
                                                                   Rotemberg Weight


                                                       (B) k Estimates vs. F-statistic
                              1.5
                              1
                   k estimate
                       .5     0
                              -.5




                                             0               20                    40                         60
                                                                   First stage F-statistic

                                                           Positive Weights          Negative Weights




Notes: This figure visualizes the relationship between Rotemberg weights, first-stage F -statistics, and in-
dividual k estimates by treating each individual fund complex share as an instrument for the benchmark
regression in the Column 3 of Panel B in Table 2. Panel (A) plots the first-stage F -statistic for using each
fund complex share as an instrument on the y-axis, against the Rotemberg weight of the instrument on
the x-axis. The horizontal dashed line indicates a value of 10. Panel (B) plots the individual k estimate
for each instrument on the y-axis against the F -statistic on the x-axis. The size of the bubbles represents
the magnitude of the Rotemberg weights. The horizontal dashed line indicates the value for the overall
^ reported in Column 3 of Panel B in Table 2.

Source: N-MFP

                                                                         46
                  Figure 7: Pre-trends for Reserves held by U.S. Entities


                         Aggregate                                           Fund A




                                                         200
    1.5
    1




                                                         0
    .5
    0




                                                         -200
    -.5
    -1




                                                         -400
           2014             2015             2016               2014           2015             2016


                          Fund B                                             Fund C
    200




                                                         200
                                                         0
    0




                                                         -200
    -200




                                                         -400
    -400




           2014             2015             2016               2014           2015             2016


                          Fund D                                             Fund E
    100




                                                         100
    0




                                                         0
    -100




                                                         -100
    -200




                                                         -200
    -300




                                                         -300




           2014             2015             2016               2014           2015             2016




Notes: This figure shows the pre-trend for reserves in U.S. entities (Column 1 of Table 6). The coefficients
are reduced-form estimates of quarterly changes in reserves on the Bartik instrument or individual in-
struments based on fund shares for the top Rotemberg weight fund complexes. The two pre-periods used
for estimation are October 2013 to October 2014 ("2014") and October 2014 to October 2015 ("2015").
The actual period for the MMF reform is October 2015 to October 2016 ("2016").
Source: N-MFP; Federal Reserve Board reserves




                                                    47
                                Figure 8: Quarter-End Effects in Secured and Unsecured Funding

                                                   (1a) MMF holdings                                                                                  (1b) Quarter-end effects in MMF holdings




                                                                                                                                                                                       300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ratio of unsecured to total q-end declines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .8
             1000




                                                                                                                                                      Q-end declines (Billions of USD)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .6
                 800




                                                                                                                                                                           200
   Billions of USD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .4
        600




                                                                                                                                                            100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
             400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                       0
             200




                                                                                                                                                                                             q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                   q2

                                                                                                                                                                                                            q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q2
                                                                                                                                                                                        14

                                                                                                                                                                                                  14

                                                                                                                                                                                                        14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17
                                4

                                         4

                                                  4

                                                        14

                                                                  5

                                                                           5

                                                                                    5

                                                                                          15

                                                                                                    6

                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                       6

                                                                                                                             16

                                                                                                                                       7

                                                                                                                                                7
                               /1

                                     /1

                                              /1



                                                                 /1

                                                                       /1

                                                                                /1



                                                                                                   /1

                                                                                                          /1

                                                                                                                   /1



                                                                                                                                      /1

                                                                                                                                             /1




                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                       1/




                                                                                         0/




                                                                                                                            1/
                          31

                                    30

                                             30



                                                             31

                                                                      30

                                                                               30



                                                                                               31

                                                                                                         30

                                                                                                                  30



                                                                                                                                  31

                                                                                                                                           30
                                                   /3




                                                                                     /3




                                                                                                                        /3
                          3/

                                6/

                                         9/



                                                            3/

                                                                  6/

                                                                           9/



                                                                                              3/

                                                                                                    6/

                                                                                                              9/



                                                                                                                                 3/

                                                                                                                                       6/
                                                  12




                                                                                    12




                                                                                                                       12
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Repo (LHS)                                                       Unsecured (LHS)
                                                                       Repo                         Unsecured                                                                                               Ratio of unsecured to total (RHS)



                                              (2a) Total outstanding                                                                                 (2b) Quarter-end effects in total outstanding
             1800




                                                                                                                                                            100 150 200 250 300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ratio of unsecured to total q-end declines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                                                                                      Q-end declines (Billions of USD)
                   1600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
   Billions of USD




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
         1400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3
                                                                                                                                                       50
             1200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                                                                                                              q4



                                                                                                                                                                                                             q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q2
                                                                                                                                                                                             15



                                                                                                                                                                                                            16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17
             1000




                                                                                                                                                                                       20



                                                                                                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                    12/31/15          3/31/16         6/30/16           9/30/16         12/30/16        3/31/17            6/30/17
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Repo (LHS)                                                       Unsecured (LHS)
                                                                       Repo                         Unsecured                                                                                               Ratio of unsecured to total (RHS)



Notes: This figure illustrates the quarter-end effects in MMF holdings and total debt outstanding for
both secured (repo) and unsecured wholesale funding instruments. Panel (1a) plots total MMF holdings
of repo securities (blue) and unsecured securities (red) issued by our sample banks. Panel (1b) plots the
quarter-end effects for MMFs' holdings of secured (blue) and unsecured (red) securities for each quarter,
and the ratio of the unsecured quarter-end effect to the total (unsecured plus secured) quarter-end effect
(black line). Panel (2a) plots total tri-party repo outstanding (blue) and total unsecured wholesale
funding outstanding (red) for our sample banks. Panel (2b) plots the quarter-end effects for total secured
(blue) and unsecured (red) funding outstanding, as well as the ratio of the unsecured quarter-end effect
to the total quarter-end effect (black line). See Section 4.9 for details on how the quarter-end effects are
constructed.
Sources: N-MFP; FR 2420; DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing
Corporation; FRBNY tri-party repo




                                                                                                                                                48
                 Figure 9: Volume-Weighed Average Arbitrage Profits

                                                           (A) IOER arbitrage profit




                                                                                                                                   700
                                 50




                                                                                                                                   100 200 300 400 500 600
                                                                                                                                     Unsecured below IOER (Billions)
                                             40
                       IOER arb profit (bps)
                      20        30
                                 10




                                                                                                                                   0
                                         9/30/15 12/30/15 3/31/16      6/30/16    9/30/16 12/31/16 3/31/17    6/30/17

                                                    IOER arb profit (bps)           Unsecured below IOER (Billions)


                                                            (B) CIP arbitrage profit




                                                                                                                                                       1600
                            500




                                                                                                                   Unsecured below swapped JPY (billions)
                                     400




                                                                                                                                           1400
                 CIP arb profit (bps)
                           300




                                                                                                                                  1200
                  200




                                                                                                                        1000
                            100




                                                                                                                   800
                            0




                                     9/30/15 12/30/15 3/31/16       6/30/16      9/30/16 12/31/16 3/31/17    6/30/17

                                                   1W CIP arb profit               1M CIP arb profit
                                                   3M CIP arb profit               Unsecured below swapped JPY


Notes: This figure shows the profit of different arbitrage strategies. Panel (A) plots the volume-weighted
average IOER arbitrage profit (blue) and total potential arbitrage capital for the IOER arbitrage (red).
Only unsecured securities with one-week maturity or less are used in calculating the profits. Panel (B)
plots the volume-weighted average CIP arbitrage profit for the CIP arbitrage at one-week (blue), one-
month (green), and three-month (orange) maturities, as well as the potential arbitrage capital for the
CIP arbitrage (red).
Sources: FR 2420; DTCC Solutions LLC, an affiliate of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation;
Bloomberg



                                                                              49
 Table 1: Amount of Potential Arbitrage Capital by U.S. and Foreign Banks

                                              (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)
                                           Potential       Assets in        Total          Estimated
                                           Arbitrage         U.S.           Global        Global USD
                                            Capital        Entities         Assets          Assets
             Foreign Banks
           Amounts in $Tril.                   1.2            2.6            47.7              7.2
    (Share of potential arb. capital)                       (45.8%)         (2.5%)           (16.7%)

              U.S. Banks
           Amounts in $Tril.                   0.2            6.9            11.4              9.1
    (Share of potential arb. capital)                       (3.0%)          (1.8%)           (2.1%)

Notes: This table reports daily averages related to potential arbitrage capital for foreign and U.S. banks
in our sample between October 2015 and June 2017. In Column 1, we report the time-series average of
total potential arbitrage capital for the IOER and CIP arbitrage. In Column 2, we report the time-series
average of total assets in U.S-based entities from the FR 2644 report, and the share of potential arbitrage
capital compared to the total assets in U.S.-based entities in parentheses. In Column 3, we report the
time-series average of total global assets from SNL Financial, and the share of potential arbitrage capital
compared to their total global assets in parentheses. In Column 4, we estimate total USD-denominated
assets for foreign and U.S. banks. The share of USD-denominated assets in total assets is estimated based
on the BIS Locational Banking Statistics for foreign banks and based on FR 2052a for U.S. banks. We
also report the share of unsecured wholesale funding in total USD-denominated assets in parentheses.




                                                     50
Table 2: Benchmark Regressions for Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Positions


                                     (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
                                      IOER         CIP
                                    Yi,t         Yi,t      QIOER
                                                             i,t       QIOER
                                                                         i,t        QIOER
                                                                                      i,t


                                        Panel (A) OLS Estimates

                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.88***     0.97***    0.80***      0.16**     0.76***
                                      (0.18)      (0.20)     (0.18)      (0.07)      (0.21)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                            0.98***
                                                                         (0.10)
                     Arbi                                                 0.00
                                                                         (0.00)

                    Sample             All        All         All         All        FBOs
                      N                232        232         232         232         192
                      R2               0.52       0.58        0.54        0.76        0.50

                                         Panel (B) IV Estimates

                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.90***     0.91***    0.84***      0.25*      0.85***
                                      (0.28)      (0.28)     (0.25)      (0.14)      (0.25)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                            0.85***
                                                                         (0.17)
                     Arbi                                                 0.00
                                                                         (0.00)

                    Sample             All        All         All         All        FBOs
                      N                232        232         232         232         192
                      R2               0.52       0.58        0.54        0.76        0.49

Notes: This table shows regression results of changes in potential arbitrage capital and the IOER arbitrage
position on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank securities. Panel (A) shows the OLS estimates
and Panel B shows the IV estimates using the Bartik instrument defined by equation (3). The dependent
                                      IOER                                                              CIP
variables are defined as follows: Yi,t       is the change in the potential IOER arbitrage capital, Yi,t
                                                                  IOER
is the change in the potential CIP arbitrage capital, and Qi,t           is the change in the proxy for the
IOER arbitrage position. holdU      nsec
                                  i,t    is the change  in MMF   holdings  of unsecured debt issued by bank
i. All changes above are quarterly, calculated from October 2015 to October 2016, and scaled by 2014
total assets from SNL Financial. Arbi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a bank's correlation between
daily changes in unsecured funding and daily changes in reserve balances is in the top third of all banks.
All specifications include time fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the bank level. Statistical
significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.




                                                    51
               Table 3: Summary Statistics of the Rotemberg Weights



                                  Panel (A): Negative and positive weights
                                    Sum      Mean     Share
                      Negative     -0.029   -0.001     0.027
                      Positive      1.029    0.018     0.973

                      Panel (B): Correlations of fund complex-level characteristics
                                  j         gj        j          Fj       Var(zj )

                         j            1
                         gj        -0.828      1
                         j         0.004     0.051       1
                         Fj        0.724    -0.507    -0.052        1
                       Var(zj )     0.263   -0.246     0.041      0.207         1

                         Panel (C): Top-five Rotemberg weight fund complexes
                                   ^j        gj     ^j
                                                            95 % CI
                       Fund A       0.208   -57.381    0.852   (0.40,1.30)
                       Fund B       0.148   -63.101    1.108   (0.90,1.30)
                       Fund C       0.106   -60.033    1.069   (0.70,1.40)
                       Fund D       0.083   -54.209    0.939   (-0.30,2.10)
                       Fund E       0.073   -34.376    0.587   (-0.20,1.20)

Notes: This table exactly follows Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020) and reports summary
statistics for the Rotemberg weights. Panel (A) reports the sum, the mean, and the share of positive
and negative weights. Panel (B) reports correlations between the Rotemberg weights (j ), the AUM
growth of the MMF complex (gj ), the just-identified coefficient estimates (j ), the first-stage F-statistic
(Fj ), and the variation of fund shares across banks (Var(zj )). Panel (C) reports the top-five MMF fund
complexes according to the Rotemberg weights. The 95% confidence interval is the weak instrument
robust confidence interval using the method from Chernozhukov and Hansen (2008).
Source: N-MFP




                                                      52
     Table 4: Relationship between Fund Shares and Bank Characteristics


                            (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                          Fund A     Fund B      Fund C     Fund D      Fund E      Bartik
          log(Asseti )     -0.042      -0.009     0.008     -0.096**     0.000      28.040
                          (0.033)     (0.031)    (0.028)     (0.045)    (0.037)    (22.168)
          Ratingi          0.046      0.115*      0.060       0.144     0.158*      -78.002
                          (0.072)     (0.067)    (0.061)     (0.098)    (0.081)    (48.581)
          CET 1i         0.069***    0.036***   0.033***    0.052***   0.053***   -31.577***
                          (0.014)     (0.013)    (0.012)     (0.019)    (0.016)     (9.521)
          ROAi           0.201**      0.136*      0.070      0.266**      0.048   -115.543**
                          (0.077)     (0.072)    (0.065)     (0.104)    (0.087)    (51.720)
          Arbi             0.068     0.168***     0.069       0.149      -0.003     -62.461
                          (0.065)     (0.061)    (0.055)     (0.089)    (0.074)    (44.123)
          US               -0.074      -0.047     0.022       0.125      -0.003     12.608
                          (0.090)     (0.084)    (0.076)     (0.123)    (0.102)    (60.722)
          Weighted by
          R2                0.46       0.39       0.20        0.36       0.28         0.37
          N                  58         58         58          58         58           58

Notes: Each column reports regression results of the pre-reform fund share on bank characteristics for
the top-five MMF complexes according to the Rotemberg weights. Ratingi is a categorical variable for
the short-term credit rating of bank i in 2014. ROAi is the average return on assets in 2014. CET 1i is
the Tier-1 common equity ratio in 2014. Arbi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the bank's correlation
between daily changes in unsecured funding and daily changes in reserve balances is in the top third of
all banks. U S is a dummy variable denoting U.S. banks. All independent variables are scaled by 10,000.
Robust standard errors are reported in the parentheses. Statistical significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05,
* p  .10.
Source: N-MFP




                                                  53
           Table 5: Alternative Estimators and Over-Identification Tests


                                       (1)          (2)         (3)             (4)
                                   No Controls    Controls   Coeff. equl    Over ID test
                      OLS              0.80         0.77        [0.28]
                                      (0.18)       (0.17)
                 2SLS (Bartik)         0.84         0.79        [0.33]
                                      (0.26)       (0.27)
                      2SLS             0.80         0.77        [0.04]         204.77
                                      (0.20)       (0.20)                      [0.73]
                    MB2SLS             0.80         0.74        [0.33]
                                      (0.20)       (0.20)
                     HFUL              0.52         0.52        [1.00]         250.41
                                      (8.61)       (7.57)                      [0.07]

Notes: We follow the tests proposed in Goldsmith-Pinkham, Sorkin, and Swift (2020) and report a variety
of estimates for the impact of MMF unsecured funding supply on the IOER arbitrage position (Column
3 of Table 2). Column 1 reports regression results without controls. Column 2 reports regression results
controlling for banks' credit rating, return on assets, and the Tier 1 common equity ratio (as in Appendix
Table A4. Column 3 reports the p-value for the test whether the coefficient in Columns 1 and 2 are
equal. Column 4 reports the test statistic and the p-value for the over-identification test, if applicable.
The 2SLS row uses each fund share (times time period) separately as instruments. The MB2SLS row
uses the estimator of Anatolyev (2013) and Kolesár et al. (2015). The HFUL row uses the estimator of
Hausman et al. (2012).




                                                    54
             Table 6: Balance Sheet Adjustments of U.S.-based Entities


                  (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)            (6)
                 Asseti,t      Cashi,t        Loani,t         Seci,t       F F Repoi,t     OtherAi,t

   holdU nsec
       i,t        0.83***       0.76***          0.03           0.03            0.03           -0.00
                   (0.14)        (0.14)         (0.03)         (0.02)          (0.02)         (0.02)

       N            200           200            200            200             200            200
       R2           0.37          0.38           0.03           0.02            0.00           0.01

                   (7)          (8)            (9)             (10)          (11)           (12)
                  Liabi,t     Borrowi,t      Depositi,t     T radingi,t     OtherLi,t       N DTi,t

   holdU nsec
       i,t         0.25**         -0.06        0.32***          -0.02           0.01         0.57***
                   (0.11)        (0.05)         (0.12)         (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.22)

       N            200           200            200            200             200            200
       R2           0.18          0.00           0.16           0.04            0.02           0.15

Notes: This table shows IV regression results of changes in the composition of banks' balance sheets on
changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank securities. The Bartik instrument is defined by equation
(3). All balance sheet items are from the FR 2644 report, which is voluntarily reported by U.S.-based
entities for U.S. and foreign banks. The dependent variables in Columns 1-6 are the change in banks'
total assets (Asseti,t ), cash (Cashi,t ), loans (Loani,t ), securities (Seci,t ), federal funds and repo
(F F Repoi,t ), and other assets (OtherAi,t ). In Columns 7-12, the dependent variables are the change
in banks' total liabilities (Liabi,t ), borrowing (Borrowi,t ), deposits (Depositi,t ), trading liabilities
(T radingi,t ), other liabilities (OtherLi,t ), and net-due-to positions (N DTi,t ). The independent
variable, holdU   nsec
                i,t    , is the change in MMF holdings of unsecured debt issued by bank i. All variables
are scaled by 2014 total assets from SNL Financial. All changes are quarterly and the sample period is
October 2015 to October 2016. All specifications include time fixed effects, with standard errors clustered
at the bank level. Statistical significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.




                                                    55
                   Table 7: Regression Results for Intra-Office Positions

                            (1)        (2)            (3)            (4)       (5)            (6)
                                                       DT -ED                                  DT -ED
                           N DTi,t     EDi,t       QN
                                                    i,t             N DTi,t    EDi,t       QN
                                                                                            i,t


        holdU nsec
            i,t             0.57***    0.78***            -0.21        0.03      0.06          -0.03
                             (0.22)     (0.26)           (0.15)      (0.09)     (0.04)        (0.09)
    Arbi × holdU nsec
               i,t                                                  0.75***    1.08***         -0.33
                                                                     (0.15)     (0.21)        (0.24)
            Arbi                                                      -0.00    0.00***          0.00
                                                                     (0.00)     (0.00)        (0.00)

             N               200         200             200          200       200              200
             R2              0.16        0.52            0.13         0.32      0.76             0.14

Notes: This table shows IV regression results of changes in net-due-to, Eurodollar (ED), and the dif-
ference between the ED and the net-due-to position on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank
securities. The Bartik instrument is defined by equation (3). The dependent variables are defined as
follows: N DT i,t is the change in the net-due-to position, EDi,t is the change in the ED position,
            DT -ED
and QN   i,t       is the difference between N DT i,t and EDi,t . holdU           nsec
                                                                                i,t    is the change in MMF
holdings of unsecured debt issued by bank i. Arbi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the bank's correlation
between daily changes in unsecured funding and daily changes in reserve balances is in the top third of
all banks. All continuous variables are scaled by 2014 total assets from SNL Financial. All changes are
quarterly and the sample period is October 2015 to October 2016. All specifications include time fixed
effects, with standard errors clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05,
* p  .10.



                    Table 8: Regression Results for Syndicated Loans


                            (1)            (2)                          (3)             (4)
                               MMF Reform                               European Debt Crisis
                      Dollar Amount Scaled by Assets              Dollar Amount Scaled by Assets

       holdU nsec
           i,t             0.0685             -0.0206                0.225**              0.242
                          (0.0621)           (0.0472)                (0.109)             (0.234)

            N                58                   58                   57                  57
            R2              0.01                 0.00                 0.15                0.05

Notes: This table shows the results of IV regressions for changes in the new origination of syndicated
loans on changes in the supply of unsecured funding from MMFs. Columns 1 and 2 report results for
the MMF reform period, and Columns 3 and 4 report results for the European debt crisis period. The
changes in dependent and independent variables are measured in dollar amounts in Columns 1 and 3,
and are scaled by total assets in Columns 2 and 4. Standard errors clustered at the bank level. Statistical
significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.



                                                        56
                     Table 9: Regression Results for Funding Costs


                                           (1)      (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)
                                           ri,n,t   ri,n,t    ri,n,t     ri,n,t     ri,n,t

                     holdU nsec
                         i,t                -0.77    0.011     -0.01      -0.12    0.50**
                                           (0.61)    (0.34)   (0.58)     (0.62)     (0.22)
              T enor>6M × holdU nsec
                              i,t                   -3.18**    -2.85     -4.21*    -3.06**
                                                     (1.57)   (1.77)     (2.52)     (1.52)

                       Sample               All       All      Arb      Non-Arb     FBOs
                         N                  256       256       82        174        215
                         R2                 0.38      0.40     0.59       0.37       0.49

Notes: This table shows the results of IV regressions for changes in banks' funding costs from October
2015 to October 2016 on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank debt. The Bartik instrument is
defined in equation (3). The dependent variable, ri,n,t , is the change in bank i's funding rate (measured
in basis points) for tenor n, which is calculated as the volume-weighted monthly average. Transactions
at rates below 5 basis points are dropped from the sample to ensure that our sample comprises only
transactions at market rates. The independent variable, holdU        nsec
                                                                   i,t    , is the change in MMF holdings
of unsecured debt issued by bank i, as a share of total assets in 2014 (measured in percentage points).
T enor>6mos is a dummy variable indicating observations for which tenor n is six months or longer. All
specifications include tenor fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the bank level. Statistical
significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.




                                                    57
                   Table 10: Arbitrage Profits and Arbitrage Capital
                                       Panel (A) IOER Arbitrage
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)               (4)
                                          IOER       IOER       IOER              IOER
                                      t           t         t                 t
                                      Non-MEs       ME         QE            Non-QE ME

                      YtIOER             0.008     -0.086***    -0.076***     -0.300***
                                        (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.044)
                   YtIOER × P ostt     -0.015**    -0.107***    -0.072***     -0.159***
                                        (0.006)     (0.031)       (0.013)       (0.052)
                        P ostt           0.024        0.737        1.547         0.989
                                        (0.031)     (1.436)       (1.344)       (1.191)
                      Constant           0.003       -0.948      -1.062**      -2.605**
                                        (0.023)     (0.915)       (0.487)       (1.060)

                         N                372         40           13             27
                         R2              0.073       0.673        0.951         0.806

                                        Panel (B) CIP Arbitrage
                           (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)           (6)
                            CIP           CIP         CIP          CIP            CIP           CIP
                          1  W,t       1   W,t     1   M,t      1   M,t         1  M,t        1  M,t
                        1W non-QE      1W QE 1M non-QE          1M QE         3M non-YE       3M YE

          CIP
         Yn,t              -0.086        -0.534     -0.040**     -0.386***     -0.036***     -0.117***
                          (0.055)       (1.130)      (0.018)      (0.133)       (0.013)       (0.040)
     CIP
    Yn,t × P ostt          -0.348        -1.545       -0.172      0.404**        -0.056        0.093
                          (0.305)       (2.525)      (0.118)      (0.198)       (0.042)       (0.082)
          P ostt           -1.685       16.928        -0.551       0.629         -0.549        0.431
                          (3.010)      (28.364)      (1.287)      (2.695)       (0.745)       (1.155)
        Constant          -2.886*      31.498*        -0.992       1.089          0.067        -0.185
                          (1.484)      (17.550)      (0.653)      (1.475)       (0.455)       (0.940)

           N                376            36          260           152          305           107
           R2              0.028         0.018        0.060         0.041        0.034         0.077

Notes: This table shows regression results of daily changes in the average arbitrage profit on daily changes
in the total arbitrage capital for our sample banks. Panel (A) shows results for the IOER arbitrage and
Panel (B) shows results for the CIP arbitrage. In Panel (A), the dependent variable is the daily change in
                                        IOER
the average IOER arbitrage profit t          . YtIOER is the change in the aggregate potential arbitrage
capital for the IOER arbitrage. P ostt is equal to one after October 14, 2016 and zero otherwise. The
sample in specification (1) is non-month-ends (non-ME), in specification (2) is month-ends (ME), in
specification (3) is quarter-ends (QE), and in specification (4) is non-quarter-end month-ends (non-QE
                                                                 CIP
ME). In Panel (B), the dependent variables are as follows: 1      W,t is change in the 1-week CIP arbitrage
                           CIP
profit (Columns 1-2), 1M,t is the change in the 1-month CIP arbitrage profit (Columns 3-4), and
    CIP                                                                            CIP
3    M,t is the change in the 3-month CIP arbitrage profit (Columns 5-6). Yn,t          is the change in the
aggregate potential arbitrage capital for the CIP arbitrage. The sample in specifications (1) and (3)
is non-quarter-ends (non-QE), in specifications (2) and (4) is quarter-ends (QE), in specification (5) is
non-year-ends (non-YE), and in specification (6) is year-ends (YE). The sample period is from October
2015 to June 2017. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. Statistical significance: *** p 
.01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.
                                                    58
Appendix


                                           Figure A1: Dollar Syndicated Loan Origination

                                                                             Announcement          Deadline
                            500      400
               USD Loans in Billions
                 200      300
                            100
                            0




                                   2000q1            2005q1              2010q1         2015q1                2020q1

                                                              US Banks             Foreign Banks


Notes: This figure plots total dollar syndicated loan origination by U.S. (blue) and foreign banks (red)
in our sample as lead arrangers.
Source: Dealscan




                                                                     59
                                                        Table A1: List of Sample Banks


                                  Bank Name                         Country                      Bank Name                 Country
                  Australia and New Zealand Banking Group          Australia          Bank Of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ          Japan
                      Commonwealth Bank Of Australia               Australia                     Chiba Bank                 Japan
                       National Australia Bank Limited             Australia              Mizuho Corporate Bank             Japan
                            Westpac Banking Corp                   Australia                  Norinchukin Bank              Japan
                                KBC Groep NV                        Belgium                    Shizuoka Bank                Japan
                               Bank Of Montreal                     Canada                    Sumitomo Group                Japan
                             Bank Of Nova Scotia                    Canada                Korea Development Bank        South Korea
                    Canadian Imperial Bank Of Commerce              Canada                Rabobank Nederland Nv         Netherlands
                           National Bank Of Canada                  Canada                   DNB Nor Bank Asa              Norway
                            Royal Bank Of Canada                    Canada                     DBS Bank Ltd               Singapore
                            Toronto Dominion Bank                   Canada                Oversea Chinese Banking         Singapore
                         Agricultural Bank Of China                  China                  United Overseas Bank          Singapore
                                 Bank Of China                       China            Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria       Spain
                       China Construction Bank Corp                  China                    Banco Santander               Spain
                   Industrial & Commercial Bank Of China             China             Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken       Sweden




60
                                  Barclays Plc                  United Kingdom             Svenska Handelsbanken           Sweden
                                  HSBC Bank                     United Kingdom                    Swedbank                 Sweden
                          Lloyds Banking Group Plc              United Kingdom                  Credit Suisse            Switzerland
                           Standard Chartered Bank              United Kingdom                     UBS Ag                Switzerland
                              Banque Federative                      France            Bank Of America Corporation      United States
                                  BNP Paribas                        France              Bank Of New York Mellon        United States
                                 Credit Agricole                     France                        BB&T                 United States
                                     Dexia                           France                       Citigroup             United States
                                 Groupe BPCE                         France                Goldman Sachs Group          United States
                                Societe Generale                     France                   JP Morgan Chase           United States
                            Bayerische Landesbank                  Germany                     Morgan Stanley           United States
                                  DZ Bank Ag                       Germany                State Street Corporation      United States
                      Landesbank Baden-Wuerttemberg                Germany                        US Bank               United States
                       Landesbank Hessen-Thueringen                Germany                       Wells Fargo            United States


     Notes: This table provides the full list of the 58 banks in our sample and the country of the bank headquarters.
 Table A2: Annual Regressions for Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Positions


                                     (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
                                      IOER         CIP
                                    Yi,t         Yi,t      QIOER
                                                             i,t       QIOER
                                                                         i,t        QIOER
                                                                                      i,t


                                        Panel (A) OLS Estimates

                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.77***     0.86***    0.84***       0.11      0.85***
                                      (0.21)      (0.20)     (0.24)      (0.08)      (0.25)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                            1.11***
                                                                         (0.17)
                     Arbi                                                0.01*
                                                                         (0.00)

                    Sample             All        All         All         All        FBOs
                      N                 58         58          58          58          48
                      R2               0.58       0.64        0.60        0.88        0.63

                                         Panel (B) IV Estimates

                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.77***     0.86***    0.84***      0.30**     0.85***
                                      (0.21)      (0.20)     (0.24)      (0.12)      (0.25)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                            0.75***
                                                                         (0.26)
                     Arbi                                                 0.00
                                                                         (0.01)

                    Sample             All        All         All         All        FBOs
                      N                 58         58          58          58          48
                      R2               0.58       0.64        0.60        0.85        0.63


Notes: This table shows regression results of changes in potential arbitrage capital and the IOER arbitrage
position on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank securities. Panel (A) shows the OLS estimates
and Panel (B) shows the IV estimates using the Bartik instrument defined by equation (3). The dependent
                                       IOER                                                              CIP
variables are defined as follows: Yi,t      is the change in the potential IOER arbitrage capital, Yi,t
                                                              IOER
is the change in the potential CIP arbitrage capital, and Qi,t      is the change in the proxy for the IOER
                           U nsec
arbitrage position. holdi,t       is the change in MMF holdings of unsecured debt issued by bank i. All
changes are annual, calculated from October 2015 to October 2016, and scaled by 2014 total assets from
the SNL Financial. Arbi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if a bank's correlation between daily changes in
unsecured funding and daily changes in reserve balances is in the top third of all banks. Robust standard
errors are shown in parentheses. Statistical significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.




                                                    61
Table A3: Quarterly Regressions for Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Positions
(Dollar Amounts)


                                      (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
                                       IOER        CIP
                                     Yi,t        Yi,t       QIOER
                                                              i,t       QIOER
                                                                          i,t       QIOER
                                                                                      i,t


                                         Panel (A) OLS Estimates

                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.65***     0.88***     0.62***     0.31***     0.58***
                                      (0.12)      (0.08)      (0.11)      (0.07)      (0.12)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                             0.69***
                                                                          (0.13)
                      Arbi                                                 0.51
                                                                          (0.37)

                    Sample             All         All        All          All        FBOs
                      N                232         232        232          232         192
                      R2               0.44        0.57       0.44         0.61        0.41

                                          Panel (B) IV Estimates

                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.66***     0.71***     0.62***     0.47***     0.64***
                                      (0.09)      (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.10)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                             0.43***
                                                                          (0.13)
                      Arbi                                                 -0.25
                                                                          (0.40)

                    Sample             All         All        All          All        FBOs
                      N                232         232        232          232         192
                      R2               0.44        0.55       0.44         0.59        0.40


Notes: This table shows regression results of changes in potential arbitrage capital and the IOER arbitrage
position on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank securities. Panel (A) shows the OLS estimates
and Panel (B) shows the IV estimates using the Bartik instrument defined by equation (3). The dependent
                                       IOER                                                              CIP
variables are defined as follows: Yi,t        is the change in the potential IOER arbitrage capital, Yi,t
is the change in the potential CIP arbitrage capital, and QIOER    i,t    is the change in the proxy for the
IOER arbitrage position. holdU      nsec
                                  i,t    is the change  in MMF   holdings of unsecured debt issued by bank i.
Unlike in the benchmark regressions in Table 2, all continuous variables are measured in dollars, instead
of as percentages of total assets. Arbi is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the bank's correlation between
daily changes in unsecured funding and daily changes in reserve balances is in the top third of all banks.
All changes are quarterly and the sample period is October 2015 to October 2016. All specifications
include time fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance: *** p
 .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.




                                                     62
Table A4: Quarterly Regressions for Arbitrage Capital and Arbitrage Positions
with Controls

                                       (1)         (2)      (3)          (4)         (5)
                                        IOER        CIP
                                     Yi,t      Yi,t     QIOERi,t        QIOER
                                                                          i,t       QIOER
                                                                                      i,t
                                        Panel (A) OLS Estimates
                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.87***    0.96***  0.77***          0.15**     0.71***
                                      (0.18)     (0.20)   (0.17)          (0.07)      (0.19)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                             0.97***
                                                                          (0.10)
                      Arbi                                                0.00*
                                                                          (0.00)
                    Ratingi          1.44***      1.40**    1.17**         0.75*        0.54
                                      (0.52)      (0.60)    (0.56)        (0.40)      (0.72)
                     ROAi              0.03        -0.09     -0.49         -0.66       -0.27
                                      (0.72)      (0.63)    (0.89)        (0.59)      (0.80)
                    CET 1i             -0.38       -0.29    -0.59*        -0.35*     -0.84***
                                      (0.24)      (0.19)    (0.31)        (0.21)      (0.30)
                    Sample              All         All       All           All       FBOs
                      N                 232         232       232           232         192
                      R2               0.53         0.58      0.56         0.77        0.52
                                          Panel (B) IV Estimates
                  holdU nsec
                      i,t            0.88***     0.88***   0.79***          0.24     0.78***
                                      (0.30)      (0.30)    (0.25)        (0.16)      (0.24)
              Arbi × holdU nsec
                         i,t                                             0.82***
                                                                          (0.18)
                      Arbi                                                 0.00
                                                                          (0.00)
                    Ratingi           1.47*         1.14        1.22      0.89*        0.78
                                      (0.82)      (0.87)      (0.80)      (0.48)      (0.78)
                     ROAi              0.07        -0.38       -0.44       -0.73       0.02
                                      (0.76)      (0.66)      (0.80)      (0.62)      (0.92)
                    CET 1i            -0.37*     -0.40**     -0.57**     -0.38**     -0.73**
                                      (0.21)      (0.18)      (0.28)      (0.18)      (0.32)
                    Sample              All         All         All         All       FBOs
                      N                232          232         232         232        192
                      R2               0.53         0.58        0.56       0.76        0.52

Notes: This table shows regression results of changes in potential arbitrage capital and the IOER arbitrage
position on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured bank securities with additional bank-level controls.
Panel (A) shows the OLS estimates and Panel (B) shows the IV estimates using the Bartik instrument
                                                                                      IOER
defined by equation (3). The dependent variables are defined as follows: Yi,t                is the change in
                                            CIP
the potential IOER arbitrage capital, Yi,t is the change in the potential CIP arbitrage capital, and
QIOER
    i,t   is the change in the proxy for the IOER arbitrage position. holdU       nsec
                                                                                i,t    is the change in MMF
holdings of unsecured debt issued by bank i. All changes are quarterly, calculated from October 2015
to October 2016, and scaled by 2014 total assets from the SNL Financial. Arbi is a dummy variable
equal to 1 if a bank's correlation between daily changes in unsecured funding and daily changes in reserve
balances is in the top third of all banks. Ratingi is a categorical variable for the short-term credit rating
of bank i in 2014. ROAi is the average return on assets in 2014. CET 1i is the Tier-1 common equity
ratio in 2014. All specifications include time fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the bank
level. Statistical significance: *** p  .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.
                                                     63
              Table A5: Balance Sheet Adjustments of FBOs in the US


                   (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
                  Asseti,t      Cashi,t        Loani,t          Seci,t       F F Repoi,t     OtherAi,t

   holdU nsec
       i,t         0.87***       0.88***          -0.01           0.00           0.03            -0.01
                    (0.12)        (0.12)         (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.02)          (0.01)

       N             160           160            160            160             160             160
       R2            0.35          0.38           0.06           0.01            0.02            0.04

                   (7)           (8)            (9)             (10)          (11)            (12)
                  Liabi,t      Borrowi,t      Depositi,t     T radingi,t     OtherLi,t        N DTi,t

   holdU nsec
       i,t         0.25**          -0.01        0.27***           -0.02          -0.00         0.62***
                   (0.10)         (0.04)         (0.10)          (0.01)         (0.00)          (0.22)

       N             160           160            160            160             160             160
       R2            0.16          0.02           0.20           0.05            0.02            0.12

Notes: This table shows IV regression results of changes in the composition of banks' balance sheets for
foreign banking organizations (FBOs) in the United States on changes in MMF holdings of unsecured
bank securities. The Bartik instrument is defined by equation (3). All balance sheet items are from the FR
2644 report. The dependent variables in Columns 1-6 are the change in banks' total assets (Assetsi,t ),
cash (Cashi,t ), loans (Loani,t ), securities (Seci,t ), federal funds and repo (F F Repoi,t ), and other
assets. In Columns 7-12, the dependent variables are change in banks' total liabilities (Liabi,t ), borrow-
ing (Borrowi,t ), deposits (Depositsi,t ), trading liabilities (T radingi,t ), other liabilities (Otheri,t ),
and net-due-to positions (N DTi,t ). The independent variable, holdU       nsec
                                                                         i,t    , is the change in MMF hold-
ings of unsecured debt issued by bank i. All variables are scaled by 2014 total assets from SNL Financial.
All changes are quarterly and the sample period is October 2015 to October 2016. All specifications
include time fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the bank level. Statistical significance: *** p
 .01, ** p  .05, * p  .10.




                                                     64
