                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   PARENTAL SKILLS, ASSORTATIVE MATING, AND THE INCIDENCE OF AUTISM
                          SPECTRUM DISORDER

                                       N. Meltem Daysal
                                         Todd E. Elder
                                      Judith K. Hellerstein
                                       Scott A. Imberman
                                         Chiara Orsini

                                      Working Paper 28652
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28652


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021


The activities of CEBI are financed by the Danish National Research Foundation, Grant
DNRF134. We greatly appreciate funding provided by the University of Maryland Population
Research Center. We are also grateful for excellent research assistance provided by Martin
Sædholm Nielsen, Mikkel Hasse Pedersen, Catalina Morales, and Sai Luo. We also thank
seminar and conference participants at Aarhus University, Association for Education Finance and
Policy, Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, Boston University, Center for
Economic Studies ­ Ifo Institute, Cornell University, Korea University, NBER Economics of
Education Program, Ohio State University, United States Military Academy, University of
Michigan H2D2 Conference, Wilfrid Laurier University, University of Sheffield, University of
Cyprus, and Society of Economics of the Household (SEHO). The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by N. Meltem Daysal, Todd E. Elder, Judith K. Hellerstein, Scott A. Imberman, and
Chiara Orsini. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Parental Skills, Assortative Mating, and the Incidence of Autism Spectrum Disorder
N. Meltem Daysal, Todd E. Elder, Judith K. Hellerstein, Scott A. Imberman, and Chiara Orsini
NBER Working Paper No. 28652
April 2021
JEL No. I10,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

We use rich administrative data from Denmark to assess medical theories that autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) is a heritable condition transmitted through underlying parental skills. Positing
that occupational choices reflect skills, we create two separate occupation-based skill measures
and find that these measures are associated with ASD incidence among children, especially
through the father's side. We also assess the empirical relevance of assortative mating based on
skill, concluding that intertemporal changes in assortative mating explain little of the increase in
ASD diagnoses in recent decades.

N. Meltem Daysal                                 Scott A. Imberman
Department of Economics and CEBI                 Michigan State University
University of Copenhagen                         486 W. Circle Drive
Øster Farimagsgade 5                             110 Marshall-Adams Hall
1353 Copenhagen                                  East Lansing, MI 48824-1038
Denmark                                          and NBER
and CEBI and IZA                                 imberman@msu.edu
meltem.daysal@econ.ku.dk
                                                 Chiara Orsini
Todd E. Elder                                    University of Sheffield
408 W Circle Dr                                  Department of Economics
110 Marshall-Adams Hall                          Room 432
Michigan State University                        9 Mappin Street
East Lansing, MI 48824                           Sheffield S1 4DT
telder@msu.edu                                   United Kingdom
                                                 and LSE
Judith K. Hellerstein                            c.orsini@sheffield.ac.uk
Department of Economics
Tydings Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
hellerst@econ.umd.edu
I. Introduction

         The U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) currently estimates that 18.5 per thousand

8-year-olds (1 in 54) residing in the U.S. meet the criteria for diagnosis of Autism Spectrum

Disorder (ASD). 2 This prevalence has grown markedly over time; the analogous prevalence in

the U.S. was only 6.7 per thousand in 2000 (Maenner et al., 2020), and numerous studies

suggest similar trends throughout the developed world. 3 Individuals with ASD have "persistent

deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple contexts" and

demonstrate "restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities," all of which lead

to impairment in "social, occupational, or other important areas of current functioning" that

cannot be explained by other intellectual or global developmental delays (American Psychiatric

Association, 2013). ASD is associated with relatively low educational attainment, poor labor

market outcomes, and difficulty with independent living in adulthood. 4

         Researchers have linked diagnoses of ASD to a variety of environmental, economic,

social, and especially genetic factors. Recent research (e.g., Satterstrom et al., 2020) has

identified specific genes associated with ASD, and various other observed dimensions of the

heritability of ASD have been documented. For example, Bai et al. (2020) study a sample of

children whose parents do not have ASD, finding that the children diagnosed with ASD are

disproportionately likely to have aunts or uncles with ASD. Similarly, monozygotic twins are

much more likely to both have ASD than are dizygotic twins (Nordenbaek et al, 2014). Children

with ASD (and without other developmental disorders) have fathers with higher IQ scores than


2
  https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/addm-community-report/index.html
3
  Hansen et al. (2015) and Parner et al. (2008) show that rates of diagnosed ASD grew sharply in Denmark, and a
comparative prevalence study using all children born in Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Western Australia between
1990 and 2007 shows an increase in prevalence of ASD in all four countries (Atladottir et al., 2015). A recent study
using nationwide health registries in Denmark, Iceland, France, and Finland for 2015 reports that ASD prevalence
among children aged 7-9 ranged from 0.48% in South-East France to 3.13% in Iceland (Delobel-Ayoub et al.,
2020). Poovathinal et al. (2018) focus on the global prevalence of autism (the most severe disorder in the ASD
spectrum) by examining sixty-six reports on the epidemiology of autism published during 1966-2017, concluding
that autism prevalence has increased worldwide in recent years.
4
  See, e.g., https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/autism-spectrum-disorder-in-teenagers-adults.html.


                                                                                                                   2
other children, largely due to differences in scores on the technical comprehension section of the

IQ test (Gardner et al., 2019). Not all evidence points to a clear role for inherited traits,

however; for example, both socioeconomic status (Daniels and Mitchell, 2014) and parental age

at birth (King et al., 2009) are positively associated with ASD incidence. While it is clear that at

least part of the growth in prevalence over time reflects increased diagnosis net of underlying

incidence due to changing diagnostic criteria, improved detection (King and Bearman, 2009),

and better information exchange through social networking (Fountain et al., 2011), the rise in

ASD rates is not well understood.

        Because ASD diagnoses hinge on deficits in social communication and social

interaction, coupled with behaviors that involve repetition and inflexibility, researchers have

examined whether parents of children with ASD exhibit characteristics associated with some of

these same traits (see, e.g., Losh et al., 2017, and Baron-Cohen and Hammer, 1997). Moreover,

because social communication and an affinity for order and repetition are characteristics that

define dimensions of the skills used in specific occupations, researchers have also examined the

relationships between parental occupations and ASD diagnoses in children. 5 Baron-Cohen et al.

(1997) find that maternal and paternal grandfathers of autistic children are disproportionately

likely to be engineers. Windham et al. (2009) estimate the impact of parental occupation and

assortative mating on ASD prevalence, concluding that ASD prevalence is higher among

children whose mothers' occupations are "high-tech" relative to other professional occupations.

In contrast, Dickerson et al. (2014) find that fathers who work in healthcare or finance

occupations are more likely to have children diagnosed with ASD than are fathers in other




5
 We use the terms "skills" and "traits" interchangeably, taking no stand on whether they are immutable
characteristics of individuals.

                                                                                                         3
occupations, but they find no analogous relationships for mothers. All of these studies use either

small sample sizes, non-representative samples, or both. 6

        Motivated in part by these small-scale studies of ASD, and by larger-scale evidence from

economics that various dimensions of skill are embodied in occupational choices (Autor et al.,

2003; Deming, 2017), we use large-scale registry data from Denmark on occupational choices to

estimate the links between paternal and maternal skills and diagnoses of ASD in a large

population of children. We take two different but complementary approaches to mapping

observed occupations into underlying skills, both of which are derived from the Occupational

Information Network (O*NET) survey of United States occupations, where we concord U.S.-

based occupation classifications to those in Denmark.

        Our first approach is derived from a factor analysis we perform on the occupation-

specific measures of the importance of a set of "skills and abilities" as defined for U.S.

occupations. We particularly focus on those skills highlighted in the context of "systemizing"

and "empathizing" traits, as described by Baron-Cohen (2006) and Baron-Cohen and

Wheelwright (2004). Individuals with systemizing personalities tend to be attracted to situations

involving clear rules and laws, while those with empathizing personalities are skilled at

interpreting and understanding the feelings of others. The second approach uses four main

measures of task-intensity in the O*NET identified in Deming's (2017) study of the role of

cognitive, non-cognitive, and social skills in the labor market.

        We begin our empirical analysis by using linear models to estimate the probability that a

child is diagnosed with ASD as a function of the occupational choice of the parents, measured

by the first three factors of our factor analysis (which account for roughly three-fourths of the

underlying variation in the factor model). Examining the correlation structure of the factors with


6
  For example, Windham et al. (2009) study 248 children with ASD matched to 659 case controls, all drawn from
the San Francisco Bay Area. Dickerson et al. (2014) use a sample of 211 children diagnosed with ASD and 78
controls from the Houston area.


                                                                                                                4
other key observable characteristics of the data and of occupations, we argue that the first factor

captures professional skills of parents, which are highly correlated with measures such as family

income. The second and third factors are more specialized. We argue that the second factor

captures systems and ordering skills, and roughly accords with the notion of "systemizing"

traits. The third factor, on the other hand, captures communication skills and is related to

"empathizing" traits. We then use the same empirical approach to examine the link between

ASD diagnoses in children and Deming's (2017) four main measures of occupational task

intensity ("routineness", "non-routineness", "social skills", and "service skills").

        Because parental skills are not exogenously assigned, we are wary of interpreting our

estimates as capturing causal effects on ASD diagnoses. Nonetheless, we argue that establishing

whether such relationships exist, even if correlational in nature, provides insight into the validity

of various approaches to conceptualizing parental traits and ASD diagnoses. Our context allows

us to address many potential observable and unobserved confounders that are absent in other

data sources with sufficient observations to detect effects on ASD. Further, socio-economic

disparities in access to diagnoses are modest in Denmark due to a relatively flat income

distribution, the availability of universal healthcare, and the availability of disability benefits,

thereby reducing the likelihood that such disparities explain the associations that we find.

        Our analyses produce four substantive findings. First, we find that our measure of

professional skills is linked to lower rates of ASD diagnosis in children. The magnitude of these

estimates are sensitive to conditioning on income, so this may be a function of socioeconomic

status rather than of underlying skill. Our measures of skill that are linked to communication on

the one hand, and systems and ordering on the other, are also associated with ASD in children,

but almost exclusively through the paternal side. In our preferred estimate, we find that a one

standard deviation increase in the paternal factor linked to systems and ordering is associated

with a 0.041 percentage-point increase in the incidence of ASD (2.4 percent of the baseline


                                                                                                       5
incidence of 1.71 percent). A one standard deviation increase in the paternal communication

skill is associated with a decrease in ASD incidence of 0.063 percentage points (3.7 percent of

baseline). Analogous estimates based on those maternal factors are much smaller, typically

statistically insignificant, and sometimes of opposite sign than those from fathers.

       Second, we find strong associations between Deming's (2017) measures of social skills

and ASD diagnoses. Again, only paternal characteristics appear to play a strong role. A one

standard deviation increase in paternal social skills is associated with a 0.130 to 0.166

percentage-point (7.6 percent to 9.7 percent of baseline) decrease in the probability of an ASD

diagnosis, depending on specification. Similarly, a one standard deviation increase in paternal

"routineness" is associated with a 0.103 to 0.120 percentage-point (6.0 percent to 7.0 percent of

baseline) increase in ASD diagnoses.

       Third, we use our framework to test the theory that ASD is a manifestation of an

"extremely systemizing brain", which Baron-Cohen describes as lying in the far right tail of the

distribution of systemizing traits in combination with lying in the far left tail of the distribution

of empathizing traits. We find mixed evidence for this theory, using our factor measures of

communications and systems / ordering as proxies for systemizing and empathizing traits,

respectively. The estimates imply that, relative to having parents who both have "balanced"

brain types (with roughly equivalent levels of systemizing and empathizing), a child with two

extremely systemizing parents has a 0.59 to 0.91 percentage-point higher likelihood of ASD

diagnosis. These estimates are strikingly large relative to the baseline incidence of 1.71 percent,

and extreme systemizing is similarly important on both the paternal and maternal side.

However, in contrast to the predictions of the Baron-Cohen model, we also find large positive

associations between ASD and extreme empathizing. While these latter findings are sensitive to

modeling choice, they suggest that ASD may be a characteristic of extreme parental traits along

multiple dimensions.


                                                                                                        6
         Finally, we assess the potential role that assortative mating on parental skills has played

in recent increases in ASD diagnosis rates. Although we find strong cross-sectional evidence of

assortative mating based on the occupation-based skills that we measure, our baseline models

imply that such assortative mating has only small (and statistically insignificant) impacts on

ASD diagnoses. Moreover, we show that the extent of assortative mating on the skills we

consider remained remarkably constant from the 1995 to 2010 birth cohorts while ASD

incidence more than doubled, from 0.6 to 1.3 percent. We conclude that the intertemporal

patterns of assortative mating ­ at least based on the occupation-based skills that we measure ­

likely do not explain a meaningful portion of the dramatic increase in ASD diagnoses in recent

decades.



II. Data and Descriptive Statistics

        Our primary data are from the Psychiatric Central Research Register (PCRR). Initiated in

1970, PCRR is an electronic record of patients treated at psychiatric departments in Denmark. 7

The register includes clinical information typically provided by discharge abstracts: primary

diagnosis, admission and discharge date of inpatient visits, start and end date of outpatient

treatments (including emergency room visits), and mode of admission (acute or planned). Since

1994, diagnoses are based on the International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision (ICD-

10). Our main outcome variable is an indicator for having ASD, as determined by ICD-10 codes

of F84.0 (childhood autism), F84.1 (atypical autism), F84.5 (Asperger syndrome), F84.8 (other

pervasive development disorders), and F84.9 (pervasive developmental disorder, unspecified). 8



7
  See Mors et al. (2011) for a detailed description of the PCRR.
8
  ASD is defined as a single diagnosis related to multiple conditions in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders Version 5 (DSM-5) published in 2013. All of the subtypes we classify as ASD fall under the
criteria described in the DSM-5 for ASD (https://www.autismspeaks.org/autism-diagnosis-criteria-dsm-5). In our
final sample, 32% of children who we identify as having ASD have the ICD-10 diagnosis code for autism, 23% are
diagnosed with Asperger's disorder, 12% with atypical autism (which by definition is typically accompanied by
intellectual disabilities), and the remaining with other pervasive developmental disorders.

                                                                                                                7
Lauritsen et al. (2010) assessed the ASD diagnosis measures in the PCRR and found that they

exhibited high levels of construct validity. The PCRR registry is linked to a series of other

registers that provide us with family linkages between children and their parents and

grandparents, birth records, education levels, employment, and basic demographics (from

population registers).

         We focus on three measures of ASD incidence. Our primary outcome is whether a child

is diagnosed with ASD at any age. We also measure diagnosis with ASD by age 8, restricting to

birth cohorts in which we observe the child through age 8 (1995-2006), and autism diagnosis

based solely on the F84.0 ICD-10 code ("childhood autism"). 9 Appendix A describes how ASD

is diagnosed and treated in Denmark.

         Our analysis sample includes all children born in Denmark between 1995 and 2010. 10

We restrict our first cohort to 1995 to ensure that reporting and diagnosis of ASD remains stable

during our study period. 11 In total, 1,069,647 children are born during this period. Using unique

individual identifiers (scrambled social security numbers provided by Statistics Denmark), we

link these children to their biological parents and grandparents. We identify parents using the

Danish Medical Birth Register (MBR), which includes information on all births in Denmark

since 1973. 12 Maternal identifiers are available for all children. If the mother is married, her

husband is assumed to be the father, and his identifier is recorded in the data. If the mother is

unmarried, then the identifier of the father is available if the father has claimed the child. In our



9
  Note that because we only know the year of birth, we define age as the calendar year of diagnosis minus the
calendar year the child is born. For example, if we define a child as being 8 years old, his/her true age is actually
between 7 (e.g. born on December 31, 1995 and diagnosed on January 1, 2003) and 9 (e.g. born on January 1, 1995
and diagnosed on December 31, 2003) years old.
10
   We have assessed the robustness of our results to using only first-born children in order to eliminate a potential
sample selection bias from endogenous fertility responses to having a child with ASD. The results (available upon
request) are very similar to the results from the full sample.
11
   As noted above, diagnosis of ASD is based on ICD-10 starting in 1994. In addition, PCRR was expanded in 1995
to include outpatient and emergency room contacts (previously only inpatient care was included). Previous research
found that these two reporting changes jointly explain 60% of the rise in ASD diagnosis among children born in
Denmark between 1980 and 1991 (Hansen et al., 2015).
12
   For more information, see Knudsen and Olsen (1998).

                                                                                                                   8
sample, 98.8% of children are matched to their fathers. Grandparents are defined using the

Population Register as the legal parents of the child's parents at the time of birth. We are able to

match 89.9% of the children to their maternal grandfather and 88.4% to their paternal

grandfather. Overall, before restricting our samples to those children for whom we have non-

missing information for the relevant variables for fathers, mothers, and grandparents, our sample

includes 1,023,494 children matched to both parents and 860,447 matched to both sets of

grandparents.



II.1 Creating Measures of Skills as Embodied in Occupations

         We construct our main independent variables of interest by mapping parents'

occupations into measures of skills, based on two different taxonomies that are derived from the

Occupational Information Network (O*NET) survey of US occupations. The O*NET is a US

Department of Labor-sponsored project that provides information on each of the almost 1,000

unique occupations in the US Bureau of Labor Statistics' Standard Occupational Classification

(SOC).

         We first leverage information from the O*NET's ratings for a set of unique knowledge

categories, skills and abilities (KSAs) for each occupation, which O*NET develops using

information from occupation analysts, experts, and workers themselves. In particular, we use the

O*NET's 35 unique "skills" and 52 "abilities" (the "SA" part of "KSA") to develop measures of

the intensity of different traits across occupations. 13 The O*NET assigns a score between one

and five for the importance of each SA to an occupation, with five being the highest level of

importance. As an example, the occupation "Mechanical Engineer" has an O*NET (version

22.0) importance score of 2.88 for the skill of "social perceptiveness" and an importance score


13
   We exclude the "knowledge" category from the KSAs in our analysis, as the knowledge measures tend to capture
information learned in school rather than underlying characteristics. We do not consider the difference between the
terms "skills" and "abilities" as defined by O*NET to be meaningful, and we refer to our derived measures from
both as "skills" or "traits".

                                                                                                                 9
of 4.00 for the ability "information ordering". The occupation "Child, Family, and School

Social Workers", in contrast, has importance scores of 4.12 and 3.62 for social perceptiveness

and information ordering, respectively. 14

          The SAs do not perfectly overlap with characteristics associated with the diagnosis of

ASD, but many of them are sufficiently evocative to infer that there may be links. For example,

social perceptiveness may be related to what is described in ASD diagnoses as "social

communication or social interaction" while information ordering may well be related to

"restricted patterns of behavior".

          In order to measure the variation of skills across occupations in the O*NET, we

construct a matrix of importance scores of the SAs in the O*NET across all occupations and

perform a factor analysis on it. This procedure converts the large matrix of importance scores of

SAs across occupations into a small number of factors that capture much of the variation in the

matrix.

          The first three factors of the factor analysis account for 76 percent of the variation in

importance scores, and we therefore limit our focus to them. It is instructive to examine the

factor loadings across SAs in order to conceptualize the different dimensions of skill that each

of the factors captures. Table 1 lists the SAs with the top 10 and bottom 5 factor loadings

corresponding to each factor. For Factor 1, the top 10 factor loadings pertain to written, reading,

and oral expression or comprehension, along with "social perceptiveness," "speaking",

"inductive reasoning", and "critical thinking". This factor, however, negatively loads on

physical skills such as "manual dexterity". In contrast, the top 10 SAs for Factor 2 include

"reaction time", "troubleshooting", "operation monitoring" and "systems analysis". Of the top

10 factor loadings for Factor 3, three overlap with the top 10 for Factor 1 ("social




14
 For information on importance scores and how they have been used in the O*NET, see National Research
Council (2010).

                                                                                                        10
perceptiveness", "oral expression", and "oral comprehension"), and seven are related to speech

or interactions with others. Notably, "mathematical reasoning" and "troubleshooting" have the

largest negative factor loadings of any SAs for Factor 3, but have large positive loadings on

Factor 2 (Appendix Table A1 shows all standardized factor loadings for these three factors; the

factor loading of "mathematical reasoning" is 0.030 for Factor 2).

        To further highlight the differences across the three factors, in Figure 1 we present three

two-way plots that show examples of the first three factor scores across a selection of

occupations. 15 The top plot graphs Factor 1 and Factor 2 for these occupations. Jobs with high

Factor 1 scores but low Factor 2 scores (in the upper left-hand area of the plot) include lawyers,

economists, and religious professionals. Police officers have a roughly average Factor 1 score,

but a high Factor 2 score. Plumbers and pipe fitters, along with carpenters and joiners, have low

Factor 1 scores and slightly below average Factor 2 scores.

        The middle plot graphs Factor 1 against Factor 3. Note that for the occupations shown in

the plot, there is significantly more variation in Factor 3 than there is in the other factors.

Computer programmers, economists, chemists, and mechanical engineers have high levels of

Factor 1 but low levels of Factor 3, whereas religious professionals and lawyers have high levels

of both. Child-care workers and police officers have the highest levels of Factor 3, reflecting the

importance of communication skills in these professions.

        The final plot graphs Factor 2 against Factor 3. Tailors, dressmakers, and hatters have

the lowest Factor 2 score, along with below-average Factor 3 scores. Note that economists also

fall in the lower left quadrant, with below average scores in both Factor 2 and Factor 3.



15
  In order to merge our indices to the Danish registry data, we use a crosswalk provided by the Institute for
Structural Research at the University of Warsaw. These data convert occupation codes from Standard Occupation
Codes for 2000 (SOC-00) used in the O*NET database to International Standard Classification of Occupations for
1988 (ISCO-88), which are the occupation codes used in Danish registries. Unfortunately, the SOC-00 codes do not
perfectly align with ISCO-88. In particular, many SOC-00 codes match to multiple ISCO-88 codes and vice-versa.
In order to convert the U.S. occupation index to Danish occupations, we average each of our indices over all SOC-
00 codes that match to each four-digit ISCO-88 code.


                                                                                                              11
        We draw three general conclusions from these descriptive facts about the factors, the

factor loadings, and the differences across occupations. First, Factor 1 appears to capture a set of

general skills often acquired through formal education, and relatedly, the occupations with high

Factor 1 scores generally require a college education, whereas the opposite is true for

occupations with low Factor 1 scores. Because of these features, we refer to Factor 1 as

"Professional Skills Factor" (PSF) hereafter. Second, Factor 2 captures a set of skills that do not

reflect the types of general skills one associates with formal education; instead, this factor is

related to occupations in which systems and / or rapid problem-solving skills are important, such

as air traffic controllers, chemists, computer assistants, and medical professionals. We refer to

this factor as the "Systems and Ordering Skills Factor" (SOF). Third, while Factor 3 overlaps

with PSF, it is especially related to skills that involve interacting with people; for example, the

lowest score shown in Figure 1 is for computer programmers, while the highest scores include

child-care workers and police officers. We refer to this factor as the "Communication Skills

Factor" (CSF).

        As an alternative way of measuring how occupational choices reflect parental skills, we

use Deming's (2017) four main measures of task intensity, which are also derived from the

O*NET and are based on Autor et al. (2003). Deming's goal was primarily to examine the

changing importance of social skills in labor market outcomes in the United States, but to do so

he categorizes the task intensity embedded in occupations into four (main) composite categories:

social skills, routineness, non-routine analytical skills, and service. 16 Some, but not all, of the

components of these categories are derived from the O*NET's SA's.

         Deming (2017) constructs social skills task intensity as the average of four variables in

the skills component of the O*NET database: social perceptiveness ("being aware of others'




16
  Deming's (2017) Online Appendix describes 10 composite categories of occupational task content, but he notes
that the four categories we use are his preferred measures.

                                                                                                             12
reactions and understanding why they react the way they do"), coordination ("adjusting actions

in relation to others' actions"), persuasion ("persuading others to approach things differently"),

and negotiation ("bringing others together and trying to reconcile differences"). Service is the

average of two variables in a different component of the O*NET (work activities): assisting and

caring for others ("providing assistance or personal care to others") and service orientation

("actively looking for ways to help people"). Both social skills and service are similar to aspects

of our CSF measure, which loads heavily on the SA's of persuasion, negotiation, service

orientation, and especially, as mentioned above, social perceptiveness.

        Routineness is the average of two measures (degree of automation and importance of

repeating some tasks) that are not part of O*NET's SAs, but they may well be important

dimensions of occupations that are relevant to ASD because they at least partly suggest

occupations where repetition and order are important. Degree of automation is defined as "the

level of automation of this job" and importance of repeating some tasks measures "the

importance of repeating the same physical activity (e.g. key entry) or mental activities (e.g.,

checking entries in a ledger) over and over, without stopping, to perform a job." Non-routine

analytical is a composite measure constructed as the average of three variables: mathematical

reasoning, mathematical knowledge, and mathematics skill. Note that mathematical reasoning is

one of the skills in the SA's, and as mentioned above, has a high factor loading for PSF and an

especially low (negative) one for CSF.

        In practice, Deming's (2017) four measures (which we update using the more recent

waves of O*NET), capture some similar but not identical skills to those in our three factors. 17

Moreover, while Deming refers to his measures as capturing "task intensity", the fact that they




17
  Deming (2017) uses data from the 1998 release of the O*NET to obtain measures of occupational skills, abilities,
and task content. We supplement these measures with the June 2009 (O*NET 14.0) and August 2017 (O*NET
22.0) releases, which include occupations not found in earlier releases. See
https://www.onetcenter.org/db_releases.html for more details about O*NET releases.

                                                                                                               13
are at least partly derived from the SA components of the O*NET imply that the differences

between "tasks" and "skills" are minor, at least for our purposes.

       Figure 2 shows raw scores on Deming's measures for the same occupations as in Figure

1, revealing some broadly similar patterns. The top panel shows, for example, that computer

programmers have high routineness and low social skills, while lawyers exhibit the opposite

patterns. The bottom panel shows that computer programmers have high non-routine analytical

skills and low service skills, while lawyers have relatively moderate levels of both.

       In Table 2, we present a full matrix of correlations of the measures of skills we use ­ the

three factors and the four Deming measures. By construction, the factors are essentially

uncorrelated with each other. In general, PSF is more highly correlated with each of Deming's

measures than the other factors; it is strongly positively correlated with social skills (with a

correlation coefficient of 0.87), non-routine analytical skills (0.64), and service skills (0.59), and

negatively correlated with routineness (-0.20). SOF is most correlated with non-routine

analytical (0.43) and somewhat correlated with social skills (0.28), but effectively uncorrelated

with routineness and service skills. The correlations between Deming's measures and CSF are

more varied. CSF is negatively correlated with both routineness and non-routine analytical

(-0.30 and -0.40, respectively), but positively correlated with social skills (0.28) and service

skills (0.50). Taken together, the correlations imply that Deming's measures and the factor

measures bear important relationships to one another, but they capture different aspects of

occupations.

       One unique characteristic of the factor-based skill measures is that they appear to relate

closely to the concepts of "systemizing" and "empathizing" proposed in Baron-Cohen (2002),

Baron-Cohen and Wheelright (2004), and Baron-Cohen (2006) as being potential drivers of

ASD. These authors hypothesize that ASD is an extreme realization of systemizing and




                                                                                                   14
empathizing traits, which may be heritable. 18 Additionally, Baron-Cohen speculates that

increased assortative mating on these (and potentially other) traits may be partly responsible for

the dramatic increases in ASD since the early 1990's. We return to these hypotheses in Section

V below.

         Because some of the parents in the Danish registry data change occupations over time ­

and some have periods of non-employment ­ we create occupational skill measures as the

average of each of the skill measures over the occupations listed in each year in which the

parent is between 25 and 34 years old. 19 This helps maximize the number of individuals

included in our estimation samples while ensuring that the skill measures are typically based on

multiple years of data. Finally, we standardize each measure within each person's own gender

group (that is, within men for fathers and within women for mothers) to make them interpretable

and more easily comparable across measures. Hence, all our results can be interpreted as the

relationship between ASD in a child and the parent's place in their gender-specific underlying

distributions.



II.2 Other Features of the Data Used in Estimation

         In addition to the indices of parental skills described above, in our empirical

specifications we include characteristics known to be associated with the likelihood of ASD in

children. In particular, we control for the gender of the child, parental age, marital status of

parents at birth, and indicators for parental field of study. 20 We also control for indicators for the

parish of the child's birth registration to capture time-invariant geographic differences in the


18
   This hypothesis, known as the Empathizing-Systemizing Theory of ASD, was originally described as the
"Extreme Male Brain" theory of Autism by Baron-Cohen (2002).
19
   We drop parents from the sample if we never observe an occupation for them within the relevant age range. This
primarily affects mothers. Further, since we only have access to the year of birth, we define a person's age as the
age had they been born on January 1 of their birth year.
20
   We obtain demographic characteristics from the Population Register, which includes all individuals with
permanent residence in Denmark on January 1 of each year. It contains a snapshot of demographic data such as
marital status, gender, date of birth, place of birth, place of residence, and citizenship. The data are updated
annually. More details on this register are available in Pedersen (2011).

                                                                                                                 15
propensity to diagnose ASD. 21 Finally, we control for the income history of parents to account

for socio-economic status and broad skill levels of the family. Specifically, we include (1) gross

personal income from all sources including transfers and (2) total taxable salary (which excludes

transfers). For each of these measures we include the values for each year the parent is between

ages 25 and 34. If there is no reported income then we set income to zero and set a missing

indicator for that parent-year equal to one. Once we restrict the sample to children who have full

data for both themselves and their parents, we include 738,126 children for our main analysis

(recall from above that we are able to match 1,023,494 children to their parents).

         Table 3 provides summary statistics for our main analysis sample. Column (1) includes

the full analysis sample, column (2) includes only children diagnosed with ASD at any age in

our sample, and column (3) includes only children who are not diagnosed with ASD. Of the

children with ASD, only roughly 22.7 percent are female, which consistent with information

reported elsewhere that ASD is nearly four times more common in boys than in girls. 22 Parents

of children diagnosed with ASD are slightly younger than parents of children without ASD, and

they have lower education levels. King et al. (2009) note an increase in the prevalence of ASD

in children when parental age at birth is 40 or higher. In our sample, however, parents are on

average much younger than 40: the average age of fathers among children with ASD is 31.6

(compared to 32.3 for children without ASD), and the average age of mothers among children

with ASD is 29.6 (compared to 30.3 for children without ASD).

         In Panel B of Table 3, we report summary statistics for the three factors from our factor

analysis (PSF, SOF, and CSF), and we report standardized Deming (2017) skill measures in

Panel C. Note that the means in column (1) of these two panels are not all equal to zero, as we

standardize using the full population of each gender with work histories observed between ages


21
   The specific birth parish variable we use is "foedreg_kode." Ninety-six percent of births are registered in birth
locations we can identify. These locations were originally based on ecclesiastical boundaries but now serve solely
to designate administrative regions. Our sample includes 2219 unique birth registration parishes.
22
   See for example, https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/data.html.

                                                                                                                   16
25 and 34, rather than our restricted sample of the parents of the children in our sample. In

general, comparing columns (2) and (3) in Panel B, fathers and mothers of children with ASD

appear to work in occupations with lower PSFs, and mothers of children with ASD appear to

work in occupations that have lower SOFs and higher CSFs. In Panel C, fathers of children with

ASD are disproportionately likely to work in occupations that require high levels of routineness

and that do not require social skills. They also tend to be in occupations for which non-analytic

skills are relatively unimportant. For mothers, these patterns are similar except that the

routineness gap is smaller. 23



III. Empirical Strategy

        In order to measure the relationship between parental skills and diagnoses of ASD, we

begin by estimating equations of the form

(1)  =  + 1   + 2   + 3   + 1   + 2   + 3   +   + 

where  is an indicator equal to 1 if child i is diagnosed with an Autism Spectrum Disorder

and zero otherwise,  ,  , and  are measures of the three factors in the mother's

occupation choice(s), and  ,  , and  are analogous measures for the father. We

also estimate variants of specification (1) in which we include all four of Deming's (2017)

measures. In all cases, as with the summary statistics we reported in Table 3, we standardize the

indices within gender in the full population. The vector  includes sets of family and

environmental characteristics that represent risk factors for ASD as described above, as well as

birth year and parish of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the birth cohort by

parental education level.




23
  Appendix Table A3 lists the incidence of childhood ASD by the full list of 2-digit ISCO-88 occupational codes,
separately for paternal and maternal occupations.

                                                                                                               17
       We estimate specification (1) via OLS. One could instead estimate versions of Equation

(1) using limited dependent variable models, but this is difficult in our context because we

include high-dimensional parish-of-birth fixed effects, generating an incidental parameters

problem. Although the relatively low diagnosis rate of ASD could result in negative predicted

values in a linear probability model, it will not lead to bias in the estimates of the parameters of

Equation (1) (Angrist and Pischke, 2008).

       We also estimate extended models where we add to Equation (1) the interaction terms

 ×  ,  ×  , and  ×  in order to assess the impact of parental

assortative mating based on each of the factors. As noted above, several authors, including

Baron-Cohen (2006), Baron-Cohen et al. (1997), Roelfsema et al. (2012), and Windham et al.

(2009), have speculated that assortative mating plays a significant role in ASD diagnoses.

       A potential obstacle to obtaining interpretable estimates of the impacts of the skills of

mothers, as well as the impacts of assortative mating, stems from the possibility that female

occupational choice may be distorted due to labor market barriers faced by women, affecting

either their choices of occupations or their labor force participation. We address this issue in

several ways. First, we use information on any occupation in which a woman works between

ages 25 and 34, and we eliminate any periods where she did not participate in the labor market.

Second, we standardize our indexes for mothers within the distribution of women only,

recognizing that selection into occupations is different for women than for men. Third, we also

estimate our regressions substituting occupational information for maternal and paternal

grandfathers of the children, in place of the corresponding measurers for their parents, as in

Baron-Cohen et al. (1997).

       Finally, we consider the possibility that ASD is particularly sensitive to specific

extremes in inherent skills of individuals. Building on previous work that characterizes skills

along the dimensions of systemizing and empathizing, Baron-Cohen (2002) proposes a


                                                                                                   18
classification system involving five distinct brain types: balanced, systemizing, empathizing,

extreme systemizing, and extreme empathizing. We explain below how we map these notions of

systemizing and empathizing into our skill measures, and we examine whether Baron-Cohen's

Empathizing-Systemizing theory of the relationship between extreme systemizing and ASD is

observable in our data.



IV. Results

IV.1. Baseline Results

       Table 4 presents estimates from linear probability models of equation (1), using the three

skill measures derived from our factor analysis. Column (1) presents baseline results in which

we include the three factors linearly (and separately) for the father and mother of the child, in

addition to controls for the child's sex, parents' age, mother's marital status, child's birth year,

parents' educational attainment, and parish fixed effects. Some of these controls are known to be

risk factors for ASD diagnoses (Werling and Gerschwind, 2015; Lauritsen et al., 2005). Others

reflect socioeconomic proxies that can affect diagnosis rates, such as educational attainment of

parents (Daniels and Mandell, 2014). The parish fixed effects control for geographic differences

in environmental factors that could affect ASD propensity and geographic variation in the

propensity of physicians to diagnose ASD (or the propensity of parents to seek out diagnoses or

treatment). The birth year fixed effects control for secular changes in ASD diagnosis rates that

reflect either true changes in ASD or rising diagnosis rates for the same underlying conditions.

       Estimates of the baseline model in column (1) suggest that higher paternal and maternal

PSF are both strongly associated with a lower risk of ASD in children, whereas SOF for either

parent has no significant relationship with ASD. The estimates for CSF suggest that paternal

CSF is negatively associated with diagnoses of ASD in children, but that the association is

positive for maternal CSF.


                                                                                                    19
         As mentioned above, PSF appears to capture features of occupations that are related to

general skills, and as such may reflect socioeconomic status not fully captured by our education

measures. Because of this, in column (2) we report estimates from models in which we include

the full set of controls for parental income history from ages 25 through 34. Given that our core

interest is assessing the associations of specific dimensions of parental skills and ASD diagnoses

in children, we view these as our preferred estimates.

         In column (2), the point estimates on both paternal and maternal PSF scores are negative,

but they are much smaller than those to column (1). A one standard deviation increase in the

PSF score of a mother is associated with a 0.058 percentage-point decline in the probability of

ASD diagnosis, which is 3.6 percent of the baseline diagnosis rate of 1.7 percent (we display

point estimates multiplied by 100 throughout, in order to represent percentage-point changes in

ASD incidence). The coefficients on maternal SOF and maternal CSF are similarly attenuated

toward zero relative to column (1) and are not statistically significant at the 5 percent level. This

may suggest that maternal skills across occupations are not especially well differentiated from

income (or for the socioeconomic factors for which income is a proxy), a sign that perhaps

occupation is not a clear signal of underlying skills for women.

         In contrast, the coefficients on paternal SOF and paternal CSF are larger (in absolute

value) in column (2). The coefficient estimate on the paternal SOF score is 0.042 (0.015),

implying that a one standard deviation in father's SOF increases the probability of ASD

diagnosis by 2.3 percent of the baseline diagnosis rate. The coefficient on paternal CSF implies

that a one standard deviation increase in the CSF score of a father is associated with a 0.062

percentage-point decline in the probability of ASD diagnosis, a 3.6 percent decrease relative to

baseline. It is worth noting that the negative association between paternal CSF and ASD

diagnoses in children is robust across all of the specifications and sensitivity analyses we report

below.


                                                                                                   20
        To the extent that CSF captures the dimension of skills related to interacting with people,

the negative point estimates for paternal CSF could reflect that children who have received a

diagnosis of ASD, and thus have demonstrated challenges with social interactions, are more

likely to have fathers who themselves have deficits in skills associated with social interaction.

Similarly, to the extent that SOF captures the dimension of skill related to systems and ordering,

the results are suggestive that children with ASD, who have restricted or repetitive behaviors,

are more likely to have fathers who work in occupations where systems analysis and processing

is important.



IV.2. Systemizing, Empathizing, and Assessing the "Extreme Brain" Hypothesis

        Thus far, we have not linked our skill measures to specific characteristics that have been

hypothesized to be related to ASD. In this section, we focus on one key theory in psychiatry that

links specific characteristics of parents to ASD ­ the Empathizing-Systemizing (E-S) Theory of

ASD. In this theory, ASD is the manifestation of what is called an excessively "systemizing"

personality (e.g., Baron-Cohen, 2006), often in combination with a deficit in the trait of

"empathizing" (Baron-Cohen and Wheelright, 2004). 24 According to the theory, systemizing

individuals will tend to be attracted to educational fields and occupations that involve well-

defined systems such as engineering, information technology, computer science and natural

sciences. Some empirical evidence supports this sorting of "systemizers" into technical

occupations. For example, Billington, Baron-Cohen, and Wheelright (2007) show that after

accounting for gender, students with high systemizing quotient (SQ) relative to empathizing

quotient (EQ) are more likely to major in physical sciences, while those with higher EQ relative

to SQ are more likely to major in humanities (we provide more details on SQ and EQ below).



24
  Figure 1 from Wheelright et al. (2006) illustrates that people with ASD are more likely than the general
population to show systemizing tendencies, and Figure 2 from Baron-Cohen and Wheelright (2004) illustrates that
people with ASD are less likely to be empathizing than the general population.

                                                                                                             21
Baron-Cohen (2006) theorizes based on observational evidence that systemizing is heritable, so

that high-SQ parents are more likely to have high-SQ children. Moreover, he argues that

assortative mating based on systemizing will lead to an increased prevalence of extremely

systemizing offspring, leading to higher ASD rates in children than in the absence of assortative

mating.

         While we do not have direct measures of systemizing and empathizing in our data, we

have explored in detail the relationship between our three skill factors and systemizing

diagnostic tests of systemizing and empathizing that have been developed by psychiatrists.

These diagnostic tests are two questionnaires intended to measure an individual's EQ and SQ. 25

As detailed in Appendix B, we created a concordance between each of the SAs and the items in

the two questionnaires, effectively constructing our own measures of SQ and EQ across

occupations. We then examine the relationship between our three skill factors and our

constructed measures of SQ and EQ. Given the discussion in Section II.1, it should not be

surprising that our measures of SQ and EQ are correlated in expected ways with SOF and CSF.

In particular, the correlation between SOF and our SQ is 0.81, and the correlation between CSF

and our EQ is 0.52. In contrast, the correlation between SOF and our EQ is 0.15 and between

CSF and our SQ is -0.17. 26

         As a part of E-S theory, Baron-Cohen (2002) classifies individuals as falling into one of

five brain types, and he hypothesizes that individuals with ASD fall into one of these categories.

In this classification, systemizing (empathizing) brains occur when SQ (EQ) is more than one

standard deviation greater than EQ (SQ), extreme versions involve differences between SQ and

EQ larger than two standard deviations, and "balanced" brains are those in which the difference

between SQ and EQ is less than one standard deviation. Baron-Cohen suggests that individuals



25
 These tests are available at https://www.autismresearchcentre.com/arc_tests.
26
 The first factor, PSF, is strongly positively correlated with both of our constructed SQ (correlation of 0.45) and
EQ indexes (0.83), providing further support for the idea that PSF captures skills that are more general in nature.

                                                                                                                      22
with ASD are much more likely to be extreme systemizers, and given the potential genetic link,

one should expect that parents of children with ASD should be more likely to be extreme

systemizers, though such a relationship between parents and children could also potentially form

through environmental interactions between the child and the parent during development. While

we are able to test for the existence of these parent-child links, we are unable to distinguish

between heritability and the parents' interactions with the child being proximate causes.

         We next use SOF and CSF as proxies of systemizing and empathizing, respectively, to

examine Baron-Cohen's typology of the five brain types and the relationship with ASD. We

categorize mothers and fathers as having one of five brain types as described above, and we

estimate modified versions of Equation (1) where we include dummy variables for each of the

brain types for mothers and fathers: extreme empathizing, empathizing, extreme systemizing,

systemizing, or balanced (which is the omitted category in our regressions). Table 5 presents the

results. 27

         The first two columns of the table report estimates from a model where we include

indicators for the brain type for each parent. Column (1a) reports the coefficients for paternal

brain type, and column (1b) reports the coefficients for the maternal brain type (both sets of

indicators are included in a single estimated model). The results suggest that extreme types

matter for ASD. Consistent with Baron-Cohen's theory, extreme systemizing of both mothers

and fathers matters, both qualitatively and statistically ­ the coefficients on extreme paternal and

maternal systemizing are 0.376 (0.047) and 0.217 (0.057). In comparison to two parents with

balanced brain types, the estimates imply that having two extremely systemizing parents is

linked to an increase in ASD incidence of 0.593 (= 0.376 + 0.217) percentage points, which is

more than one-third of the baseline incidence of 1.71 percent. In contrast to the theory, though,




27
  Appendix Table A4 lists the incidence of ASD by the most common occupations in each of the five brain types,
separately for men and women.

                                                                                                             23
extreme empathizing among parents is also positively related to ASD in children, especially for

mothers.

         In the next two columns, we add controls for the three factors linearly in the regressions.

By including the factors linearly into the model, the specification is identical to that shown in

Table 4 but also includes the controls for parental brain type. Additionally, this model provides

insight into how extreme typologies relate to ASD once one conditions on the underlying levels

of each factor individually, e.g., how much does the difference between the factors matter as

opposed to each factor on its own? The point estimates on empathizing of both parents are

smaller than in the first two columns and noisy enough to render them insignificant. On the

other hand, extreme systemizing of both parents is associated with large increases in ASD in

children. Regardless of specification, the evidence is consistent with the idea that ASD is related

to extreme parental traits, especially extreme systemizing.



IV.3. Assortative Mating and ASD

         We next turn to the role of assortative mating and the rise in ASD. We first examine the

extent of assortative mating based on our factors. In Figure 3, we present a series of binned

scatterplots that provide evidence of the existence of assortative mating. Each figure shows the

relationship between parents' residualized and standardized factor scores, where we have

residualized each index by the control variables included in the regressions reported in column

(2) of Table 4. We residualize the indices in order to focus on the potential impact of assortative

mating on ASD in children conditional on other observable characteristics of parents. 28 We see

clear patterns of positive assortative mating across the three (residualized) factors. Specifically,

a one standard deviation increase in residualized PSF for mothers is associated with a 0.13 SD




28
  The line in the figure is from the regression of the residualized value of the father's factor on the mother's
residualized factor.

                                                                                                                   24
increase in residualized PSF for fathers. Similarly, we find estimates of 0.11 for both SOF and

CSF. Hence, there is clear assortative mating behavior occurring in the cross section along all

three skill dimensions. 29

         We turn next to assessing the potential role on ASD diagnoses of assortative mating

based on parental skills. Returning to Table 4, in columns (3) and (4) we report estimates from

specifications that are identical to the first two columns of the table but also include, for each

factor, interactions between the maternal and paternal factor scores. The estimated coefficients

on each of the paternal and maternal factors are essentially unchanged from the first two

columns, and the estimates on each of the three interaction terms are small and statistically

insignificant. Thus, despite the strong tendency of parents to sort along these dimensions, there

does not appear to be a relationship between having two parents with high skills and ASD

beyond the individual parental effect (although as we showed above, the linearity assumption

may be hiding some relevant tail behavior, a point to which we return below). Perhaps more

importantly, in order for assortative mating on skills to play a role in the increased incidence of

ASD over time, the extent of assortative mating must also be increasing over time. In order to

investigate how the strength of assortative mating evolved during our analysis period, we

estimate models of the form:

(2)        = 0 + 0   + 2007
                       =1996{1( =  ) ×  +    } +  ,


where   is the residualized PSF measure for the father of child i,   is similarly defined

for the mother, and 1( = ) is an indicator that equals 1 if child i is born in birth cohort c,

and zero otherwise. The estimate of 0 captures the strength of assortative mating in the 1995




29
  We also investigate whether there is cross-factor assortative mating. Most of the cross-factor estimates using
residualized factors are negative but very small relative to the same-factor relationships ­ the largest in absolute
value is -0.03 SD.

                                                                                                                       25
birth cohort, while the estimates of  capture the strength of assortative mating in subsequent

cohorts, relative to 1995. We estimate versions of Equation (2) for CSF and SOF as well.

       In Figure 4, we plot the estimates of  for all three factors for each birth cohort from

1996 to 2007. For the PSF, the estimate of 0 is 0.146 (0.005), so that there is strong evidence of

assortative mating in 1995, but the key insight is that the trend over the subsequent 12 birth

cohorts is decreasing ­ the strength of assortative mating on the Professional Skills Factor has

declined over time. The second and third panels show analogous estimates for SOF and CSF,

again showing clear evidence of assortative mating based on these factors: the relevant estimates

of 0 are 0.100 (0.005) and 0.101 (0.005), respectively. In both cases, though, the trends over

the birth cohorts are relatively flat, with the 95 percent confidence intervals including zero for

nearly all years. Taken together, the patterns shown in Figure 4 suggest that there has been little,

if any, change in assortative mating across birth cohorts.

        As a complement to the estimates displayed in Figure 4, we also consider a back-of-the-

envelope calculation to calculate plausible upper bounds on the role that assortative mating

plays in the increase in ASD over time. To do so, we estimate variants of Equation (2) that

impose linear trends in assortative mating. The resulting estimates based on SOF imply an

annual increase in assortative mating of 0.0013 (0.0003), so that the effect of a one-unit increase

in maternal SOF on paternal SOF is 0.0156 (= 0.0013 × 12) larger in the 2007 birth cohort than

in the 1995 birth cohort, with a 95% confidence interval of (0.089, 0.0223). We use the upper

limit of that confidence interval, 0.0223, as our estimate of the upper bound of the increase in

the strength of assortative mating over time. Similarly, the upper limit of the 95 percent

confidence interval of our estimated coefficient on "Paternal × Maternal SOF" from column (4)

of Table 4 is 0.0216 percentage points (based on a point estimate of -0.006 and a standard error

of 0.014). Thus, our upper-bound estimate of the effect of an increase in assortative mating over

time on ASD diagnoses is 0.00048 percentage points (= 0.0223 × 0.0216), which is less than 0.1


                                                                                                     26
percent of the observed increase in ASD incidence over this period (from 0.6 to 1.3 percent).

We reach similar conclusions for CSF: using calculations analogous to those above, we find that

changes in assortative mating based on CSF explain less than 0.1 percent of the increase in ASD

incidence between the 1995 and 2007 birth cohorts. Finally, the downward trend in assortative

mating based on PSF is inconsistent with the idea that changes in assortative mating on PSF has

driven increases in ASD incidence, given that the estimate on the PSF interaction in column (4)

of Table 4 is positive. 30

        We acknowledge that our factor scores are measured with error, in that they are not

perfect measures of parents' skills, and that phenomenon may be particularly pronounced

among women. Such error potentially attenuates the estimates toward zero, and as mentioned

above, this may explain why the estimated effects on maternal skills for all three factors declines

when we control for income in Table 4. However, even if the resulting error-corrected estimates

were two orders of magnitude larger than what we find, assortative mating would still explain

less than 10 percent of the increase in ASD incidence between the 1995 and 2007 birth cohorts.

While we are hesitant to conclude that assortative mating played no role in the growth in ASD

incidence over time, we cannot detect evidence of this role in Denmark over the birth cohorts in

our sample.



IV.4 Results Using Deming's Measures of Parental Skills

        We next turn the associations between Deming's (2017) four measures of task intensity

and ASD diagnoses. In the first four columns of Table 6, we report results where we include

each measure one-by-one in models analogous to specification (1) (along with the full set of


30
  We have also produced variants of Figure 4 that focus on extreme realizations of skills. In particular, we
estimated Equation (2) using residualized measures of extreme systemizing and extreme empathizing and then
plotted estimates of  for these factors for each of the 12 birth cohorts from 1996 to 2007. We found that
assortative mating of extreme sympathizers has remained remarkably stable over time, whereas assortative mating
of extreme empathizers has slightly decreased. While the latter finding is interesting in its own right, it cannot
explain increases in ASD over time, given that the estimates on extreme empathizing in Table 5 are positive.

                                                                                                                 27
controls used in columns (2) and (4) of Table 4). In column (1), we include Deming's index of

routine tasks, separately for each parent. Routineness of the father is strongly associated with

ASD in children; a one standard deviation increase in paternal routineness is associated with an

increase in ASD of 0.120 percentage points, or 6.7 percent of the mean ASD incidence. The

point estimate for maternal routineness is much smaller, negative, and statistically insignificant.

In column (2), we include the indices for paternal and maternal social skills, finding again that

the paternal coefficient is large and statistically significant, and negative as expected. The

coefficient for mothers is much smaller and statistically significant only at the 10 percent level.

In column (3), we only include measures of non-routine analytical skills, and in column (4), we

use measures of parents' service skills. The results in these two columns are very similar: a one

standard deviation increase in paternal non-routine analytic skills (paternal service skills) is

associated with a 0.043 (0.047) percentage-point decrease in ASD in children, whereas the

coefficients for mothers are smaller and statistically insignificant.

        While many of the estimates in columns (1) thorough (4) are of the expected sign, the

negative estimate for non-routine analytical skills might be surprising at first glance. However,

as shown in Table 2, non-routine analytical skills are strongly correlated with all three factors

(negatively with CSF) and social skills. It thus captures multiple dimensions of skill. Indeed, in

column (5) of Table 6, where we report results from a specification that includes all four of

Deming's measures together, the coefficient estimates on non-routine analytic skills are small,

positive, and statistically insignificant.

        Turning to the other results in column (5), the coefficient estimates on routineness and

social skills are similar to their counterparts in columns (1) and (2). In particular, having a father

in an occupation with a high level of routine work is associated with an increase in the

probability of ASD diagnosis in children, and having a father working in an occupation that

requires strong social skills is associated with a decrease in that probability. The analogous point


                                                                                                    28
estimates for mothers are smaller and statistically significant only at the 10 percent level. The

magnitudes of the effects for fathers are meaningful: a one standard deviation increase in

paternal routineness (paternal social skills) is associated with a 5.7 (9.4) percent increase

(decrease) in ASD diagnoses relative to the underlying ASD incidence. These results parallel the

results in Table 4, in the sense that paternal routineness is negatively correlated with CSF. The

results for service are difficult to interpret. We find no effect of maternal service skills, but the

coefficient on paternal service skills is large and positive, contrasting sharply with the estimates

in column (4). Service and social skills are highly correlated (the correlation coefficient is 0.69

in Table 2), so this may be a result of high collinearity between the two factors.

        Overall, the most robust results in Table 6 point to a positive relationship between a

father's routine-task skills and ASD in children, and a negative relationship between a father's

social skills and ASD in children. For these two task intensity categories, we see a much smaller

effect of mothers, although the point estimates have the same sign as those for fathers.



IV.5 Results by Sex of the Child

        In Table 7, we report results by sex of the child, using specifications as in Equation (1).

There are two motivations for splitting the sample by sex. First, ASD incidence among boys

(2.65 percent) is much larger than among girls (0.85 percent). Second, our full-sample results

suggest a much stronger pathway between fathers and children than between mothers and

children. A simple story of a genetic link for ASD that exists primarily between fathers and their

children might suggest that only boys would be affected (presumably via the Y chromosome).

        In columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, we report results using our three factors as measures

of skills for boys and girls, respectively, based on the specification in Table 4, column (2). In

columns (3) and (4), we report results using Deming's measures and the specification in Table

6, column (5). The results for boys magnify the full-sample results shown previously. In


                                                                                                        29
particular, boys whose fathers are in occupations involving high levels of CSF or social skills

are relatively unlikely to have ASD, whereas boys whose fathers are in occupations with high

levels of SOF or high routineness are more likely to have ASD. Boys whose mothers have high

PSF are less likely to have ASD, but the results for SOF and CSF are weak qualitatively and are

statistically insignificant. For Deming's (2017) measures, only the coefficient of maternal social

skills is statistically significant among the maternal measures, and only at the 10 percent level.

       For girls, the point estimates are typically much smaller than for boys, although they

have the same sign in all cases. They are only strongly statistically significant in the case of

paternal routineness and the paternal CSF. Nonetheless, because the average ASD rate for girls

is so much smaller than for boys, the magnitude of the effects in percentage terms is similar

across girls and boys. For example, the coefficient on paternal CSF for boys implies that a one

standard deviation increase in a father's CSF is associated with a decrease of 3.5 percent

(= -0.093 / 2.645) in the probability of a boy having ASD; for girls, the corresponding decrease

is 3.7 percent (= -0.032 / 0.850).

       Our finding that paternal skills ­ especially CSF and routineness of fathers ­ are

important for both boys and girls in the intergenerational transmission of ASD is not consistent

with a genetic pathway that involves simple transmission through Y chromosomes. Indeed, the

underlying genetics behind ASD are complex; studies such as Krishnan et al. (2016) estimate

that ASD is driven by an interaction of several hundred different genes. Studies have also

suggested that even if females have the same ASD-causing genes as males, those genes are less

likely to be expressed in females (Zhang et al., 2020), potentially explaining the divergence in

male and female rates of ASD.



IV.6 The Relative Contributions of Maternal and Paternal Skills




                                                                                                     30
         The bulk of our estimates thus far provide suggestive evidence that paternal occupation-

based skills are more strongly associated with childhood ASD than are maternal skills.

However, as noted above, the impacts of maternal skills might be difficult to measure because

labor market barriers likely distort female occupational choices and participation decisions. In

order to address these concerns, we turn next to specifications in which we use occupational

information for maternal and paternal grandfathers of the children in our sample, rather than the

corresponding measures for parents. Table 8, which mirrors our preferred specifications in

Tables 4 and 6, presents the estimates.

         Unfortunately, the estimates in Table 8 are largely uninformative, as most are neither

practically nor statistically significant. For example, only one of the estimates in column (1) is

(barely) statistically distinguishable from zero at the ten percent level. In comparison to the

estimates in Tables 4 and 6, those in Table 8 are both imprecisely estimated and attenuated

toward zero, especially for paternal grandfathers relative to fathers. Two factors are likely

responsible. First, we only have grandfathers' information for roughly 50 percent of the

children. Second, and perhaps more importantly, generation skipping potentially dilutes the

importance of traits that pass from parents to children. As such, we are wary of drawing firm

conclusions about the relative contributions of paternal and maternal skills based on these

results. 31

         Another potential reason why we find smaller effects for mothers than for fathers in our

preferred specifications is that mothers might be more likely to have jobs that bring them into

regular contact with children (e.g., child care workers) or have specialized knowledge that make

them more aware of the symptoms of ASD (e.g., pediatricians). More generally, if parents in

these fields are more likely to notice that their child has symptoms of ASD, the resulting




31
  We have also produced versions of Tables 4-7 for the subsample of children (and their parents) who appear in
Table 8. The results (unreported) are similar to the full-sample results.

                                                                                                                 31
associations between our skill measures and ASD could capture increased diagnosis net of

underlying incidence, rather than a genetically inheritable link between parental and child traits.

To address this possibility, we estimated specifications in which we exclude children who have

parents in such occupations (doctors, secondary school teachers, primary and pre-school

teachers and associates, and child-care workers). The estimates, available upon request, are

similar to those shown above in Tables 4-7, in that they point to larger roles of paternal skills

than maternal skills, at least for the occupation-based skills we consider.



V. Discussion and Conclusions

       Using large-scale administrative data in Denmark, we test the hypothesis that parental

skills are systematically related to diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children. We

construct measures of maternal and paternal skills based on occupational choices in order to

assess the association between parental skills and ASD in children.

       We focus on the first three factors from a factor analysis of O*NET Skills and Abilities,

and we find evidence of a link between skills ­ especially paternal skills ­ and ASD in children.

In particular, for fathers, the second factor, which is related to the use of systems and ordering in

occupations, is positively related to diagnoses of ASD in children, whereas the opposite is true

for the third factor, which is related to communication skills. Analogous estimates for maternal

skills for these second and third factors tend to be smaller and statistically insignificant (and

sometimes opposite-signed of those for fathers). The first factor, which captures general

professional skills for both mothers and fathers, is negatively related to ASD diagnoses among

children.

       We also find strong associations between ASD diagnoses and Deming's (2017)

measures of social skills and routineness. Again, fathers' characteristics appear to play much

stronger roles than do mothers' characteristics. While social skills are positively related to the


                                                                                                     32
Professional Skills and Communication Skills Factors, routineness is negatively correlated with

them, providing some insight into why these results emerge. The roles of Deming's other two

measures ­ non-routine analytic skills and service skills ­ are less clear, as the relevant estimates

differ considerably across specifications.

       In addition, we find evidence consistent with the theory that ASD is a manifestation of

extreme personality traits. For example, we find that a child with two parents who are

characterized as "extreme systemizers" has a roughly 35 percent higher likelihood of ASD

diagnosis compared to children whose parents both have "balanced brain types", using the

terminology of Baron-Cohen (2004).

       Finally, while we find clear evidence of assortative mating based on all of the measures

we use, we are unable to detect a role for assortative mating on ASD incidence. The estimated

coefficients on interaction terms between mothers' and fathers' skills are consistently small and

statistically indistinguishable from zero. Moreover, assortative mating along these dimensions

has not risen over the 13 cohorts of children we study, even though ASD rates in Denmark

doubled during this period. Thus, we conclude that intertemporal patterns of assortative mating

on these skills are unlikely drivers of the dramatic increase in ASD diagnoses in recent decades.

       Taken together, our results lend credence to the idea that skills are heritable and can lead

to ASD (and potentially other outcomes) in children. Our findings suggest that the pathway by

which this occurs is primarily through fathers, although we do not completely rule out the

possibility of a maternal pathway. Further, our findings show that it is possible to use

occupational choices to identify proxies for parental traits more generally, highlighting the

potential uses of large-scale administrative data on parental characteristics to shed light on the

transmission of traits from parents to their children.




                                                                                                     33
References

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 5th ed.
  Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association; 2013.

Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J. S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist's
   companion. Princeton University Press.

Atladottir, H.O., Gyllenberg, D., Langridge, Sandin, S., Hansen, S. N., Leonard, H., Gissler, M.,
   Reichenberg, A., Schendel, D. E., Bourke, J., Hultman, C. M., Grice, D. E., Buxbaum, J. D.,
   Parner, E. T. (2015) The increasing prevalence of reported diagnoses of childhood
   psychiatric disorders: a descriptive multinational comparison. European Child & Adolescent
   Psychiatry 24, 173­183

Autor, D., Levy, F., Murnane, R. (2003). The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change:
   An Empirical Exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1279-1333.

Baadsgaard, M., and Quitzau, J. (2011). Danish Registers on Personal Income and Transfer
   Payments. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 39 (7 suppl): 103­5.

Bai, D., Marrus, N., Yip, H., Reichenberg, a., Constantino, J., Sandin, S. (2020). Inherited Risk
   for Autism Through Maternal and Paternal Lineage. Biological Psychiatry, 88(6), 480-487.

Baron-Cohen, S. (2006). The Hyper-systemizing, Assortative Mating Theory of Autism.
   Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 30(5), 865-872.

Baron-Cohen, S., and Hammer, J. (1997). Parents of Children with Asperger Syndrome: What is
   the Cognitive Phenotype? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 548­554.

Baron-Cohen, S., Richler, J., Bisarya, D., Gurunathan, N., & Wheelwright, S. (2003). The
   systemizing quotient: an investigation of adults with Asperger syndrome or high­
   functioning autism, and normal sex differences. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
   Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 358(1430), 361-374.

Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2004). The empathy quotient: an investigation of adults
   with Asperger syndrome or high functioning autism, and normal sex differences. Journal of
   autism and developmental disorders, 34(2), 163-175.

Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Stott, C., Bolton, P., and Goodyere, I. (1997). Is There a
   Link between Engineering and Autism? Autism 1(1), 101-109.

Baron-Cohen, S., Bolton, P., Wheelwright, S., Short, L., Mead, G., Smith, A., and Scahill, V.
   (1998). Does Autism Occur More Often in Families of Physicists, Engineers and
   Mathematicians? Autism, 2(3), 296-301.

Becker, G.S. (1981) A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981.

Billington, J., Baron-Cohen, S., & Wheelwright, S. (2007). Cognitive style predicts entry into
    physical sciences and humanities: Questionnaire and performance tests of empathy and
    systemizing. Learning and Individual Differences, 17(3), 260-268.

                                                                                                 34
Breen, R., and Andersen, S. H. (2012). Educational Assortative Mating and Income Inequality
   in Denmark. Demography, 49(3), 867-87.

Christensen DL, Baio J, Braun KV, et al. Prevalence and Characteristics of Autism Spectrum
   Disorder Among Children Aged 8 Years -- Autism and Developmental Disabilities
   Monitoring Network, 11 Sites, United States, 2012. MMWR Surveill Summ 2016;65(No.
   SS-3)(No. SS-3):1­23.

Constantino, J. N., Zhang, Y., Frazier, T., Abbacchi, A. M., & Law, P. (2010). Sibling
   recurrence and the genetic epidemiology of autism. American Journal of Psychiatry,
   167, 1349-1356.

Currie, J., Greenstone, M., and Moretti, E. (2011). Superfund Cleanups and Infant Health. The
   American Economic Review, 101(3), 435-441.

Daley, D., Jacobsen, R. H., Lange, A, Sørensen, A., and Walldorf, J. (2015). Costing Adult
   Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: Impact on the Individual and Society. Oxford
   University Press.

Daniels, A. M. and Mandell, D. S. (2014). Explaining differences in age at autism spectrum
   disorder diagnosis: A critical review. Autism, Vol. 18(5) 583­597.

Danish Ministry of Health and Prevention ("Ministeriet for Sundhed og Forbyggelse"). (2008)
   Health Care in Denmark.

Delobel-Ayoub, M., Saemundsen, E., Gissler, M. et al. Prevalence of Autism Spectrum
   Disorder in 7­9-Year-Old Children in Denmark, Finland, France and Iceland: A Population-
   Based Registries Approach Within the ASDEU Project. (2020). Journal of Autism and
   Developmental Disorders 50, 949­959.


Deming, D. J. (2017). The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1593-1640.

Dickerson, A. S., Pearson, D. A., Loveland, K. A., Rahbar, M. H., & Filipek, P. A. (2014). Role
   of parental occupation in autism spectrum disorder diagnosis and severity. Research in
   autism spectrum disorders, 8(9), 997-1007.

Fleiss, J. L., Tytun, A., & Ury, H. K. (1980). A simple approximation for calculating sample
    sizes for comparing independent proportions. Biometrics, 36(2), 343-346.

Gihleb, R., & Lang, K. (2016). Educational homogamy and assortative mating have not
   increased (No. w22927). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grove, J., Ripke, S., Als, T. D., Mattheisen, M., Walters, R. K., Won, H., ... & Awashti, S.
   (2019). Identification of common genetic risk variants for autism spectrum disorder. Nature
   genetics, 51(3), 431-444.



                                                                                                35
Hansen, S.N., Schendel, D.E. and Parner, E.T. (2015). "Explaining the Increase in the
   Prevalenceof Autism Spectrum Disorders" JAMA Pediatrics 169(1), 56-62.

Jensen, V. M., and Rasmussen, A.W. (2011). "Danish Education Registers." Scandinavian
   Journal of Public Health 39 (7 suppl): 91­94.

Kalmijn, M. (1994). Assortative Mating by Cultural and Economic Occupational Status.
   American Journal of Sociology, 100(2), 422-453.

King, M. and Bearman, P. Diagnostic Change and the Increased Prevalence of Autism. (2009)
   International Journal of Epidemiology, 38(5), 1224-1234.

King M., Fountain, C. and Bearman, P.S. (2011). Age of diagnosis for autism: individual and
   community factors across 10 birth cohorts. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health,
   65:503-510.

King, M., Fountain, C., Dakhlallah, D., and Bearman, P.S. (2009). Estimated Autism Risk and
   Older Reproductive Age. American Journal of Public Health 99(9), 1673­ 1679.

Knudsen L.B., and Olsen J. (1998). "The Danish Medical Birth Registry." Danish Medical
   Bulletin. 45(3): 320-323.

Krasnik A, Hansen E, Keiding N, Sawitz A. (1997). "Determinants of general practice
   utilization in Denmark." Danish Medical Bulletin. 44(5):542-6.

Krishnan, A., Zhang, R., Yao, V., Theesfeld, C. L., Wong, A. K., Tadych, A., ... &
   Troyanskaya, O. G. (2016). Genome-wide prediction and functional characterization of the
   genetic basis of autism spectrum disorder. Nature neuroscience, 19(11), 1454.

Lauritsen, Marlene B., Jørgensen, M., Madsen, K.M., Lemcke, S., Toft, S., Grove, J., Schendel,
   D.E., and Thorsen, P. (2010). Validity of Childhood Autism in the Danish Psychiatric
   Central Register: Findings from a Cohort Sample Born 1990-1999. Journal of Autism and
   Developmental Disorders, 40(2), 139-148.

Lauritsen, M.B., Pedersen, C.B., Mortensen, P.B. (2005). Effects of Familial Risk Factors and
   Place of Birth on the Risk of Autism: A Nationwide Register-based Study. Journal of Child
   Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(9), 963-971.

Little, R. & Wu, M. (1991). Models for Contingency Tables with Known Margins When Target
    and Sampled Populations Differ. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 86(13),
    87-95.

Liu, K., King, M., and Bearman, P.S. (2010). Social Influence and the Autism Epidemic.
   American Journal of Sociology, 115(5), 1387-1434.

Maenner MJ, Shaw KA, Baio J, et al. Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorder Among Children
  Aged 8 Years -- Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 11 Sites,
  United States, 2016. MMWR Surveill Summ 2020; 69(No. SS-4):1­12.



                                                                                              36
Makrygianni, M. K., Reed, P. (2010) A meta-analytic review of the effectiveness of behavioural
  early intervention programs for children with Autistic Spectrum Disorders. Research in
  Autism Spectrum Disorders Volume 4, Issue 4, October­December 2010, 577-593

Manning, J. T., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., & Fink, B. (2010). Is digit ratio (2D: 4D)
  related to systemizing and empathizing? Evidence from direct finger measurements reported
  in the BBC internet survey. Personality and Individual Differences, 48(6), 767-771.

Mare, R.D. (1991). Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating. American Sociological
  Review, 56(1), 15­32.

McConachie, H., Diggle T.(2007) Parent implemented early intervention for young children
  with autism spectrum disorder: a systematic review. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical
  Practice Feb;13(1):120-9

Merikangas, K. R. (1982). Assortative Mating for Psychiatric Disorders and Psychological
  Traits. Archives of General Psychiatry, 39(10), 1173-1180.

Mors, O., Perto, G.P., and Mortensen, P.B. (2011). "The Danish Psychiatric Central Research
  Register." Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 39 (7 suppl): 54-57.

Nakosteen, R.A., Westerlund, O., and Zimmer, M.A. (2003). Marital Matching and Earnings:
   Evidence from the Unmarried Population in Sweden. The Journal of Human Resources,
   39(4), 1033-1044.

National Research Council 2010. A Database for a Changing Economy: Review of the
   Occupational Information Network (O*NET). Washington, DC: The National Academies
   Press.

Nordenbæk, C., Jørgensen M., Kyvik K.M., and Bilenberg N. (2014). A Danish population-
   based twin study on autism spectrum disorders. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry
   (2014) 23:35­43.

Oster, E. (2005). Sexually Transmitted Infections, Sexual Behavior, and the HIV/AIDS
   Epidemic. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2), 467-515.

Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Carter, A., Messinger, D., Yirmiya, N., Zwaigenbaum, L., Stone,
   W.L. (2011). Recurrence risk for autism spectrum disorders: A baby siblings research
   consortium study. Pediatrics, 128:e488-e495

Parner, E.T., Schendel, D.E., and Thorsen, P. (2008). Autism Prevalence Trends Over Time in
   Denmark: Changes in Prevalence and Age at Diagnosis. Archives of Pediatric and
   Adolescent Medicine, 162(12), 1150-1156.

Pedersen, C.B. (2011). "The Danish Civil Registration System." Scandinavian Journal of Public
   Health 39 (7 suppl): 22­25.

Pencavel, J. (1998). Assortative Mating by Schooling and the Work Behavior of Wives and
   Husbands. American Economic Review, 88(2), 443-459.


                                                                                              37
Petersson, F., Baadsgaard, M. and Thygesen, L.C. (2011). "Danish Registers on Personal
   Labour Market Affiliation." Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 39 (7 suppl): 95­98.

Poovathinal, S.A., Anitha, A., Thomas, R., Kaniamattam, M., Melempatt, N., Anilkumar, A.,
   Meena, M. (2018). Global Prevalence of Autism: A Mini-Review. SciFed Journal of Autism,
   2:1, 1-9.

Quian, Z. (1998). Changes in Assortative Mating: The Impact of Age and Education.
   Demography, 35(3), 279-292.

Ritvo, E. R., Jorde, L. B., Mason-Brothers, A., Freeman, B. J., Pingree, C., Jones, M. B., & Mo,
    A. (1989). The UCLA- University of Utah epidemiologic survey of autism: Recurrence risk
    estimates and genetic counseling. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 1032-1036.

Roelfsema, M.T., et al. (2012). Are Autism Spectrum Conditions More Prevalent in an
   Information-Technology Region? A School-Based Study of Three Regions in the
   Netherlands." Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 42(5), 734-739.

Satterstrom, F. K., Kosmicki, J. A., Wang, J., Breen, M. S., De Rubeis, S., An, J.-Y., Peng, M.,
    Collins, R., Grove, J., Klei, L., Stevens, C., Reichert, J., Mulhern, M. S., Artomov, M.,
    Gerges, S., Sheppard, B., Xu, X., Bhaduri, A., Norman, U., Buxbaum, J. D. (2020). "Large-
    scale exome sequencing study implicates both developmental and functional changes in the
    neurobiology of autism." Cell, 180(3), 568-584.e23. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.12.036

Silvertoinen, K., Kaprio, J., Lahelma, E., Viken, R.J., and Rose, R.J. (2003). Assortative Mating
    by Body Height and BMI; Finnish Twins and their Spouses. American Journal of Human
    Biology, 15(5), 620-627.

Skyt Nielsen, H., and Svarer, M. (2009). Educational Homogamy: How Much is Opportunities?
   The Journal of Human Resources, 44(4), 1066-1086.

mieja, M., Stolarski, M. Assortative Mating for Emotional Intelligence. (2018).Current
  Psychology 37, 180­187

Sundhedsstyrelsens opfølgningsgruppe. (2005). Udviklingen i den børne- og ungdoms-
   psykiatriske virksomhed. København: Sundhedsstyrelsen.

Sundhedsstyrelsens opfølgningsgruppe. (2001). Børne- og ungdomspsykiatrisk virksomhed -
   den fremtidige tilrettelæggelse. København: Sundhedsstyrelsen.

Vernon, P. A., Petrides, K. V., Bratko, D., & Schermer, J. A. (2008). A behavioral genetic study
   of trait emotional intelligence. Emotion, 8(5), 635­642.

Videnscenter for Autisme. (2006). National Autisme Plan ­ Opsporing og udredning.

Weiss, Y. (1997). The Formation and Dissolution of Families: Why Marry? Who Marries
  Whom? And What Happens Upon Divorce? Ch. 3 in Handbook of Population and Family
  Economics. Rosenzweig and Stark, eds., pp. 81-123, Elsevier.



                                                                                               38
Werling D. M. and Geschwind, D. H. (2013). Sex differences in autism spectrum disorders.
  Current Opinion in Neurology. 26(2): 146­153.

Winiowiecka-Kowalnik, B., & Nowakowska, B. A. (2019). Genetics and epigenetics of autism
  spectrum disorder--current evidence in the field. Journal of applied genetics, 60(1), 37-47.

Wheelwright, S., Baron-Cohen, S., Goldenfeld, N., Delaney, J., Fine, D., Smith, R., ... &
  Wakabayashi, A. (2006). Predicting autism spectrum quotient (AQ) from the systemizing
  quotient-revised (SQ-R) and empathy quotient (EQ). Brain research, 1079(1), 47-56.

Windham, G.C., Fessel, K. and Grether, J. K. (2009). Autism Spectrum Disorders in Relation to
   Parental Occupation in Technical Fields. Autism Research, 2(4), 183-191.

Wright, D. B., Eaton, A. A., & Skagerberg, E. (2015). Occupational segregation and
   psychological gender differences: How empathizing and systemizing help explain the
   distribution of men and women into (some) occupations. Journal of Research in
   Personality, 54, 30-39.

Zhang, Y., Li, N., Li, C., Zhang, Z., Teng, H., Wang, Y., ... & Li, J. (2020). Genetic evidence of
    gender difference in autism spectrum disorder supports the female-protective
    effect. Translational Psychiatry, 10(1), 1-10.

Zwaigenbaum, L., Bauman, M. L., Choueiri, R., Kasari, C., Carter, A., Granpeesheh, D.,
   Mailloux, Z., Smith Roley, S., Wagner, S., Fein, D., Pierce, K., Buie, T., Davis, P. A.,
   Newschaffer, C., Robins, D., Wetherby, A., Stone, W.L., Yirmiya, N., Estes, A., Hansen,
   R.L., McPartland, J.C., Natowicz, M.R. (2015) Early Intervention for Children With
   Autism Spectrum Disorder Under 3 Years of Age: Recommendations for Practice and
   Research Pediatrics October, 136 (Supplement 1) S60-S81




                                                                                                39
                                         Figure 1: Factor Scores for Selected ISCO-88 Occupations

                    2
                                                                                                                                    s           ls                                                                                    ls
                                                                                                                  er s          ist          na                                                                                  na
                                                                                                                wy          om           sio                                                                        sio
                                                                                                          La           on             es                                                                          es
                                                                                                                   Ec             rof                                                                        r of
                                                                                                                              s p
                                                                                                                                                                                             in            gp
                                                                                                                         i ou                                                            sch
                                                                                                                     lig                                                             e era
Professional Skills Factor (Factor 1)



                                                                                                                 Re                                                              innet                  rs
                                                                                                                                                                              ntg
                                                                                                                                                                                io                   me                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                                          lcea                                                                                                to r                                             ls
                                                                                                                                                                    n  cd
                                                                                                                                                                      ie au
                                                                                                                                                                                               g ram                                                                ld
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         oc                                                 na r s
                                                                                                                                                                ar
                                                                                                                                                               ch
                                                                                                                                                                  ay                        ro                                                                  a                                                      sio olle
                                                                                                                                                            re
                                                                                                                                                             im                          rp                                                                 dic                                                    fe s o n tr
                                                                                                                                                          M
                                                                                                                                                          P                         u te                                                             Me              ts                                         ro    c
                             1




                                                                                                                                                                                mp                                                                              ta n                                          p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ry ffic
                                                                                                                                                                           Co                                                                                  s ts
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            siis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sm                                            ife tra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ae                                            dw ir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   t e r h                                           mi A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          m      pu C                                       an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Co                                         ing
                                                                                                                                                                            rs                                                                                               rs
                                                                                                                                                                        rke                                                                                               Nu
                                                                                                                                                                     wo
                                                                                                                                                            -c   are
                                                                                                                                                        ild
                                                                                                                                                     Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      to r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          s                                                           ffi c
              0




                                                                                                  rs                                                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                        a   tte                                                                                                             p   era                                                     li    ce
                                                                                     dh                                                                                                                  to                                                          Po
                                                                             a   n                                                                                                                l an
                                                                     ke
                                                                          rs                                                                                                                g-p
                                                                ma                                                                                                                    nin
                                                              ss                                                                                                               e fi
                                                         re                                                                                                                 s-r
                                                     d                                                                                                                 ga
                                                 rs,                                                                                                               al -
                                             ilo                                                                                                           a   tu r
                                          Ta                                                                                                            dn
                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                               -a
                                                                                                                                le      um
                                                                                                                            tro
-1




                                                                                                                         Pe                                    n   ers
                                                                                                                                         rs d              joi
                                                                                                                                     itte an
                                                                                                                                 e tfers
                                                                                                                           d pipe n
                                                                                                                        an   rp
                                                                                                                         Ca
                                                                                                                    ers
                                                                                                               mb
                                                                                                        Plu


                                          -1                                                   0                        1                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                      Systems and Ordering Skills Factor (Factor 2)
                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ls
                                                                                                                                   ists                                                                         er s                                                                  als                    na
                                                                                                                              om                                                                              wy                                                             on                        sio
                                                                                                                      on                                                                                 La                                                              ssi                         es
                                                                                                                    Ec                                                                                                                                              fe                   r of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            s   pro                    gp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     i ou                         in
                                                                                                                                   ers                                                                                                        lig                              ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ea
 Professional Skills Factor (Factor 1)




                                                                                                                              e                                                                                                            Re                        nt
                                                                              rs                                          gin                                                                                                                                 ti o
                                                                           me                                     al
                                                                                                                       en                                                              to r
                                                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ca                                         ls
                                                                     ram                                      ni c                                                                oc                                             s                 ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        u                                      a
                                                               rog                                        a                                                                  ld                                           ller              ry                                          ssi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            on
                                                          rp                                           ch                                                              ica                                            tr o               ma                                        fe
                                                     te                                      Me                                                  ts M e d                                                    co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pri                                       pro
                                                  pu
                              1




                                              m                                                                                             ta n                                                        ffic                                                             ry
                                           Co                                s ts                                                        sis                                                      tra                                                           i fe
                                                                    e      mi                                                          as                                                 Air                                                                idw
                                                                 Ch                                                       u   te r                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                       mp                                                                                                                        a   nd
                                                                                                                  Co                                                                                                                       ing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rs                                                                         rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Nu                                                                        rke
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        wo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ild-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ers
                                                                                                                                                                                                        to r
                                                                                                                                                                                                            s                                                                                                                      ffi c
               0




                                                                                                                                               rs                                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                     a   tte                                                 p   era                                                                                                                      lice
                                                                                                                                  dh                                                      to                                                                                                                           Po
                                                                                                                          a   n                                                    l an
                                                                                                                  ke
                                                                                                                       rs                                                    g-p
                                                                                                            a                                                         nin
                                                                                                        ssm                                                    e fi
                                                                                                                                                            s-r
                                                                                                  dre                                                  ga
                                                                                        rs,                                                        al -
                                                                                ilo                                                       a    tu r
                                                                             Ta                                                        dn
                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                                                                              -a
                                                                                                                 le     um
                                                                                                             tro
 -1




                                                                                                          Pe                                                     ers
                                                                                                                                                          oi n
                                                                                                                                                n       dj                                     er s
                                                                                                                                             sa                                         fitt
                                                                                                                                n        te r                               i pe
                                                                                                                            rpe                                           dp
                                                                                                                         Ca                                          an
                                                                                                                                                               ers
                                                                                                                                                          mb
                                                                                                                                                    Plu


                                          -2                                                 -1                   0              1                                                                                                                                   2                                                    3
                                                                                                        Communication Skills Factor (Factor 3)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ller
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n   tr o                                                                a   ls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    co                                                                      on
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ffic                                                                     ssi




                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         tra                                                                     fe
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Air                                                                     pro
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i fe

              Systems and Ordering Skills Factor (Factor 2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         m    idw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a   nd                                                                            ers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ing                                                                            o   ffi c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rs
                                                                                                                                                                                                to   rs                            Nu                                                                                 lice
                                                                                                s ts                                                              n ts                   d   oc                                                                                                                    Po
                                                                                              mi                                                           sta                      al
                                                                                       Ch
                                                                                          e                                                            ssi                    dic
                                                                                                                                             te   ra                     Me
                                                                                                                                 m        pu
                                                                                                                              Co
                                            1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         na
                                                                                                  ers                                                                                                                                                                                              sio
                                                                                             mm                                                                                                                                                                                                  es
                                                                                       gra                                                                                                                    to r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  s                                                                       r of
                                                                                   pro                                                                                                                    era                                                                      in   gp
                                                                            te r                                                                                                                     op                                                                         ch
                                                                       pu                                                                        ers                                     la     nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      nt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ea
                                                                Co
                                                                   m                                                                     i ne                                        g-p                                                                       ti o
                                                                                                                                   e   ng                        nin                                                                                         ca                                        rs
                                                                                                                              al                            e fi                                                                                    ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         u                                         rke
                                                                                                                   a      ni c                           s-r                                                                                   ry                                               wo
                                                                                                                ch                                  l -ga ers                                                                               ma                                          ca
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             re
                                                                                                             Me                                  a
                                                                                                                                             tu r o i n                                                                                 Pri                                          ld-
                                                                                                                                           na nd j                                                                                                                              C hlis
                                                                                                                                       nd      a                                                                                                                             i o na
                                                                                                                                    - a ters                                    er s                                                                                       ss
                                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                                                                 u pie  sn
                                                                                                                                         ts                                fitt                                                                                       fe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pro
                          0




                                                                                                                           t role a o
                                                                                                                                     rm                              pi pe                                                                               us
                                                                                                                         Pe coC   n
                                                                                                                                                               an
                                                                                                                                                                   d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ligi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                               E                                                                                       er s                 Re
                                                                                                                                                          ers                                                        wy
                                                                                                                                                  lu   mb                                                       La
                                                                                                                                               P

                                                                                                                                                             rs
                                                                                                                                                       tte
                                                                                                                                             d    ha
                                                                                                                                          an
                                                                                                                                     rs
                                                                                                                            a   ke
                                                                                                                     s   sm
                                                                                                                 dre
                                                                                                           rs,
                                       -1




                                                                                                     ilo
                                                                                                  Ta


                                                                -2                                          -1                0              1                                                                                                                        2                                               3
                                                                                                                    Communication Skills Factor (Factor 3)




Notes: The figure shows examples of standardized factor scores for each labeled occupation. Description of each
factor is in the main text in Section II.I.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          41
             Figure 2: Deming (2017) Measures for Selected ISCO-88 Occupations


                                                                                                                                           s
                             4                                                                                                ol       ler
                                                                                                                         n tr
                                                                                                                      co
                                                                                                              a f fic
                                                                                                            tr
                                                                                                       Air             to r
                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                  era
                                                                                                            t op
                                                                                                        lan
                                                                                                 a   sp
                                                                                            dg
                             3.5



                                                                                       an                                                         rs
                                                                              u   m-                                                        me
                                                                          ole                                                         ram
                                                                  P   e tr                                                    pro
                                                                                                                                  g
                                                                                                                       te r
                                                                                                                pu                              ts
                                                                                                        Co
                                                                                                           m                         ta n
                                                                                                                                  sis                                                                       ls
                                                                                                                            r   as                                                                  ion
                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                 Routineness




                                                                                                                   p   u te                                                                 fe   ss
                                                                                                            Co
                                                                                                               m                                                                        pro
                         3




                                                                                                                                                                                   ry
                                                                                                                                                                            i fe
                                                                                                                                                                     m   idw
                                                                                                                                                              a   nd
                                                                                                       rs                                               ing
                                                                                                 tte                            s ts               rs
                                                                                      d     ha                                mi                Nu
                                                                                   an                                 e
                                                                                                                   Ch
                                                                           ers              er s                                                         rs
                                                                        ak             fitt                                                          ice
                                                                    sm            i pe                                                          o ff
              2.5




                                                                  s
                                                              dre            d p                                             ers           lice                       s
                                                          r s,           a n                                           i n e           P o                        to r             ls
                                                      ilo            ers                            rs               ng                                        oc               na
                                                   Ta                                                             le                                        ld              sio
                                                                  mb                           i ne            ca                                       ica
                                                               lu                           jo             n i                                        d                 fe s                   er s
                                                             P
                                                                                     a nd              cha                                      Me ists pro                                 wy
                                                                              te r
                                                                                   s               Me                                                  m
                                                                                                                                                    no chin
                                                                                                                                                                 g                     La
                                                                            n                                                                    o
                                                                       rpe                                                                    E c te a
                                                                    Ca                                                                             on
                                                                                                                                               ati
                                                                                                                           r k ers educ
                             2




                                                                                                                       w o         r y                                                                            ls
                                                                                                                    re        im
                                                                                                                                 a                                                                             na
                                                                                                                -ca       Pr                                                                               sio
                                                                                                         h ild                                                                                    r o fe s
                                                                                                        C                                                                                      sp
                                                                                                                                                                                          i ou
                                                                                                                                                                                      lig
                                                                                                                                                                                 Re


                                              2                  2.5                                 3                             3.5                    4        4.5                                                                 5                            5.5                                    6
                                                                                                                                                     Social Skills




                                                                       ists rs
                                                                  om i nee
                                                               on
                                                           Ec l engts
                             5




                                                              ica is
                                                           an em
                                                       ch Ch
                                                    Me                    me
                                                                             rs
                                                                     ram
              Non-Routine Analytical Skills




                                                                ro g
                                                             rp
                                                        u te
                                                     mp
                                                  Co                                                                                   o   rs
                                                                                                                                   rat
                                   4




                                                                                                                          o   pe
                                                                                                                       nt                                                                                                                                                           rs
                                                                                                               -pl
                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             na
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ls                         c to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       sio                              do                             ry
                                                                                                         ing                                                                                                                         es                       ic   al                          i fe
                                                                                   ers         e fi
                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r of                       ed                                dw
                                                                             oi n           s-r                  n ts                                                                                                         gp                       M                                   mi
                                                                         d j l-ga                            sta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       d
                                                                      an         a                       ssi                 s                                                                                         hi n                                                         an
                                                                 e rs        tu r                      a                ller                                                                                     e   ac                                                      ing
                                                             n t         n a
                                                                                               u te
                                                                                                    r               tr o                                                                                  nt                                                       Nu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      rs
                                                       a rpe and                    s        p                 con                                                                                ati
                                                                                                                                                                                                      o
                                                    C         m-                 er   rs o m
                                                                                                          ffic                                                                                 uc
                        3




                                                          leu                fitt atte C              tra                                                                                 ed
                                                     tro               i pe , h                Air                                                                                  ry
                                                  Pe                d p kers                                                   er s                                              ma
                                                               a  n      a                                                 wy                                              Pri
                                                        b  ers ressm                                                   La
                                                     m        d
                                                  Plu lors,                                                                                                                                                                       rs
                                                      i                                                                                                                                                                     ice
                                                   Ta                                                                                                                                                        e       o ff
                                                                                                                                                                                                     P   olic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rs                                                                                 n   als
              2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                rke                                                                                sio
                                                                                                                                                                                                             wo                                                                        ro   fe s
                                                                                                                                                                                                    -c   are                                                                    u   sp
                                                                                                                                                                                             ild                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                                                                          Ch                                                                          ligi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Re
                             1




                                              2                       2.5                                    3                                   3.5        4                                                                 4.5                                   5                                 5.5
                                                                                                                                                 Service Skills

Notes: The top panel shows averages of Deming's (2017) routineness and social skills measures for each labeled
occupation, while the bottom panel shows averages of the non-routine analytical skills and service skills measures
for those same occupations.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42
                   Figure 3: Cross-Sectional Assortative Mating by Skill Factors




Notes: Each panel shows binscatters of father's and mother's Skill Factors, residualized with respect to child's sex,
parents' age, mother's marital status, child's birth year, parents' educational attainment, parental income history
from ages 25 through 34 (as described in Section IV), and parish of birth fixed effects. Each panel shows the same
measure for each parent; the X-axis measures standardized units of the relevant maternal measure, and the Y-axis
measures standardized units of the relevant paternal measure. The solid lines in each panel represent linear fits from
OLS regressions of the relevant paternal measure on the relevant maternal measure.




                                                                                                                   43
         Figure 4: Changes in Assortative Mating on Residualized Factors over Time




Notes: Each panel shows coefficient estimates and 95% confidence intervals from the interaction of birth cohort
and maternal residualized factors (PSF, SOF, and CSF) in linear models of paternal measures on those interactions.
See Equation (2) in the text for more details. We residualized each factor with respect to child's sex, parents' age,
mother's marital status, child's birth year, parents' educational attainment, parental income history from ages 25
through 34, and municipality fixed effects.




                                                                                                                   44
                      Table 1: Highest and Lowest Loadings for Principal Factors of Importance Scores

                                  Factor 1 (48%)                                  Factor 2 (19%)                                       Factor 3 (9%)
                                                               A. Highest 10 Loadings

 Social Perceptiveness                 0.034         Reaction Time                     0.069          Social Perceptiveness                0.099
 Speaking                              0.034         Troubleshooting                   0.068          Peripheral Vision                    0.093
 Oral Expression                       0.034         Operation Monitoring              0.063          Stamina                              0.092
 Active Learning                       0.033         Flexibility of Closure            0.055          Oral Expression                      0.085
 Inductive Reasoning                   0.028         Inductive Reasoning               0.053          Speaking                             0.077
 Critical Thinking                     0.027         Peripheral Vision                 0.051          Gross Body Coordination              0.075
 Written Expression                    0.027         Systems Analysis                  0.049          Oral Comprehension                   0.063
 Oral Comprehension                    0.027         Equipment Selection               0.048          Response Orientation                 0.062
 Reading Comprehension                 0.026         Perceptual Speed                  0.048          Speech Clarity                       0.057
 Writing                               0.025         Systems Evaluation                0.047          Spatial Orientation                  0.056
                                                                B. Lowest 5 Loadings
 Dynamic Strength                     -0.028         Explosive Strength                0.002          Complex Problem Solving              -0.067
 Extent Flexibility                   -0.032         Trunk Strength                    0.002          Operations Analysis                  -0.074
 Reaction Time                        -0.032         Rate Control                     -0.001          Equipment Selection                  -0.084
 Repairing                            -0.034         Programming                      -0.003          Mathematical Reasoning               -0.094
 Manual Dexterity                      -0.044        Speaking                          -0.008          Troubleshooting                     -0.099
Notes: Cell entries are estimates of the scores of predictions using the first, second, and third factors. We first performed factor analysis on all 87
Skills and Abilities across all occupations in the O*Net dataset, as described in the text.




                                                                                                                                                          45
       Table 2: Correlations Across SOC Occupation Codes of Factors and Deming (2017)
                                         Measures

                                                                                                    Non-
                                                                                       Social      Routine
                                  PSF         SOF          CSF        Routineness      Skills     Analytical

  PSF                              -            -             -            -              -            -
  SOF                            0.05           -             -            -              -            -
  CSF                            0.08         0.06            -            -              -            -
  Routineness                    -0.20        0.01         -0.30           -              -            -
  Social Skills                  0.87         0.28          0.28         -0.33            -            -
  Non-Routine Analytical         0.64         0.43         -0.40         0.01           0.57           -
  Service Skills                 0.59         0.09          0.50         -0.27          0.69         0.15

Notes: Descriptions of PSF, SOF, CSF, Routineness, Social Skills, Non-Routine Analytical, and Service Skills are
in the main text in Section II.




                                                                                                               46
                                        Table 3: Summary Statistics

                                                                 (1)               (2)             (3)

                                                                 All
                                                               Children    Child with ASD   Child without ASD

                                     Panel A: Child and Parent Characteristics

Diagnosed with ASD                                              0.017               -               -
                                                               (0.130)              -               -
Diagnosed with ASD by Age 8                                     0.009             0.443             -
                                                               (0.094)           (0.497)            -
Child is Female                                                 0.487             0.227           0.491
                                                               (0.500)           (0.419)         (0.500)
Mother is Married at Child's Birth                              0.593             0.562           0.594
                                                               (0.491)           (0.496)         (0.491)
Father's Age at Child's Birth                                   32.3              31.6            32.3
                                                                (4.6)             (4.6)           (4.6)
Mother's Age at Child's Birth                                   30.3              29.6            30.3
                                                                (4.3)             (4.5)           (4.3)
Father's Education - Bachelor's Degree or Higher                0.292             0.251           0.293
                                                               (0.455)           (0.433)         (0.455)
Father's Education - Some Post-HS Education                     0.570             0.567           0.570
                                                               (0.495)           (0.495)         (0.495)
Father's Education - High School or Less                        0.138             0.182           0.137
                                                               (0.345)           (0.386)         (0.344)
Mother's Education - Bachelor's Degree or Higher                0.425             0.376           0.426
                                                               (0.494)           (0.485)         (0.495)
Mother's Education - Some Post-HS Education                     0.475             0.489           0.475
                                                               (0.499)           (0.500)         (0.499)
Mother's Education - High School or Less                        0.100             0.134           0.099
                                                               (0.300)           (0.340)         (0.299)

                                Panel B: Factor measures of Parents (Standardized)

Father's PSF                                                      0.031           -0.064          0.033
                                                                (0.999)          (0.969)         (1.000)
Father's SOF                                                      0.014           0.016           0.014
                                                                (0.998)          (0.999)         (0.998)
Father's CSF                                                     -0.015           -0.021          -0.015
                                                                (1.001)           (1.03)         (1.001)
Mother's PSF                                                      0.023           -0.100          0.025
                                                                (0.983)          (0.997)         (0.982)
Mother's SOF                                                      0.008           -0.044          0.009
                                                                (0.993)          (0.971)         (0.993)
Mother's CSF                                                     -0.001           0.039           -0.002
                                                               (1.000)           (1.018)         (1.000)




                                                                                                           47
                              Panel C: Deming (2017) Scores of Parents (Standardized)

Father's Routineness                                               -0.005           0.102                 -0.007
                                                                  (0.998)          (1.014)               (0.998)
Father's Social Skills                                              0.025           -0.091                0.027
                                                                  (0.999)          (0.952)               (0.999)
Father's Non-Routine Analytic Skills                                0.035           -0.062                0.037
                                                                  (0.997)          (0.995)               (0.997)
Father's Service Skills                                             0.008           -0.032                0.009
                                                                  (1.002)          (0.990)               (1.003)
Mother's Routineness                                               -0.000           0.022                 -0.001
                                                                  (0.998)          (1.005)               (0.998)
Mother's Social Skills                                              0.013           -0.101                0.015
                                                                  (0.991)          (0.969)               (0.991)
Mother's Non-Routine Analytic Skills                                0.013           -0.070                0.014
                                                                  (0.996)          (0.990)               (0.996)
Mother's Service Skills                                             0.005           -0.034                0.006
                                                                  (0.997)          (0.986)               (0.997)

Observations                                                     738,917           12,646               726,271

Notes: Means with standard deviations provided in parentheses. All measures in Panels B and C are standardized
within gender. ICD-10 diagnostic codes for ASD include F84.0, F84.1, F84.5, F84.8, and F84.9. We consider a child
as having ASD if he or she is diagnosed by the end of our observation period (which ranges from 5 to 19 years old).
Indicators for diagnosis by a given age are restricted only to those cohorts that are observed for the entirety of the
relevant age span.




                                                                                                                   48
Table 4: The Association of ASD with Measures of Parental Skills as Measured
                   by O*NET Skills and Abilities Factors
                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)

Paternal PSF                    -0.088***             -0.032            -0.087***             -0.033
                                 (0.021)             (0.022)             (0.021)             (0.022)

Maternal PSF                    -0.139***            -0.058**           -0.141***           -0.058**
                                 (0.024)              (0.025)            (0.024)             (0.025)

Paternal SOF                       0.024            0.042***              0.023             0.041***
                                  (0.015)            (0.015)             (0.014)             (0.015)

Maternal SOF                       -0.022             -0.006              -0.021              -0.007
                                  (0.018)            (0.018)             (0.018)             (0.018)

Paternal CSF                     -0.029**           -0.062***           -0.031**           -0.063***
                                  (0.014)            (0.014)             (0.014)            (0.014)

Maternal CSF                     0.089***            0.030*             0.088***             0.032*
                                  (0.018)            (0.018)             (0.018)             (0.018)

Paternal × Maternal PSF                                                   -0.012              0.004
                                                                         (0.019)             (0.019)

Paternal × Maternal SOF                                                   -0.016              -0.006
                                                                         (0.014)             (0.014)

Paternal × Maternal CSF                                                   0.012               0.015
                                                                         (0.015)             (0.015)


Observations                     738,892             738,892             738,892            738,892

Income controls                                         X                                       X
Notes: Cell entries are estimates from linear probability models of ASD diagnoses. Sample size is
738,892 in all specifications. Mean ASD incidence is 1.71 percent in all specifications. Section II
includes the Descriptions of the Factors. Controls include gender of the child, parental age, marital
status of parents at birth, indicators of parental field of study, parental income history between ages
25 and 34, cohort fixed effects and parish of birth fixed effects. *, **, *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the birth
cohort and parental education level.




                                                                                                          49
     Table 5: Assessing Extreme-Brain Theories of ASD Using Principal Factors of Skill

                                                Without Factor Main Effects              Including Factor Main Effects
                                                            (1)                                       (2)
                                                 Paternal          Maternal                Paternal          Maternal
                                                    (a)               (b)                     (a)               (b)
Extreme Empathizing                                0.088           0.468**                   0.040             0.260
(SOF ­ CSF) <= -2                                 (0.070)           (0.218)                 (0.101)           (0.241)

Empathizing                                        0.103**            0.165***               0.086                0.051
(SOF ­ CSF) between -1 and -2                      (0.041)             (0.041)              (0.060)              (0.060)

Systemizing                                       0.185***              -0.000             0.222***               0.090
(SOF ­ CSF) between 1 and 2                        (0.047)             (0.051)              (0.072)              (0.067)

Extreme Systemizing                               0.376***            0.217***             0.450***             0.458***
(SOF ­ CSF) >= -2                                  (0.047)             (0.057)              (0.108)              (0.124)

PSF (Linear)                                           -                  -                 -0.046**              -0.040
                                                       -                  -                  (0.022)             (0.025)

SOF (Linear)                                           -                  -                  -0.042             -0.078**
                                                       -                  -                 (0.036)              (0.037)

CSF (Linear)                                           -                  -                  0.005              0.089**
                                                       -                  -                 (0.035)             (0.040)

Notes: Cell entries are estimates from linear probability models of ASD diagnoses as a function of "brain types" as
described by Baron-Cohen (2003). For example, in the first column the "Paternal Extreme Empathizing" indicator
equals 1 if the father's SOF index lies more than 2 standard deviations below the father's CSF index, the "Paternal
Empathizing" indicator equals 1 if the father's CSF index lies between 1 and 2 standard deviations above the father's
SOF index, and so on. The excluded category is the "balanced brain", in which the father's SOF and CSF indices lie
within one standard deviation of each other. Sample size is 738,836 in all specifications. Mean ASD incidence is
1.77 percent in all specifications. Controls include gender of the child, parental age, marital status of parents at birth,
indicators of parental field of study, parental income history between ages 25 and 34, cohort fixed effects and parish
of birth fixed effects. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard
errors are clustered at the birth cohort and parental education level.




                                                                                                                           50
   Table 6: The Association of ASD with Skills, as Measured by Deming's
                            (2017) Skill Indices

                                         (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)

Paternal Routineness                  0.120***                                              0.103***
                                       (0.019)                                               (0.020)

Maternal Routineness                    -0.028                                              -0.048*
                                       (0.019)                                              (0.025)

Paternal Social Skills                             -0.130***                              -0.166***
                                                    (0.018)                                 (0.030)

Maternal Social Skills                             -0.034*                                  -0.063*
                                                   (0.020)                                  (0.036)

Paternal Non-routine Analytic Skills                           -0.043**                       0.024
                                                                (0.018)                      (0.022)

Maternal Non-routine Analytic Skills                             -0.027                       0.014
                                                                (0.020)                      (0.030)

Paternal Service Skills                                                      -0.047***      0.088***
                                                                              (0.016)        (0.024)

Maternal Service Skills                                                        -0.015         0.006
                                                                              (0.020)        (0.031)



Notes: Sample size is 738,917 in all specifications. Mean ASD incidence is 1.71 percent in all
specifications. Controls include gender of the child, parental age, marital status of parents at
birth, indicators of parental field of study, parental income history between ages 25 and 34,
cohort fixed effects and parish of birth fixed effects. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered at the birth cohort and
parental education level.




                                                                                                        51
               Table 7: The Association of ASD with Measures of Parental Skills,
                                    by Gender of the Child
                                                                                                Using Deming's
                  Using Principal Factors of Skills
                                                                                                   measures

                        Male             Female                                               Male          Female

                         (1)                (2)                                                (3)            (4)


Paternal PSF            -0.029            -0.032             Paternal Routineness           0.153***       0.054***
                       (0.035)            (0.02)                                             (0.031)        (0.020)

Maternal PSF          -0.089**            -0.020             Maternal Routineness             -0.066         -0.029
                       (0.04)            (0.023)                                             (0.043)        (0.023)

Paternal SOF          0.066**             0.013              Paternal Social Skills         -0.271***       -0.056*
                      (0.026)            (0.016)                                             (0.051)        (0.032)

Maternal SOF            -0.011            -0.000            Maternal Social Skills           -0.107*         -0.010
                       (0.031)           (0.017)                                             (0.060)        (0.036)

Paternal CSF         -0.093***           -0.032**            Paternal Non-routine             0.053          -0.003
                      (0.026)             (0.016)               Analytic Skills              (0.039)        (0.025)

Maternal CSF            0.044             0.016              Maternal Non-routine             0.027          0.000
                       (0.030)           (0.018)               Analytic Skills               (0.053)        (0.029)

                                                            Paternal Service Skills         0.163***         0.012
                                                                                             (0.042)        (0.025)

                                                            Maternal Service Skills           0.024          -0.014
                                                                                             (0.052)        (0.026)

Observations          379,136            359,756                                             379,149       359,768
Mean Dep.              2.645              0.850                                               2.645         0.850

Notes: Controls include gender of the child, parental age, marital status of parents at birth, indicators of parental
field of study parental income history between ages 25 and 34, cohort fixed effects and parish of birth fixed effects.
*, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Standard errors are clustered
at the birth cohort and parental education level.




                                                                                                                      52
               Table 8: The Association of ASD with Measures of Grandfathers' Skills

                Using Principal
                Factors of Skills                                           Using Deming's Measures
                      (1)                                      (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)

Paternal PSF         -0.036         Paternal Routineness     0.037*                                        0.028
                    (0.022)                                  (0.020)                                      (0.022)

Maternal PSF        -0.034*         Maternal Routineness      0.017                                        0.013
                    (0.021)                                  (0.020)                                      (0.022)

Paternal SOF         0.014          Paternal Social Skills             -0.051**                            -0.070
                    (0.020)                                             (0.021)                           (0.043)

Maternal SOF         -0.020         Maternal Social Skills             -0.070***                         -0.112***
                    (0.021)                                             (0.020)                           (0.040)

Paternal CSF         -0.027         Paternal Non-routine                             -0.023                0.016
                    (0.019)            Analytic Skills                              (0.021)               (0.032)

Maternal CSF         0.002          Maternal Non-routine                           -0.053**                0.008
                    (0.019)            Analytic Skills                              (0.021)               (0.029)

                                      Paternal Service                                         -0.034*     0.022
                                           Skills                                              (0.020)    (0.033)

                                      Maternal Service                                          -0.022    0.058*
                                           Skills                                              (0.020)    (0.033)

Observations        422,103                                  422,422   422,422      422,422    422,422   422,422



Notes: Controls include gender of the child, parental age, marital status of parents at birth, indicators of
parental field of study, parental income history between ages 25 and 34, cohort fixed effects and parish
of birth fixed effects. *, **, *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. Dependent variable mean = 1.71 in all specifications. Standard errors are clustered at the
birth cohort and parental education level.




                                                                                                                  53
Appendix A. Autism Diagnosis and Service Provision in Denmark

         Most Danish health care services, including the diagnostic evaluations and treatment of
ASD, are free of charge to all citizens (Danish Ministry of Health and Prevention, 2008). There
is strong evidence (Kraznik et al., 1997) that differences in health drive overall healthcare
utilization rather than differences in geography or demographics (other than gender).
         If parents or other caregivers notice that a child is not following the typical
developmental path, they may request that the child be evaluated by a medical professional. The
first step in the diagnosis of very young children often involves a visit to the general
practitioner, who acts as a gatekeeper for specialist treatment. 32 The general practitioner
discusses the caregiver's concerns, collects information on the child's medical history (e.g.,
prenatal and perinatal conditions, hereditary dispositions), and conducts a preliminary
assessment of the child's development, focusing on criteria outlined by the International
Classification of Diseases (ICD) diagnostic manual. If the general practitioner's initial
evaluation raises concerns about a mental health problem, the child is referred from primary
care to specialist care. Given that there are no screening tools that can unequivocally detect
ASD, the medical guidelines recommend that all children with suspected ASD be referred to a
specialist (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2001).
         A child who is referred to specialist care is evaluated by an interdisciplinary team that
consists of a child and adolescent psychiatrist, a clinical or educational psychologist, and often a
speech and language therapist. 33 Parents usually have very limited power in choosing the
specialist due to long waiting times. According to Daley et al. (2015), until the 2000s, "it was
not uncommon for children to wait up to two years to be seen in regional child and adolescent
psychiatry departments" [p. 19]. Even in recent years, waiting times remain an important
problem: in 2005, 35 percent of children had to wait at least 3 months before their first
psychiatric evaluation, and 1 percent had to wait more than a year (Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2015).




32
  School-age children are typically referred to a specialist by school psychologists.
33
  Children referred to specialists can be treated by psychiatrists at regional psychiatric hospitals or in private
practice (under contract with the Danish Regions). General practitioners refer patients to private practices only if
regional hospitals are overbooked. Hence, the bulk of child and adolescent psychiatric care is provided by regional
hospitals. Currently, only 16 private psychiatry practices have formal agreements with the Danish Regions. These
private practices cared for 4,049 patients in 2011. Hospital-based psychiatric wards, on the other hand, provided
care for 22,788 children in the same year. It is possible to see a specialist without a referral, but these specialists
work at private psychiatric clinics that do not contract with the Danish regions. In this case, patients have to cover
the fees of these providers out of pocket. For more details on the structure and organization of mental health
services in Denmark, see Chapter 3 in Daley et al. (2015).

                                                                                                                     54
        The assessment by the interdisciplinary team includes a structured observation, a
diagnostic interview, a psychological examination, and a medical examination. 34 Structured
observation refers to a 30-60 minute evaluation of the child in which the examiner assesses the
child's social and communication skills through a series of structured and semi-structured tasks.
The assessment uses autism-specific instruments, such as Autism Diagnostic Observation
Schedule (ADOS). The diagnostic interview involves collecting the child's full developmental
history through a structured interview of the parents. 35 The purpose of the psychological
examination is to create a cognitive profile of the child and to examine the child's learning
strategies. 36 Finally, the team conducts a physical examination. 37 A diagnosis of ASD is made if
the child presents developmental and behavioral features consistent with criteria outlined by the
International Classification of Diseases.
        Children who are diagnosed with ASD are entitled to free medical care. ASD care is
tailored to the specific needs of each child and consists of behavioral therapy and
pharmaceutical treatment. The pedagogical and psychological treatments provided to children
aim to help them acquire new skills and to ultimately function independently in everyday life.
Therapies for children with severe developmental delays focus on language development and
skills such as imitation, attention, and play and exchange. Treatment of high functioning ASD
children targets other skills such as social interactions and self-help. While there are no specific
pharmaceutical drugs used in treatment of ASD, children with ASD receive pharmaceutical
treatment for psychiatric and somatic comorbidities (such as depression and ADHD). In rare
cases, children may be prescribed antipsychotic drugs to address aggressive behavior. 38
        Children with ASD are also eligible to receive special education. The type of special
education is determined in consultation with the child's parents after the psychological
assessment. If the child needs fewer than 9 hours of special needs education per week, (s)he is
placed in mainstream classrooms with pullout time with a special needs teacher. If the child
needs at least 9 hours of special needs education per week, then instruction takes place in
remedial classes or at a special-needs school.


34
   For a description of autism care in Denmark, see Videnscenter for Autisme (2006).
35
   Medical guidelines in Denmark recommend the interview to involve autism-specific tools, such as the Autism
Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R).
36
   Different neuropsychological tests are used depending on the child's level of development and language
impairment.
37
   The medical exam always includes a measurement of head circumference and a screening for sensory defects, but
it can also include an examination of vision and hearing and an assessment of signs of specific comorbidities
associated with ASD (e.g., neurological examination for epilepsy, examination of the skin for tuberous sclerosis).
38
   In Denmark, Risperidone is the only antipsychotic drug currently approved for treatment of aggressiveness in
children with ASD, and only for children who are at least 6 years old.

                                                                                                               55
        Finally, parents of children with ASD can apply for government support in accordance
with the Danish Social Service Act. While parents are generally provided some counseling when
a child receives a diagnosis of ASD, they can ask for additional funds to enroll in courses to
understand their child's behavior, to create a family environment conducive to their child's
progress, and to deal with the stress of caring for a disabled child. They can also request
compensation to cover the direct costs of caring for a child with ASD (e.g., technical equipment
needed at home, additional costs associated with special dietary restrictions, or additional costs
associated with hired professional help) as well as compensation for lost earnings. Finally,
parents can request to have non-financial resources, such as professional childcare at specialized
institutions.




                                                                                                 56
Appendix B. Descriptions of O*NET Skills and Abilities Used in the Construction of EQ
and SQ Indices

        In order to consider a link between the three main factors we identify in the factor
analysis of O*NET skills and abilities and conceptualizations in the psychiatric literature of
systemizing and empathizing, we created a concordance between the individual skills and
abilities in the O*NET and the (non-filler) questions in in both of the EQ and SQ-R
questionnaires in psychology (Baron-Cohen and Wheelwright, 2004; Wheelwright et al.,
2006).We did this by making a determination about whether an individual with a specific skill
or ability in the O*NET would respond with either "agree" or "strongly agree" to each item in
the questionnaires. For example, consider the skill of social perceptiveness, defined in the
O*NET as "Being aware of others' reactions and understanding why they react as they do." We
determined that a person with social perceptiveness would have "agreed" or "strongly agreed"
with 23 of the 40 non-filler items in the modified EQ questionnaire, so we assigned social
perceptiveness an EQ value of 23.
        We found that one additional ability and six skills mapped well with the modified EQ
questionnaires. They are, respectively: problem sensitivity ("the ability to tell when something is
wrong or is likely to go wrong. It does not involve solving the problem, only recognizing that
there is a problem"), active listening ("giving full attention to what other people are saying,
taking time to understand the points being made, asking questions as appropriate, and not
interrupting at inappropriate times"), instructing ( "teaching others how to do something"),
negotiation ("bringing others together and trying to reconcile differences"), persuasion
("persuading others to change their minds or behavior"), service orientation ("actively looking
for ways to help people"), and speaking ("talking to others to convey information effectively").
We assigned values to all of these skills and abilities based on the number of questions in the
modified EQ questionnaire that we associated with them. In Panel A of Table A2, we provide
the number of questions in the modified EQ questionnaire to which each ability and skill has
been associated (that number is zero for all abilities and skills not shown in the table).
        The SQ measure we use is a composite measure of ten abilities and eight skills. The
abilities are: category flexibility (defined as "the ability to generate or use different sets of rules
for combining or grouping things in different ways", deductive reasoning (defined as "The
ability to apply general rules to specific problems to produce answers that make sense"),
flexibility of closure ("The ability to identify or detect a known pattern (a figure, object, word, or
sound) that is hidden in other distracting material"), inductive reasoning (defined as "the ability
to combine pieces of information to form general rules or conclusions -includes finding a

                                                                                                      57
relationship among seemingly unrelated events"), information ordering (defined as "the ability
to arrange things or actions in a certain order or pattern according to a specific rule or set of
rules ,e.g., patterns of numbers, letters, words, pictures, mathematical operations), mathematical
reasoning (defined as "the ability to choose the right mathematical methods or formulas to solve
a problem"), memorization (defined as "the ability to remember information such as words,
numbers, pictures, and procedures"), number facility (defined as "the ability to add, subtract,
multiply, or divide quickly and correctly"), spatial orientation (defined as "the ability to know
your location in relation to the environment or to know where other objects are in relation to
you"), visualization (defined as "the ability to imagine how something will look after it is
moved around or when its parts are moved or rearranged"). The eight skills are: equipment
maintenance (defined as "performing routine maintenance on equipment and determining when
and what kind of maintenance is needed"), equipment selection (defined as "determining the
kind of tools and equipment needed to do a job"), installation (defined as "installing equipment,
machines, wiring, or programs to meet specifications"), management of financial resources
(defined as "determining how money will be spent to get the work done, and accounting for
these expenditures"), repairing (defined as "repairing machines or systems using the needed
tools"), science (defined as "using scientific rules and methods to solve problems"), time
management (defined as "managing one's own time and the time of others"), troubleshooting
(defined as "determining causes of operating errors and deciding what to do about it"). In Table
A2, we provide a full list of the skills and abilities that we matched to the SQ and EQ questions,
and the SQ and EQ values that correspond to the number of questions to which they matched for
each test.
        We then use these SQ and EQ values to construct overall SQ and EQ indexes for each
occupation. To do this, we also make use of the importance scores in O*NET for each ability
and skill, allowing us to place more weight for each occupation on skills and abilities that
O*NET has determined are more important for the occupation. O*NET assigns these
importance scores based on data collected from answers to a version of the question "How
important is the ability/skill to the occupation?" with answers given on a scale from 1 ("not
important") to 5 ("extremely important").
        Our calculated value of the EQ index for occupation j is:
               1
(1)      =   ×  ,
               




                                                                                                    58
             
where  is the value we assigned to skill/ability k, and  is the O*NET importance
score of skill/ability k in occupation j. As an example, consider the O*NET occupation "Child,
Family, and School Social Workers." O*NET lists the skill of social perceptiveness to have an
importance score of 4.12 for this occupation, and as described above, we assigned social
perceptiveness an EQ value of 23. Thus, the contribution of social perceptiveness to the overall
EQ index for this occupation is 23 × 4.12 = 94.76. We average these products over all
skills/abilities k for the "Child, Family, and School Social Workers" occupation to calculate the
overall occupational EQ index. We construct the SQ measure for each occupation j in a similar
fashion:
               1
(2)     =   ×  ,
              

             
where  is the value we assigned to skill/ability k based on our concordance of the
skill/ability to the modified SQ-R questionnaire (see Table A2).




                                                                                                59
    Table A1: Factor Loadings of Importance Scores for O*NET Skills and
                                  Abilities

                                                Normalized Factor Loadings on
                                        Factor 1          Factor 2        Factor 3
Skill / Ability:                          (1)                (2)                (3)
Active Learning                          0.033             0.031           -0.018
Active Listening                         0.015             0.006           0.034
Arm-Hand Steadiness                     -0.020             0.043           -0.038
Auditory Attention                      -0.005             0.030           0.042
Category Flexibility                     0.011             0.029           -0.016
Complex Problem Solving                  0.024             0.045           -0.067
Control Precision                       -0.020             0.026           -0.030
Coordination                             0.008             0.019           0.042
Critical Thinking                        0.027             0.036           -0.005
Deductive Reasoning                      0.022             0.039           -0.021
Depth Perception                        -0.014             0.046           0.026
Dynamic Flexibility                     -0.010             0.013           0.013
Dynamic Strength                        -0.028             0.030           0.021
Equipment Maintenance                   -0.016             0.021           -0.010
Equipment Selection                     -0.007             0.048           -0.084
Explosive Strength                      -0.010             0.002           0.012
Extent Flexibility                      -0.032             0.023           0.028
Far Vision                              -0.002             0.047           0.027
Finger Dexterity                        -0.009             0.027           -0.030
Flexibility of Closure                   0.000             0.055           -0.007
Fluency of Ideas                         0.021             0.035           -0.025
Glare Sensitivity                       -0.014             0.016           0.055
Gross Body Coordination                 -0.028             0.031           0.075
Gross Body Equilibrium                  -0.015             0.007           0.034
Hearing Sensitivity                     -0.006             0.036           0.049
Inductive Reasoning                      0.028             0.053           -0.011
Information Ordering                     0.007             0.028           -0.023
Installation                            -0.007             0.026           -0.042
Instructing                              0.016             0.017           0.025
Judgment and Decision Making             0.016             0.015           0.032




                                                                                      60
Table A1 (cont.): Factor Loadings of Importance Scores for O*NET Skills and
                                  Abilities
Learning Strategies                                 0.022    0.020    0.042
Management of Financial Resources                   0.011    0.006    0.005
Management of Material Resources                    0.010    0.031    -0.002
Management of Personnel Resources                   0.020    0.026    0.025
Manual Dexterity                                    -0.044   0.033    -0.038
Mathematical Reasoning                              0.024    0.030    -0.094
Mathematics                                         0.006    0.012    -0.032
Memorization                                        0.005    0.012    0.002
Monitoring                                          0.011    0.025    0.022
Multilimb Coordination                              -0.021   0.005    0.039
Near Vision                                         0.002    0.025    -0.021
Negotiation                                         0.019    0.012    0.039
Night Vision                                        -0.010   0.023    0.050
Number Facility                                     0.013    0.031    -0.055
Operation Monitoring                                -0.011   0.063    -0.051
Operation and Control                               -0.020   0.028    -0.007
Operations Analysis                                 0.005    0.027    -0.074
Oral Comprehension                                  0.027    0.006    0.063
Oral Expression                                     0.034    0.011    0.085
Originality                                         0.023    0.039    0.011
Perceptual Speed                                    0.006    0.048    -0.009
Peripheral Vision                                   -0.024   0.051    0.093
Persuasion                                          0.016    0.005    0.048
Problem Sensitivity                                 0.007    0.020    0.022
Programming                                         0.003    -0.003   -0.024
Quality Control Analysis                            0.000    0.035    -0.062
Rate Control                                        -0.019   -0.001   0.008
Reaction Time                                       -0.032   0.069    0.031
Reading Comprehension                               0.026    0.021    -0.042
Repairing                                           -0.034   0.023    -0.020
Response Orientation                                -0.019   0.042    0.062
Science                                             0.000    0.010    -0.035




                                                                               61
Table A1 (cont.): Factor Loadings of Importance Scores for O*NET Skills and
                                  Abilities
Selective Attention                                                0.009          0.026           0.025
Service Orientation                                                0.010          0.006           0.034
Social Perceptiveness                                              0.034          0.005           0.099
Sound Localization                                                 -0.018         0.030           0.034
Spatial Orientation                                                -0.011         0.027           0.056
Speaking                                                           0.034          -0.008          0.077
Speech Clarity                                                     0.019          0.013           0.057
Speech Recognition                                                 0.021          0.020           0.051
Speed of Closure                                                   0.008          0.045           0.017
Speed of Limb Movement                                             -0.016         0.013           0.024
Stamina                                                            -0.014         0.024           0.092
Static Strength                                                    -0.024         0.011           0.055
Systems Analysis                                                   0.020          0.049          -0.032
Systems Evaluation                                                 0.021          0.047          -0.025
Technology Design                                                  0.000          0.027          -0.050
Time Management                                                    0.016          0.014           0.023
Time Sharing                                                       0.006          0.032           0.042
Troubleshooting                                                    -0.009         0.068          -0.099
Trunk Strength                                                     -0.016         0.002           0.015
Visual Color Discrimination                                        -0.003         0.020          -0.011
Visualization                                                      -0.011         0.036          -0.026
Wrist-Finger Speed                                                 -0.009         0.008          -0.019
Writing                                                            0.025          0.014          -0.004
Written Comprehension                                              0.014          0.015          -0.021
Written Expression                                                 0.027          0.004           0.000



Notes: Cell entries are estimates of the scores of predictions using the first, second, and third factors
(in columns (1), (2), and (3), respectively). We first performed factor analysis on all 87 Skills and
Abilities across all occupations in the O*Net dataset, as described in the text.




                                                                                                            62
  Table A2: Mapping between skills and abilities in O*NET and modified
                             EQ and R-SQ questionnaires
                   Panel A                                     Panel B
Skill/Ability                Score for EQ    Skill/Ability            Score for SQ
Social Perceptiveness             23         Information Ordering              19
Service Orientation               10         Flexibility of Closure            9
Persuasion                        8          Inductive Reasoning               8
Active Listening                  7          Memorization                      8
Negotiation                       5          Category Flexibility              7
Problem Sensitivity               4          Deductive Reasoning               7
Instructing                       2          Installation                      4
Speaking                          1          Management of                     4
                                             Financial Resources
                                             Spatial Orientation               4
                                             Visualization                     4
                                             Mathematical                      3
                                             Reasoning
                                             Number Facility                   2
                                             Science                           2
                                             Equipment                         1
                                             Maintenance
                                             Equipment Selection               1
                                             Repairing                         1
                                             Time Management                   1
                                             Troubleshooting                   1
Notes: The number associated to each skill and ability in the table above is the result of
awarding one point every time the 5 co-authors thought that a person with a certain skill or
ability as measured in O*NET would have answered with "agree" to the modified EQ and R-SQ
questionnaires.




                                                                                               63
                  Table A3: Incidence of Child ASD by 2-Digit ISCO-88 Codes
                                        A. Paternal Occupations
Occupation
  Code                                                                        % with
(ISCO-88                                                                      an ASD      % of
 2-Digit)                         Occupation Description                       Child   Observations

   81        Stationary-Plant and Related Operators                            3.72        0.8
   11        Legislators and Senior Officials                                  3.64        0.1
   91        Sales and Services Elementary Occupations                         3.59        4.2
   82        Machine Operators and Assemblers                                  3.51        7.0
   83        Drivers and Mobile-Plant Operators                                3.49        3.9
   31        Physical and Engineering Science Associate Professionals          3.37        5.8
   93        Labourers in Mining, Construction, Manufacturing and Transport    3.33        2.6
   21        Physical, Mathematical and Engineering Science Professionals      3.27        5.3
   92        Agricultural, Fishery and Related Labourers                       3.26        0.7
   41        Office Clerks                                                     3.23        7.2
   72        Metal, Machinery and Related Trades Workers                       3.06        10.6
   73        Precision, Handicraft, Printing and Related Trades Workers        3.06        0.5
   51        Personal and Protective Services Workers                          3.03        6.9
   74        Other Craft and Related Trades Workers                            3.00        1.5
   23        Teaching Professionals                                            2.80        3.8
   71        Extraction and Building Trades Workers                            2.80        8.3
   33        Teaching Associate Professionals                                  2.78        2.0
   13        General Managers                                                  2.76        3.7
   52        Models, Salespersons and Demonstrators                            2.76        3.5
   24        Other Professionals                                               2.50        4.1
   22        Life Science and Health Professionals                             2.48        0.9
   32        Life Science and Health Associate Professionals                   2.43        0.8
   61        Market-Oriented Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers          2.42        2.5
   34        Other Associate Professionals                                     2.31        9.5
   42        Customer Services Clerks                                          2.18        1.1
   12        Corporate Managers                                                2.16        2.7




                                                                                           64
              Table A3: Incidence of Child ASD by 2-Digit ISCO-88 Codes (cont.)
                                        B. Maternal Occupations
Occupation
  Code                                                                        % with
(ISCO-88                                                                      an ASD      % of
 2-Digit)                         Occupation Description                       Child   Observations

   83        Drivers and Mobile-Plant Operators                                5.16        0.2
   81        Stationary-Plant and Related Operators                            5.11        0.1
   93        Labourers in Mining, Construction, Manufacturing and Transport    5.08        0.2
   72        Metal, Machinery and Related Trades Workers                       3.83        0.3
   71        Extraction and Building Trades Workers                            3.82        0.7
   74        Other Craft and Related Trades Workers                            3.55        0.8
   51        Personal and Protective Services Workers                          3.45        20.8
   91        Sales and Services Elementary Occupations                         3.43        6.5
   82        Machine Operators and Assemblers                                  3.36        4.2
   73        Precision, Handicraft, Printing and Related Trades Workers        3.34        0.5
   31        Physical and Engineering Science Associate Professionals          3.30        2.5
   33        Teaching Associate Professionals                                  3.26        6.8
   11        Legislators and Senior Officials                                  3.16        0.1
   41        Office Clerks                                                     3.06        16.5
   21        Physical, Mathematical and Engineering Science Professionals      3.04        1.4
   13        General Managers                                                  3.00        1.4
   52        Models, Salespersons and Demonstrators                            2.89        5.5
   23        Teaching Professionals                                            2.83        5.3
   92        Agricultural, Fishery and Related Labourers                       2.78        0.5
   61        Market-Oriented Skilled Agricultural and Fishery Workers          2.77        0.7
   24        Other Professionals                                               2.72        4.0
   42        Customer Services Clerks                                          2.66        2.6
   32        Life Science and Health Associate Professionals                   2.55        6.1
   22        Life Science and Health Professionals                             2.43        1.8
   34        Other Associate Professionals                                     2.29        9.9
   12        Corporate Managers                                                2.23        0.9




                                                                                           65
              Table A4: The Incidence of Child ASD by The Most Common Occupations by "Brain Type"


                               Fathers                                                     Mothers

                                            Percentage                                                 Percentage
                                            of those in Percent                                        of those in Percent
Occupations                                 the Group w/ ASD Occupations                               the Group w/ ASD
                                             who have    Child                                          who have    Child
                                            Occupation                                                 Occupation

                                                   Panel A: Balanced
Carpenters and joiners                       5.6%       2.6% Nursing associates                          11.1%      2.3%
Technical and commercial sales reps          5.1%       2.1% Technical and commercial sales reps         3.1%       2.1%
Meat and fish processors                     3.0%       3.5% Secretaries                                 3.1%       2.5%
Farmers                                      2.8%       2.2% Office clerks                               3.0%       2.9%
                                                  Panel B: Empathizing
Shop salespersons                            9.8%       2.6% Secretaries                                 13.0%      2.8%
Primary education teachers                   5.9%       2.7% Office clerks                               10.2%      3.4%
Office clerks                                5.4%       3.2% Shop salespersons                           9.6%       2.8%
Truck drivers                                4.5%       3.6% Primary education teachers                  6.7%       2.8%
                                                  Panel C: Systemizing
Auto mechanics                               10.2%      2.8% Medical doctors                             11.2%      0.2%
Tool-makers                                  5.1%       2.8% Life-science technicians                    9.6%       2.9%
Agricultural or industrial machinery
                                              4.2%       2.9%    Electronic-equipment assemblers         3.3%
mechanics                                                                                                           3.5%
Machine-tool setters                         3.6%       3.3% Chemical and physical science techs         3.2%       3.2%
                                             Panel D: Extremely Empathizing
                                                                 Personal care workers (institution-
Custodians                                   15.7%      3.1%                                             15.4%
                                                                 based)                                             3.8%
Child-care workers                           12.2%      2.5% Child-care workers                          14.3%      3.5%
Personal care workers (institution-based)    11.4%      3.8% Pre-school teaching associate               13.8%      3.3%
Pre-school teaching associate                10.8%      2.9% Personal care workers (home based)          12.2%      4.1%


                                                                                                                             66
         Table A4: The Incidence of Child ASD by The Most Common Occupations by "Brain Type" (cont'd)


                               Fathers                                                  Mothers

                                         Percentage                                               Percentage
                                         of those in Percent                                      of those in Percent
Occupations                              the Group w/ ASD Occupations                             the Group w/ ASD
                                          who have    Child                                        who have    Child
                                         Occupation                                               Occupation

                                           Panel E: Extremely Systemizing
Electricians                              11.0%       2.5% Chemical and physical science techs      14.1%      3.2%
Computer assistants                       6.6%        3.9% Physical and engineering techs           8.9%       2.8%
Machine-tool setters                      6.3%        3.1% Draughtspersons                          8.6%       2.7%
Agricultural or industrial machinery
                                           6.2%      2.9.%   Architects and engineers               6.2%
mechanics                                                                                                      2.8%




                                                                                                                        67
