                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DIVERSITY AND TEAM PERFORMANCE IN A KENYAN ORGANIZATION

                                        Benjamin Marx
                                         Vincent Pons
                                         Tavneet Suri

                                      Working Paper 28655
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28655


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We are extremely grateful to Suleiman Asman, Eleanor Wiseman, Geoffrey Onyambu and
Bonnyface Mwangi for exceptional research management and assistance in the field. We
benefited from helpful comments and suggestions from Anna Aevarsdottir, Evan Apfelbaum,
Abhijit Banerjee, Nick Bloom, Ray Fisman, Christina Patterson, Jonathan Petkun, Otis Reid,
Michael Stepner, as well as seminar audiences at Bocconi University, Ecole Polytechnique, the
Econometric Society, Georgetown, IIES Stockholm, IPEG, MIT, MIT Sloan, the NBER Summer
Institute, Novafrica, the Rotman School of Management, University of Capetown, and UVA
Batten School. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from MIT Sloan School of
Management and the Program on Innovation in Markets and Organizations at MIT Sloan.
Vincent Pons reports that he is the cofounder of a company specialized in electoral strategy in
Europe, eXplain (https://explain-technology.com). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Benjamin Marx, Vincent Pons, and Tavneet Suri. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diversity and Team Performance in a Kenyan Organization
Benjamin Marx, Vincent Pons, and Tavneet Suri
NBER Working Paper No. 28655
April 2021
JEL No. D22,J24,L22,M54,O12

                                         ABSTRACT

We present the results from a field experiment on team diversity. Individuals working as door-to-
door canvassers for a non-profit organization were randomly assigned a teammate, a supervisor,
and a list of individuals to canvass. This created random variation within teams in the degree of
horizontal diversity (between teammates), vertical diversity (between teammates and their
supervisor) and external diversity (between teams and the individuals they canvassed). We
observe team-level measures of performance and find that horizontal ethnic diversity decreases
performance, while vertical diversity often improves performance, and external diversity has no
effect. The data on time use suggests that horizontally homogeneous teams organized tasks in a
more efficient way, while vertically homogeneous teams exerted lower effort.


Benjamin Marx                                   Tavneet Suri
Sciences Po                                     MIT Sloan School of Management
Department of Economics                         100 Main Street, E62-517
28 Rue des Saints-Peres                         Cambridge, MA 02142
75007 Paris                                     and NBER
France                                          tavneet@mit.edu
benjamin.marx@sciencespo.fr

Vincent Pons
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 289
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
vpons@hbs.edu
1       Introduction
A central question in organizations is how to strike an optimal balance between diversity and
homogeneity within teams of workers. While diversity brings in a wider range of skills and
ideas, it may also create communication costs and other frictions inside the organization. Many
studies (Lazear, 1999; Prat, 2002; Lyons, 2017) have highlighted this trade-off. Which level of
diversity maximizes team performance? Does team diversity make management more effective,
or facilitate relationships with clients and partners?
        In this paper, we study these questions in the context of a field experiment conducted inside
a Kenyan organization. A key contribution of our design is that we are able to study, within
a single organization, the effect of three dimensions of diversity. First, we analyze the impact
of horizontal diversity (diversity among individuals who hold the same position and collabo-
rate with each other) on various measures of team performance. Second, we look at the effect
of hierarchical or "vertical" diversity (between supervisors and supervisees) on performance.
Third, we test whether similarity between team members and the individuals they interact with
outside the organization affects performance. Our primary focus is on ethnic diversity, which
is known to be an important determinant of productivity in Sub-Saharan Africa (Alesina and
Ferrara, 2005) and Kenya specifically (Hjort, 2014). We benchmark the effects of ethnic diversity
against those of another randomly assigned characteristic of teams: gender diversity.
        Our experiment was conducted inside a non-profit research organization which conducted
a large voter canvassing and registration exercise in 2012. The experiment focuses on a stan-
dard set of tasks that employees of this organization conduct and that we use to measure effort
and performance: in particular, canvassing success rates and canvassing times, time use, and
registration rates among target households. We find that ethnically homogeneous teams on the
horizontal dimension perform better across most of these measures, and that this effect inten-
sifies over the duration of the exercise. In particular, horizontally homogeneous teams conduct
more and longer visits, spend more time in the field, and are more likely to divide up tasks.
However, vertical homogeneity has the opposite effect on team performance. Teams with a su-
pervisor whose ethnicity matches that of one of the canvassers conduct shorter canvassing visits
and spend less time in the field, suggesting that effort levels are lower in those teams. Canvass-
ing outcomes are unaffected by ethnic homogeneity between canvassers and the residents which
staff members were expected to canvass.1
        While we are underpowered to detect effects on voter registration, an outcome which we
could only measure in a subset of our experimental sample, the effects of horizontal, vertical and
external homogeneity on registration are broadly consistent with the results we find in terms of
    1
    This result, while perhaps surprising, is consistent with the findings in Berge et al. (2020) who show that ethnic
bias among Kenyans may not be as extensive as previously thought. We show that canvassers did not strategically
target households of the same ethnicity and that they did not spend more time canvassing these households.


                                                          1
visit completion and duration. Vertical homogeneity, in particular, has a negative effect on reg-
istration. Overall, the effects of horizontal and vertical ethnic homogeneity, which are opposite
in sign, are large in magnitude and robust to a range of specifications. These effects are corrob-
orated by self-reported estimates of the staff members' own performance, working hours, and
socialization outcomes--horizontally homogeneous teams are more likely to socialize outside
fieldwork, while the opposite holds for vertically homogeneous teams. By comparison, evi-
dence that gender diversity affects team performance is much more mixed. Horizontal gender
homogeneity positively impacts performance only in some specifications, this impact is smaller
than that of horizontal ethnic homogeneity, and vertical gender homogeneity has no effect.
       The context of this study was a door-to-door canvassing campaign conducted in collabora-
tion with the Independent Electoral and Boundaries Commission of Kenya (IEBC) in 2012. The
canvassing experiment aimed to increase voter registration in Nairobi's largest informal set-
tlement, called Kibera. The intervention targeted approximately 15,000 households across 300
enumeration areas (census tracts)2 and provided residents with information on the registration
process via door-to-door canvassing conducted by teams of two.
       Subsumed within this registration experiment, we designed a field experiment to study how
diversity within teams and along the organizational hierarchy affects effort and performance.
This involved three levels of randomization. First, we randomly allocated the canvassers to
teams of two. Second, we randomly allocated each team to a supervisor responsible for mon-
itoring them in the field. This created variation in vertical homogeneity, i.e., in the degree of
heterogeneity between managers and the workers they supervised. Third, each team was ran-
domly allocated a set of enumeration areas (EAs) to visit in a mandatory random order. This
introduced variation in the degree of similarity between canvassers and the residents which
staff members were expected to canvass. An important feature of our experimental design is
that we observe the outcome of a large number of tasks (approximately 30,000 canvassing visits
conducted over three weeks) across a relatively small number of teams (30).
       The organization which conducted the canvassing visits on behalf of the IEBC resembles
other survey companies across the world. A sizeable fraction of its workforce consists of short-
term staff whose main task is to canvass or interview households, and substantial resources
are invested in the monitoring of this short-term staff. In the context of this organization, we
measure team performance in several ways. First, we observe whether a particular canvassing
visit was completed, i.e. whether the correct household was found and whether the pair of
canvassers was able to complete the canvassing interview. Second, we look at the duration
of each visit. As we discuss in Section 3, conditional on the same amount of time spent in
the field, longer visit durations are a positive outcome in the context of our study since they
   2
    This is the size of our treatment sample. There was an equal-sized control group where households did not
receive any canvassing visits.



                                                     2
indicate both effort on the part of canvassers and active involvement of the target households.
This is consistent with insights from the get-out-the-vote literature, in which discussions with
voters are found to be more effective when campaigners take the time to connect with them
(Nickerson, 2007; Gerber and Green, 2015). The total duration of visits conducted by a team
also correlates positively with various measures of self-reported voter registration in our data.
Third, we look at (self-reported) registration outcomes measured in a phone survey conducted
at the end of the registration period. Fourth, we analyze aggregate measures of time use and
team organization, namely the total amount of time spent each day in the Kibera settlement,
the total amount of time spent canvassing residents, and the fraction of visits conducted alone.
Fifth, we look at individual assessments of the staff's own performance from a survey of the
canvassers conducted after the experiment.
      Our empirical findings shed light on a simple mechanism behind the diversity-homogeneity
trade-off in organizations: diversity has different effects along different dimensions of organiza-
tional structure. On the one hand, diversity within teams of workers who collaborate with each
other may reduce efficiency and performance by inducing communication costs, disutility from
collaboration, or other frictions. On the other hand, homogeneity along the organization's hier-
archy can also undermine effort and performance, due to preferential treatment and a loosening
of discipline between managers and co-ethnic employees,3 or other distortions of managerial
effort, as in Bandiera et al. (2009). Given the growing amount of empirical evidence on the role
of management in firms (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Giuliano et al., 2009; Lazear et al., 2015),
including firms in developing countries (Bloom et al., 2013, 2020), addressing the question of di-
versity in organizations requires evaluating the differential gains diversity brings within teams
of co-workers and across firm hierarchies.


1.1    Contribution to Literature

There is a large literature on diversity in teams and organizations across economics, psychology,
and organizational behavior. Reviewing the literature outside economics is beyond the scope of
this paper, but excellent discussions can be found in Apfelbaum et al. (2014) and Phillips and
Shim (2011). In economics, the question of whether and how diversity matters has been studied
across various fields. In this section, we highlight some of the studies in these areas and discuss
the contributions of our paper to the existing literature.4
    3
      In a related paper, Barr and Oduro (2002) find large earnings differentials between ethnic groups in Ghanaian
manufacturing, which they argue result from employers favoring their co-ethnics in terms of pay and job allocation.
    4
      Aside from the evidence we discuss on firms and organizations, many studies explore the role of ethnic diversity
in other economic spheres, including credit markets (Fafchamps, 2000; Fisman et al., 2017), financial markets (Hjort
et al., 2019), education (Fairlie et al., 2014), justice (Anwar et al., 2012; Shayo and Zussman, 2011), professional
sports (Price and Wolfers, 2010) and public goods provision (Alesina et al., 1999; Miguel and Gugerty, 2005; Algan
et al., 2016). At the macro level, a large literature documents the strong negative correlations between diversity and



                                                          3
    The early literature on diversity and performance was largely theoretical and descriptive.
Becker (1957) argues that employees of a firm sometimes incur disutility from working with
individuals from other groups. This taste-based discrimination can explain why wage differen-
tials arise between ethnic groups: discriminators are compensated for working with the groups
they do not like. Arrow (1973) proposes a model of statistical discrimination in which employ-
ers have beliefs about the ability of different groups, while Lazear (1999) and Prat (2002), among
others, discuss the conditions under which homogeneity is optimal.
    At the same time, there exists a "business case for diversity" positing that diverse teams can
serve a broader spectrum of customers and solve a wider range of problems (Hamilton et al.,
2012). This argument posits that ethnic diversity brings in diversity of skills--different groups
have access to different information and skill sets, generating complementarities across groups.
For such complementaries to arise, the skills possessed by different groups must be relevant to
one another, and there must exist opportunities for learning (Lazear, 1999). Consequently, the
relationship between diversity and productivity should become more positive as groups become
more diverse in terms of skills, and more negative when groups are more diverse along other
dimensions, such as language (Hamilton et al., 2012).5 Furthermore, diversity can improve the
functioning of markets by reducing herding behavior (Levine et al., 2014).
    Hjort (2014) studies the effect of ethnic diversity on team productivity in the Kenyan flower
                                                                                                `
industry. He finds that diversity adversely affects productivity (consistently with preferences a
la Becker), and that ethnic conflict accentuates this negative effect. His results, however, are at
odds with those of Hamilton et al. (2003) and those in Hoogendoorn et al. (2014) and Hoogen-
doorn and van Praag (2012), who study the impact of ability dispersion and diversity on team
performance in a population of MBA students and young entrepreneurs in the Netherlands. In
a related paper, Lyons (2017) studies diversity by nationality in teams within oDesk (an online
labor market) in a field experiment. She finds that allowing teamwork in homogeneous teams
improves performance, while teamwork in diverse teams has the opposite effect.
    Furthermore, Lang (1986) argues that preference-based arguments are not borne out em-
pirically. He frames the question of ethnic diversity in terms of the costs that communication
between members of different groups imposes to the firm. Zenger and Lawrence (1989) simi-
larly show that age differences increase communication costs between employees. In a related
experiment, Reinhard and Warglien (2007) investigate the conditions under which teammates
develop a common language. They find that a functional working language (code) is more
likely to arise if teammates possess ex ante a larger repertoire of common linguistic symbols.
These technological advantages are augmented with the higher ability of homogeneous teams
measures of economic performance across and within countries (Alesina and Ferrara, 2005).
   5
     The findings of Hamilton et al. (2012) are broadly in line with these predictions: using personnel records from a
Californian garment factory, they find that teams heterogeneous in ability are more productive, while more diverse
teams in terms of age and ethnicity are less productive after controlling for ability.


                                                          4
to prevent free-riding through sanctions--Kandel and Lazear (1992) show this formally. Diver-
sity, on the other hand, tends to weaken social ties and to reduce peer pressure (Hamilton et al.,
2012), which in turn hampers the ability of teams to prevent free-riding (Mas and Moretti, 2009).
    In this paper, we contribute to this literature along several dimensions. First, the literature
has generally focused on the impact of horizontal homogeneity between teammates, rather than
the impact of homogeneity across the firm hierarchy. This is at odds with the large literature
highlighting the key role managers and the organization of management play in determining
form performance (see Lazear et al. (2015) and Caliendo et al. (2015), among others). One im-
portant exception is Bandiera et al. (2009), who find that social connections between managers
and workers increase individual productivity, but also that an increase in the average level of
connections can decrease firm productivity by inducing distortions in the allocation of manage-
rial effort. Our contribution is to study both horizontal as well as vertical diversity within the
same organization and along two dimensions--ethnicity and gender.6 In addition, we study
how external homogeneity, i.e. similarities between workers and the individuals they interact
with outside the organization, affects performance. In the context of information campaigns,
there is some interest in understanding how team composition and incentives can improve per-
formance. For example, Berg et al. (2019) show that monetary incentives can mitigate the effects
of "social distance" as part of an information campaign on public health insurance in India. We
present an experimental setting in which the pairing of target respondents with the agents hired
to spread information was explicitly randomized.
    Second, we contribute to the identification of the effects of team diversity on effort and per-
formance by using a field experiment to generate random variation in team diversity outside
the laboratory. Because of this randomized design, we are able to identify the causal impacts of
diversity along the three dimensions discussed above and on a range of outcomes. Our detailed
data on time use, team cohesiveness and team organization in the field, visit outcomes and voter
registration outcomes, and our ability to track these outcomes over time enable us to clarify the
mechanisms responsible for these effects.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our experiment and section
3 describes our data. We present the econometric framework in section 4 and our main results
in section 5. Section 6 concludes.
    6
      Hjort (2014) uses quasi-experimental variation in both "upstream" and "downstream" ethnic interactions, but in
his context the upstream/downstream dimension refers to the supply chain, rather than an actual reporting hierarchy
within the firm. Karaca-Mandic et al. (2013) exploit the conditional random assignments of army recruits to study
the impact of group composition on time to promotion. They find that an increase in the fraction of own-group
(e.g., female) peers decreases the time to promotion for members of other groups (e.g., men), while the fraction of
own-group members in leadership has the opposite effect. Our empirical framework is slightly different, since we
are interested in the effect of homogeneity/diversity on joint (team) output.




                                                         5
2       Experimental Design
2.1       Context and Experimental Site

A general election was held in Kenya in March 2013. Prior to this election, in the aftermath of
a heavily contested election in 2007, a new electoral commission (called the IEBC) undertook to
re-register the Kenyan electorate using biometric equipment. Registration took place across the
entire country in November-December 2012. We collaborated with the IEBC during this period
to implement a door-to-door canvassing experiment in Kibera, the largest of Nairobi's slums.7
        Kibera was chosen as the site of the experiment for two reasons. First, it is host to a large
migrant population, and there is evidence that migrant voters suffer the most from the various
obstacles to registration (Braconnier et al., 2017). Kibera had also been a focal point in the 2007-
2008 election violence. Second, building on earlier fieldwork conducted in the slum (Marx et
al., 2019), we had data available on the households residing in Kibera, including a geo-localized
census of residents and maps for each enumeration area (EA) in the slum. A more detailed
description of this data is provided in Section 3.


2.2       Ethnic Diversity in Kenya

There are over 30 different ethnic groups in Kenya, as defined in the official census, including
five main groups representing over sixty percent of the population: the Kikuyus (17%), Luhyas
(14%), Kalenjins (13%), Luos (10%), and Kambas (10%) (figures from the 2009 Kenyan census).
These groups differ in terms of their linguistic proximity with each other--the Kikuyus, Luhyas
and Kambas are Bantu-speaking peoples, while the Luos and Kalenjins belong to the Nilotic
linguistic family. Political coalitions between these groups have also varied over time. Three
of the four Kenyan presidents hailed from the majority Kikuyu group, but the longest-serving
Kenyan president, Daniel Arap Moi, was a Kalenjin. The ethnic composition of the site of the
experiment, the Kibera slum, is not reflective of that of Kenyan society overall. Luos and Luhyas
are the most prevalent groups in Kibera (together constituting 63% of the slum population,
based on our 2012 census), while Kikuyus are a minority locally (6%).


2.3       Canvassing Experiment

2.3.1      EA Randomization

The voter registration experiment was designed to tease apart the effects of pure information
on the registration process versus those of specific information about the new electoral commis-
sion, both of which were disseminated via door-to-door canvassing. The experimental design
    7
     This experiment was designed to contribute to the literature on voter education campaigns in developing coun-
tries (related work includes Aker et al. (2017) and Banerjee et al. (2010), among others).


                                                        6
included two treatment groups. In the first group, households were encouraged to register and
given information about the location of nearby registration centers, and what documents were
required to register. In the second group (henceforth the IEBC treatment), households were, in
addition, given detailed information about the IEBC, in particular about its record in organizing
successful by-elections and its efforts to establish an accurate register based on biometrics.
   The experimental treatment was clustered at the level of the EA (EAs in Kibera typically
correspond to a compact block of dwellings). There are 643 EAs in the slum, 603 of which were
part of our sampling frame. 303 EAs were randomly chosen to be part of the control group,
after stratifying by village and by being above or below the median EA population (there are
16 villages in our 2012 census of Kibera). Half of the remaining EAs were allocated to each
treatment group. Overall, the experiment covered 31,646 households across 603 EAs, with a
total of 15,676 households living in the 300 treatment EAs.


2.3.2   Implementation

The fieldwork for this experiment was entrusted to a Kenyan organization affiliated with a U.S.-
based non-profit research institution. The Kenyan organization has conducted field operations
in Kenya and other African countries for over fifteen years. The organization typically hires
long-term research coordinators and research assistants, as well as short-term survey staff. Some
of these staff are hired again to work on other projects, based on performance. The effort and
performance of the survey staff are a major determinant of the organization's overall produc-
tivity and operating costs. Monitoring the performance of this staff requires high-frequency
supervision and quality controls, as is typically the case in survey companies across the world.
   To implement the experiment, the organization recruited sixty canvassers for a period of
three weeks. Sixteen of these canvassers had some prior fieldwork experience with the organi-
zation (and in Kibera) and the rest were new staff members hired specifically for the canvassing
exercise. The canvassers were paid by the day, and wages were not tied to specific indicators
of performance. Prior to the beginning of the door-to-door exercise, the canvassers were care-
fully trained on canvassing goals and methods. Teams were also given specific guidelines on
the details of each treatment, along with a cheat sheet of the list of issues to be covered in each
treatment group and a list of questions that were expected to frequently come up in the field.
   Three layers of supervision were established over the sixty canvassers. The first layer was
a team of seven "group leaders". Group leaders were assigned between four and five teams to
accompany in the field. If teams fell behind schedule or if a team member was absent on a given
day, the group leader was to step in and conduct canvassing visits instead. In practice, due to
staff absences and replacements, group leaders ended up being mostly involved in implemen-
tation (canvassing) rather than supervision or management; hence we do not consider them in
the analysis of vertical diversity. The second layer was a team of seven supervisors, all of whom

                                                 7
were previous employees of the organization with more advanced fieldwork experience. The
responsibility of the supervisors was to spend each day in the field monitoring the teams under
their responsibility. They actively watched canvassers in the field and independently checked
with a subset of households whether the canvassing visit had taken place as planned. Finally,
the entire field exercise was overseen by a director of operations, a research assistant, and the
principal investigators (the authors of this paper). Team supervisors reported back to the direc-
tor of operations and the research assistant on a daily basis.
      To maximize contact with households, each EA was covered twice during implementation.
Given our previous work in Kibera (in particular the slum census we conducted in 2012), we
expected that any member of a given household would be found at home a little less than half
the time. Many household members spend the day outside their dwelling, either working or
looking for employment. Activities were therefore planned so that each household would be
visited twice over the two-week period, once each week, and by a different team each week.


2.4     Diversity Experiment

Over the canvassing experiment, we collaborated with the organization to overlay an experi-
ment on team diversity, with three layers of randomization. The canvassing exercise was con-
ducted by teams of two. We randomly paired canvassers with each other, and in doing so,
introduced random variation in the degree of horizontal diversity within each team. In this ran-
domization, we ensured that junior canvassers (those with no previous experience working in
Kibera) were generally paired with a more experienced canvasser, though this was not always
feasible since only 16 senior canvassers were available to work on this campaign. Through-
out our analysis, we show intent-to-treat estimates based on the initial random composition of
teams, thus ignoring occasional staff replacements.
      We then randomly allocated four to five teams to a supervisor, so as to induce random vari-
ation in vertical diversity. In the analysis below, "vertically diverse" teams are defined as teams
where the ethnicity of the supervisor differs from that of both team members. The seven super-
visors belonged to the following six ethnicities: Embu, Kamba, Kikuyu, Kisii, Luo, and Teso.
Finally, we randomly allocated EAs (and hence residents) to each team to create variation in
external diversity, i.e. in how different teams were from the households on their canvassing list.
      Each team was allocated to one of the two treatment groups, and assigned a random set of
twenty EAs to cover (ten per week of canvassing). On average, any given team had to complete
1,045 visits over the two week period. The set of EAs assigned in the first week was different
from the set of EAs assigned in the second week, so that a household would not be visited by
the same canvassing team twice. The order in which canvassing teams visited the EAs allocated
to them was also randomly determined.



                                                 8
        Teams used identifiable information (GPS coordinates and names of household heads) pro-
vided by the management to locate treatment households within the slum. Figure 1 shows a
sample tracking sheet, with respondent identifiers left intentionally blank. Once they located
a target household, canvassers were instructed to cover the relevant script for each treatment
group and to collect basic information about visits (Section 3 provides additional details). Dur-
ing training, canvassers were also encouraged to disseminate information to as many household
members and neighbors as possible, since treatment was defined at the EA level.


3       Data
3.1       Baseline and Randomization Data

The baseline data for this experiment came from two sources. First, we conducted a census of
Kibera as part of prior work in 2012 (Marx et al., 2019). The census covered more than 30,000
households over two rounds of visits in the slum and was conducted using a short survey mod-
ule. Second, also for the purpose of this earlier work, we were granted access to de-identified
micro data for the entire slum from the 2009 national census, as well as EA maps of the area.
This allowed us to aggregate the 2009 census data to the EA level and to locate households vis-
ited in our 2012 census in specific EAs. Figure 2 shows a map of the Kibera area with the EAs
demarcated in yellow. Since the EAs were randomly allocated to the canvassing teams, we can
test randomization balance by looking at correlations between staff characteristics and EA char-
acteristics. We rely on our 2012 census, the 2009 national census, and related geospatial data for
these balance checks (presented in Section 5).


3.2       Performance and Effort Data

Canvassing outcomes. Each canvassing team was provided with tracking sheets pre-filled with
information on households from the 2012 census data. These tracking sheets included the names
of target household heads, along with their GPS coordinates and village names. The canvassers
were required to fill out information about each visit, in particular information on whether the
household was found or not, the time when each visit began and ended, and other visit details.8
        In what follows, we use data from the tracking sheets to create several measures of perfor-
mance. First, we use a dummy variable for whether the canvassing visit was completed. This
means the household was found and agreed to the canvassing visit (only 0.01% of the house-
holds successfully located by the staff refused to be canvassed). A second outcome is the dura-
    8
     Canvassers were also required to fill out the name of the person in the household spoken to and their relationship
to the household head; whether that person was already registered and whether they had a national ID card (needed
to register); whether anyone else was present during the canvassing visit and if so, who they were.



                                                          9
tion of the visit. Based on the extensive training given to the canvassers on what was expected
from them during a canvassing visit, we expected a typical successful visit to last between five
and ten minutes. In the data collected from the tracking sheets, successful visits (i.e conditional
on the household being found) lasted for 4.8 minutes on average. The median duration for a
successful visit was 5 minutes and the 95th and 99th percentiles were 9 minutes and 15 minutes,
respectively. Most visits therefore fell within the range we expected from the training.
    In our empirical analysis, we use an unconditional measure of time spent with each house-
hold, ranging from zero minutes (for unsuccessful visits) to an hour.9 We interpret visit duration
as a positive measure of performance, as longer canvassing visits reflect greater engagement of
both respondent households and team members themselves. This seems reasonable given the
range of durations we see in the data. The main challenge canvassers face in an urban envi-
ronment such as Kibera is retaining the attention of respondents (who can become impatient
as the conversation unfolds) so that every aspect of the voter registration process is covered.
In addition, the canvassers were trained to collect data on whether additional members of the
household or other people people were at the canvassing visit. In our data, the duration of a visit
correlates positively with whether any additional person attended the visit and with the num-
ber of additional people attending the visit. Visit duration also correlates positively with several
self-reported measures of voter registration: namely whether the head of household reported
to be registered, whether the entire family was registered, and whether registration occurred in
Kibera (we provide more details on these variables below).

Organization of work. Based on the tracking sheets, we also observe whether teams conducted
several visits simultaneously. This effectively indicates that team members split to canvass
households individually. Two visits are coded as simultaneous if they were conducted by the
same team, on the same day, and completed within one minute of each other. We aggregate this
measure by team and by day to compute the fraction of visits conducted individually in each
team. This gives us a proxy for how different canvassing pairs organized their work on a daily
basis. This variable could also be capturing whether teams gathered households to conduct one
visit with multiple households at the same time. This is consistent with our interpretation that
the variable captures a more efficient organization of work within the team.

Time use. Finally, we use the data from the tracking sheets to create measures of effort. We
compute daily measures of how much time the team spent in the field, and how much time
was spent canvassing households. The time spent in the field was calculated as the difference
between the start time of the first canvassing visit and the end time of the last canvassing visit
   9
     We treat as enumeration errors visits recorded to have lasted more than 60 minutes. These visits represent
approximately 0.05% of the raw tracking data.




                                                      10
for each team and each day,10 thus variation in this measure is entirely driven by the times at
which teams decided to start and to stop working. The time spent canvassing is the sum of the
durations of all canvassing visits completed on a given day by each team. These measures of
time use provide a reasonable proxy for effort and performance. Indeed, Table 1B shows that
the time spent in the field and the time spent canvassing are strongly correlated with measures
of voter registration (described below).
       Although measures of performance are computed from the tracking sheets, we are not con-
cerned about strategic misreporting by the canvassers driven by the demographic composition
of teams. Indeed, canvassers had little incentive to engage in strategic misreporting in the first
place. The organization's incentive structure was not tied to the number of successful canvass-
ing visits or the duration of visits: staff members were paid fixed daily wages regardless of the
number of households successfully canvassed, and the staff was not given specific targets in
terms of visit completion rates. Furthermore, falsifying data was cause for immediate dismissal.
We cannot entirely exclude that career concerns led some staff to alter their numbers, but these
simple metrics did not carry any weight in subsequent promotion decisions (which were instead
driven by staff behavior as observed by supervisors), and the staff had no reason to expect they
would.

Summary statistics. Table 1A shows summary statistics from the performance data and the staff
composition, and Table 1B reports correlations between team performance indicators and self-
reported measures of voter registration. 23% of the canvassing pairs (7 teams out of 30) were
ethnically homogeneous on the horizontal dimension. The ethnicity of the manager matches
that of one of the team members in 23% of cases, and there is no instance where the ethnicity
of the manager matches that of the two team members. Each team was allocated 1,045 visits
on average, and managed to complete 426. On a daily basis, teams conducted an average of
33 visits and spent approximately two and a half hours canvassing households--the rest of the
time was spent walking between dwellings and searching for target households. Overall, 41%
of all scheduled visits were successfully completed, in line with comparable experiments in
the literature (see, for example, Pons and Liegey (2018)). Table 1B shows that on average, one
additional successful visit led to 0.33 more registrations, 0.28 more registrations of the entire
family, and 0.26 more registrations in Kibera. An additional hour spent in the field led to 1.7
more registrations, and an additional hour spent canvassing led to 3.2 more registrations.


3.3      Registration Data

Once the canvassing experiment was completed, we conducted a short phone call experiment
in the final two days before the registration deadline. 8,100 households were randomly selected
  10
       We do not have a measure of the time spent searching for the first household every day.


                                                           11
from an eligible pool to receive a phone call reminder about registration. These households rep-
resent (a random) half of households with a valid phone number in our 2012 census of Kibera.
In the census, about 51% of the household heads reported a phone number. Unlike the canvass-
ing experiment, which was randomized at the EA level, this randomization was conducted at
the household level. The phone calls were made by the same team of canvassers. Households
reached as part of this exercise were asked whether they had already registered for the upcom-
ing election. 85% of respondents with a valid ID reported they had already registered at the time
of the call. 62% reported they registered within Kibera, while 73% said the entire household was
registered. We use these self-reported variables to measure final registration outcomes.
      For the original canvassing experiment, we were also able to access the official voter register
for the two constituencies that cover the Kibera area. Unfortunately, since we were not granted
access to individual phone numbers or ID numbers, and since many names do not uniquely
identify individuals in our data, we are not able to confidently match participants in our experi-
ment to the database of registered voters. We therefore rely on self-reported data collected from
the phone calls to measure treatment effects on registration.


3.4     Staff Survey Data

We conducted a survey of the canvassing staff 18 months after the completion of the experiment
in order to clarify the mechanisms behind our main experimental results. The survey question-
naire was conducted individually and collected data on social interactions between teammates
(e.g., did teammates interact socially after work or after the experiment), working methods (e.g.,
what language was primarily used within the team), as well as self-reported assessments of per-
formance and hours worked.


4     Empirical Framework
4.1     Effects of Ethnic Diversity on Performance

Horizontal diversity. We now describe the empirical specifications we use to study the impact
of team composition on team performance. Our first specification is the following regression:

                                                 jun   sen
                        yijt =  + Horizontaljt + jt  + jt  + Xijt +         ijt                   (1)

where yijt is a measure of the outcome of a canvassing visit for household i visited by team j
in week t; Horizontaljt is a measure of horizontal ethnic homogeneity, i.e. a dummy equal to
                                                                     jun     sen are ethnicity
one if the two canvassers in team j belong to the same ethnic group; jt  and jt
dummies for junior canvassers and senior canvassers, respectively (out of 30 teams, 15 teams



                                                  12
have at least one senior canvasser); and Xijt are a set of controls and fixed effects. We report
estimates from equation (1) for two measures of team performance: canvassing success rates
(visit completion) and canvassing times (visit duration).
    In this specification, visit outcomes are indexed by time since each household was to be vis-
ited twice, so the data is at the household-week level in our preferred specifications. Through-
out, we present intent-to-treat estimates, i.e. we use the value of the match variable Horizontaljt
from the initial random allocation of teams. Controls include a dummy variable for being allo-
cated to the IEBC treatment, the random order in which household i was visited by team j in
week t, as well as strata fixed effects used in the randomization for the canvassing experiment
(described in section 2.3).11 We show robustness to removing controls and strata fixed effects
in the Appendix. Standard errors are clustered by team, which is the level at which diversity is
observed. Since there are only 30 teams, we also report the p-values from (i) a wild bootstrap
clustering with 1,000 replications at the team level and (ii) a randomization inference procedure
with 1,000 replications implemented following Young (2018).12

Vertical diversity. We then augment equation (1) by including additional dimensions of team
diversity. First, we estimate the effect of vertical diversity in the following equation:

                                                      jun   sen   sup
           yijt =  + 1 Horizontaljt + 2 V erticaljt + jt  + jt  + jt  + Xijt +                  ijt           (2)

where V erticaljt is a dummy variable equal to one if the ethnicity of the manager matches
                                         sup
the ethnicity of either team member, and jt  are ethnicity dummies for the team supervisor.
Since there is no instance where the ethnicity of the manager matches that of the two team
members, we do not interact the effects of horizontal and vertical homogeneity. We discuss how
this affects our interpretation of mechanisms in Section 5. Note that the correlation between
Horizontaljt and V erticaljt is -0.32 in our data. We also report the wild-bootstrap p-values and
randomization inference p-values for 1 and 2 in equation (2).

External diversity. Finally, we estimate the effect of external homogeneity on performance,
i.e. we ask whether the ethnicity of households randomly assigned to each team affects the
performance of canvassers. For this, we use the following specification:

                                                            jun   sen   sup   h
 yijt =  + 1 Horizontaljt + 2 V erticaljt + 3 Externalijt + jt  + jt  + jt  + ijt +Xijt +               ijt   (3)

where Externalijt is a dummy equal to 1 if the household has the same ethnicity as either can-
  11
     Since canvassing was only conducted in treatment EAs (and not in control EAs), outcome data is only avail-
able for households belonging to treatment EAs. Hence we only use households allocated to either one of the two
canvassing treatment groups to analyze the performance impacts of ethnic homogeneity.
  12
     We report the p-value from the "randomization-t" procedure in Young (2018).



                                                      13
            h are ethnicity dummies for household i.13
vasser, and i


4.2      Effects of Gender Diversity on Performance

In order to compare the effects of ethnic diversity with those of gender diversity we estimate the
following specification:

                                   G
             yijt =  + 1 Horizontaljt              G
                                      + 2 V erticaljt + jun  sen  sup
                                                        jt + jt + jt + Xijt +                     ijt         (4)

                G and V erticalG are measures of horizontal and vertical gender homogeneity,
where Horizontaljt             jt
respectively (defined as before); and jun  sen      sup
                                      jt , jt , and jt are gender dummies for the junior
canvasser, senior canvasser, and manager. We also estimate a version of equation (4) including
the effects of horizontal and vertical ethnic homogeneity--defined as in equation (2)--as well
as the relevant main effects of ethnicity.
       Beyond gender, we note that equations (1), (2), and (3) cannot distinguish the effect of eth-
nic homogeneity itself from that of other characteristics correlated with ethnic matches. This
is analogous to other papers in the literature on dyadic matches, with the partial exception
of Goldberg-paradigm experiments and correspondence studies such as Bertrand and Mul-
lainathan (2004)--Bertrand and Duflo (2016) provide a relevant discussion. To address this
issue, in Appendix Table 3 we further show that our estimates of the effects of ethnic homogene-
ity and gender homogeneity are not driven by homogeneity along two other sociodemographic
characteristics, namely age and education.


4.3      Learning Over Time

The canvassing experiment took place for approximately three weeks between December 1 and
December 24, 2012, with 99% of visits taking place between December 3 and December 15. In
this period of time, ethnic diversity may have affected the teams' ability to learn about their
assigned tasks and improve their performance. To test for this, we interact the main effects of
ethnic diversity included in equations (1), (2) and (3) with the day (entered linearly) in which a
particular canvassing visit was conducted, in the following specification:

  yijt =  + 1 Horizontaljt  Dayijt + 2 V erticaljt  Dayijt + 3 Externaljt  Dayijt + 1 Dayijt
                                                             jun   sen   sup
          + 2 Horizontaljt + 3 V erticaljt + 4 Externalijt + jt  + jt  + jt  + Xijt +                   ijt   (5)
  13
    We only consider external matches for households belonging to one of the seven ethnic groups for which we
collected ethnicity data in the 2012 census (Kalenjins, Kambas, Kikuyus, Kisiis, Luhyas, Luos, and Nubis). The
remaining ethnicities were lumped together (only 2% of households in the 2012 census data do not belong to any of
these ethnic groups). For these households, the external match dummy is unobserved (coded as missing).




                                                       14
where 1 , 2 , and 3 are the main coefficients of interest. From a theoretical standpoint, the
sign of these coefficients is ex ante ambiguous. On the one hand, the effects of horizontal ethnic
homogeneity on performance may dissipate over time if diversity creates frictions (for example
in terms of communication) that can be overcome with time. Learning could also be facilitated
by diversity if different groups bring diverse sets of skills that directly contribute to the comple-
tion of tasks assigned to the team. On the other hand, if group-specific skills are irrelevant or
if socialization between similar teammates decisively affects learning, then ethnic homogeneity
would instead improve the teams' ability to learn how to complete their tasks more efficiently.
Equation (5) allows us to adjudicate between these channels empirically.


4.4     Sample Size

Before presenting our experimental results, here we discuss sample size and inference issues.
While we have variation in outcomes for the 15,676 thouseholds treated in the canvassing ex-
periment, the random variation we use to estimate the effects of horizontal and vertical ethnic
homogeneity is at the team level. Since this randomization is clustered at the team level with
30 teams, following standard practice for clustered randomized designs we report standard er-
rors clustered at the team level. In addition, we worry about a small number of clusters biasing
standard errors down: to quote from Cameron et al. (2008), "Standard asymptotic tests can
over-reject, however, with few (five to thirty) clusters." We therefore use the tools proposed
by Cameron et al. (2008) to deal with a small number of clusters, the wild bootstrap, which we
also report in all tables. In addition, we systematically report the results from a randomized
inference procedure following Young (2018).
      A small number of clusters in an RCT is not uncommon in the development and labor eco-
nomics literatures. For example, Bloom et al. (2013) report on an experiment involving 17 firms;
Cohen and Dupas (2010) report on an experiment with 20 clinics; Fryer (2014) reports on an ex-
periment in 16 schools; Wantchekon et al. (2015) analyze a policy across 8 regions; and Fujiwara
(2015) analyzes a policy across Brazil's 27 states. As we do in this paper, these studies also use
the wild bootstrap to account for the small number of clusters in their design.
      Finally, note that this discussion is only relevant for testing the effects of horizontal and
vertical homogeneity. The effective sample size we have to estimate the effects of external ho-
mogeneity is very large since the variation we use comes from the random matching of teams
with households spread across 300 enumeration areas. Nevertheless, the standard errors we
report for this test are also conservatively clustered at the team level.




                                                 15
5     Results
5.1     Randomization Balance Checks

We first present a set of checks to verify that the randomization produced a balanced sample.
In particular, we check whether the measures of horizontal, vertical, and external homogeneity
correlate with any observable characteristics of staff members, target areas, and target house-
holds. Tables 2A and 2B show these results. Column (1) in this table reports the sample mean of
the relevant dependent variable. In column (2), we show the coefficient obtained from regress-
ing each relevant staff, household, and EA level characteristic on the horizontal homogeneity
team dummy (equal to one for teams with co-ethnic canvassers) and ethnicity dummies for
each junior and senior team member. In column (3), we report the coefficient from a similar
specification using the measure of vertical homogeneity (coded as one if the manager belongs
to the same ethnicity as any one of the two canvassers) as the main regressor. In column (4) of
Table 2B, we show results for the external match with a team member.14 All regressions include
the relevant main effects, and standard errors are clustered by team.
      The outcomes of these regressions are pre-determined staff characteristics, household char-
acteristics from the 2012 census, and EA level aggregates of the 2009 census micro data. Staff
characteristics include the gender, age, years of college education, and seniority (previous expe-
rience working in Kibera) of each staff member. For household characteristics, the correspond-
ing regressions are run at the team-day level. Household characteristics include household size,
the number of children in the household, whether the household pays rent for their housing, the
(log) amount paid in rent, whether the household was ever evicted from their dwelling in the
past, the number of years spent in the same dwelling, the number of years spent in Kibera, and
a dummy for households with a phone number in our data. The corresponding regressions are
at the household level. Finally, EA-level variables include log consumption per capita, the EA-
level poverty rate,15 the number of households in the EA, average age of the household head,
years of education of the household head, whether the household head owns a business, a ra-
dio, and TV, whether the household head is employed, the fraction of youth unemployed in the
EA, the average fraction of household dwellings with a cement floor, a mixed mud-cement wall,
piped water, an uncovered pit latrine for sanitation, and electricity, and whether the household
cooks with paraffin. These regressions are run at the EA level.
      Tables 2A and 2B illustrate that the randomization of the composition of canvassing teams
produced a balanced experimental sample. Only two coefficients (out of 27) are statistically
significant at conventional levels.
  14
     Here note that since the external match is defined at the household level, the only checks we can conduct are
those with household characteristics from the 2012 census.
  15
     The poverty indicator was computed as part of a poverty mapping exercise. See Marx et al. (2019) for details.



                                                       16
5.2     Ethnic Composition and Team Performance

5.2.1     Horizontal Homogeneity

Table 3 reports estimates from equations (1), (2), and (3) for two outcomes: visit completion and
unconditional visit duration. We first estimate the effect of horizontal homogeneity, and then
introduce dummies for vertical homogeneity and external homogeneity. As a consequence of
the experimental design, these coefficients estimate the causal impact of a team's horizontal,
vertical, and external ethnic homogeneity on canvassing outcomes, respectively. In all specifi-
cations, we control for the IEBC Treatment, the order in which the team was instructed to visit
that household,16 and strata fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by team, and we also
report the p-values from a wild bootstrap and a randomization inference procedure, both using
1,000 replications.
       Columns (1) through (3) of Table 3 show that ethnically homogeneous teams on the hori-
zontal dimension are approximately 8 percentage points more likely to complete a canvassing
visit--about a 20% effect size. Such teams also conduct visits that are 0.8 to 1.3 minutes longer
on average (columns (4) through (6)). These results are similar across all columns, large in mag-
nitude, and robust to using the wild bootstrap and randomization inference in 4 out of 6 spec-
ifications. Overall, a team conducts more and longer visits if it is composed of two co-ethnic
canvassers. In Figure 3, we provide further evidence that the fraction of co-ethnic pairs is a
monotically increasing function of visit duration across all visits lasting less than 10 minutes.


5.2.2     Vertical Homogeneity

Looking at both canvassing outcomes, we find some evidence that the effects of vertical homo-
geneity are opposite in sign to those of horizontal homogeneity. If a manager and any one team
member belong to the same ethnicity, the probability that the canvassing visit is completed de-
creases by about 3 percentage points, but this estimate is not statistically significant (columns
(1)-(3)). The duration of visits decreases by 1.4 minutes (columns (4)-(6)). The effects on duration
are sizeable and statistically significant, even when we rely on wild bootstrap or randomization
inference p-values for inference. Recall that since there are no instances of a "triple match" be-
tween both canvassers and the manager, these effects are identified from canvassing pairs that
are not ethnically homogeneous themselves.17 In Figure 4, we show that vertical homogeneity
  16
      Across specifications, a position at the bottom of the canvassing order reduces the chance of a successful visit,
and reduces visit duration.
   17
      Consequently, an equivalent interpretation is that teams where the supervisor and both canvassers belong to 3
different ethnic groups are on average more productive than teams where the supervisor and one canvasser belong
to the same ethnic group. Since vertically homogeneous teams are never horizontally homogeneous while vertically
diverse teams are sometimes horizontally homogeneous, the comparison between both types of teams captures vari-
ation in vertical homogeneity as well as some variation in horizontal homogeneity. However, the regressions that
control for both vertical and horizontal homogeneity allow us to correctly estimate the effect of vertical homogeneity.


                                                          17
is a monotically decreasing function of visit duration for all visits under 10 minutes.

Mechanisms. Since no team is ethnically homogeneous along both the horizontal and the verti-
cal dimension, our estimate of 2 in equations (2) and (3) combines two distinct effects. First, this
estimate captures differences in the degree of vertical diversity, i.e. whether teams where the su-
pervisor is non-co-ethnic with both employees outperform teams with one vertical connection.
Second, this estimate captures differences in the nature of the vertical relationship between su-
pervisors and a team with at least one co-ethnic employee compared to the vertical relationship
between supervisors and a team with no co-ethnic employee. These two effects can equivalently
be understood as the intensive and the extensive margin effects of vertical diversity--equations
(2) and (3) estimate the total effect of vertical diversity across these two margins.
   Furthermore, two potential mechanisms could be driving the performance differential be-
tween teams with and without a vertical ethnic match. First, vertical homogeneity could drive
a further wedge between already struggling horizontally diverse pairs. Alternatively, managers
could manage pairs with at least one co-ethnic team member less intensively because they are, in
essence, cutting their co-ethnic employee more slack. While our empirical setup does not allow
us to disentangle between these two mechanisms, the results from our survey of the field staff
(discussed in Table 8 and section 5.7) suggest that the latter mechanism is most likely driving
the vertical diversity result. Columns (2) and (4) of Table 8 show that vertical homogeneity un-
dermines the (self-assessed) performance of the co-ethnic employee, without affecting the per-
formance of the non-co-ethnic employee. If the negative impact of vertical diversity came from
an increase in the wedge between already struggling horizontally diverse pairs, then the perfor-
mance of both team members should have been equally affected. Furthermore, columns (5)-(6)
and (9)-(10) of Table 8 show that vertical diversity does not affect language use or the likelihood
that team members stay in contact after the experiment. Again, one would have expected an
effect on these variables if the former mechanism were at play. Overall, these estimates provide
suggestive evidence that vertical diversity undermines team performance through a loosening
of discipline and effort in those teams--a channel supported by the evidence in column 1 of
Table 7, where vertical homogeneity reduces the time spent by teams in the field. We elaborate
on this explanation in sections 5.6 and 5.7.


5.2.3   External Homogeneity

We also estimate whether households' ethnicities affect the success and duration of canvassing
visits. There are at least two distinct reasons why such "external" homogeneity could affect
our measures of performance. Canvassers could target their efforts towards finding households
of the same ethnicity if they feel responsible for mobilizing co-ethnic voters in the upcoming
election. Second, conditional on finding households, external homogeneity may also affect the


                                                 18
time canvassers spend with respondents.
   However, the effect of an external ethnic match with any one canvasser is a precisely es-
timated zero--we are able to rule out very small effects. We do not report effects of a "triple
match" between the household's ethnicity and both canvassers on the team, since this config-
uration occurs in only 3% of all cases. This effect is negative, small in magnitude, and not
significantly different from zero (results available upon request).


5.2.4   Robustness

In Appendix Tables 1 and 2 we check the robustness of these results to alternative specifications.
For comparison we report the main specification (equation 3) in column (1) of these tables, us-
ing visit completion and visit duration as the dependent variable in Appendix Tables 1 and 2,
respectively. In column (2) we remove controls and strata fixed effects, while in column (3) we
report estimates obtained with controls, without strata fixed effects. In column (4) we include
EA fixed effects instead of strata fixed effects, and in column (5) we include supervisor fixed
effects. Finally, in column (6) we use a different parametrization of the ethnicity main effects
where instead of dummy variables for the ethnicity of the junior and the senior canvasser we
use dummy variables equal to 1 if the relevant ethnicity is represented on the team (for instance,
the Kikuyu dummy is equal to 1 if either of the two canvassers is a Kikuyu).
   Across all these specifications, horizontal homogeneity has a positive, significant effect on
both visit completion (Appendix Table 1) and visit duration (Appendix Table 2). Vertical ho-
mogeneity has a negative, significant effect on visit duration. Results for the effect of vertical
homogeneity on visit completion are more mixed: the coefficient on this variable is positive,
non-significant in the specification without controls (column (2)) and negative, generally non-
significant in other specifications.
   In Appendix Table 6 we also ensure that our results on visit duration are not driven by
outliers in this variable. We report the main effects of horizontal and vertical homogeneity in
columns (1) and (3) in this table, where duration trimmed at the 99th percentile (10 minutes)
is the dependent variable in column (1) and log of (1+duration) is the dependent variable in
column (3). Our estimates are robust throughout.
   Finally, in Appendix Table 7 we compare our baseline estimates of the effects of horizontal
and vertical diversity on visit duration with estimates obtained after making various assump-
tions on the nature of selection into visit completion. Column (1) of this table reproduces our
baseline estimates, where the dependent variable is unconditional visit duration. In columns
(2) through (4) of Appendix Table 7, we then show that the positive (negative) effect of hori-
zontal (vertical) homogeneity is robust to alternative assumptions about the potential duration
of incomplete visits. In column (2), we impute visit duration at the mean of conditional visit
duration for all incomplete visits. In column (3), we impute visit duration at the 10th percentile

                                                19
of conditional visit duration (2 minutes), and in column (4) we impute visit duration at the 90th
percentile of conditional of visit duration (8 minutes). These estimates show that the effects of
horizontal and vertical homogeneity hold independently of the effect on visit completion.


5.3      Ethnic Composition and Learning

In Table 4, to test for the presence of learning effects, we also look at whether the effects of
horizontal and vertical homogeneity differ across the duration of the canvassing exercice. We
interact horizontal, vertical, and external homogeneity with the day in which a particular can-
vassing visit was completed, as described in equation (5).18 We report additional robustness
checks on these estimates in Appendix Tables 4 and 5, using the same alternative specifications
as in Appendix Tables 1 and 2. In Appendix Table 6, we show estimates obtained using trimmed
duration and log of (1+duration) as the dependent variables in equation (5).
       Across all specifications, we find robust evidence that the effect of horizontal ethnic homo-
geneity on performance increases over the duration of the exercise. Horizontal homogeneity
increases completion rates by approximately 1 percentage point for every additional day of can-
vassing, suggesting that co-ethnic pairs become more efficient at finding target households as
they spend more time together in the field. Visit duration also increases by 0.08 minutes for ev-
ery additional day of canvassing for these teams.19 This suggests that learning occurs primarily
within homogeneous pairs: learning is not improved by the blending of group-specific skills,
but it is facilitated by communication or increased socialization between co-ethnic teammates.
       In the second row of Table 4, we find no similar evidence that the effects of vertical ethnic ho-
mogeneity accentuate over time. If the negative effect of vertical homogeneity on performance
is caused by preferential treatment or distortions of managerial effort, then these distortions are
not a function of time spent together as a team.


5.4      Gender Composition and Team Performance

We estimate the effects of gender composition and compare them with the effects of ethnicity
in Table 5. As in Table 3, we first look at the effects of (gender) horizontal homogeneity sepa-
rately, and then introduce a dummy for vertical homogeneity. Columns (2) and (6) report the
coefficients of interest from equation (4). The specifications in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) include
measures of both gender and ethnic homogeneity on the right-hand side, in order to compare
the effects of both dimensions.
       The results we find are much more nuanced than those we find for horizontal and vertical
ethnic homogeneity. The effect of gender horizontal homogeneity is positive in all specifica-
  18
      The sample size is smaller in Table 4 because the visit date was not recorded in the canvassing data for 21% of
attempted visits.
   19
      This implies that homogeneous teams don't simply rush to complete their tasks as the exercise evolves.


                                                         20
tions, but is relatively small in magnitude and significant in only 3 out of 8 specifications. We
also show that gender vertical homogeneity does not significantly affect either measure of per-
formance. On the other hand, the effects we estimate for horizontal and vertical ethnic homo-
geneity are almost identical to those reported in Table 3.
       In Appendix Table 3, we further show that our results on horizontal and vertical ethnic and
gender homogeneity are not driven by homogeneity along two other dimensions, namely age
and education. We separately control for (i) a dummy for both canvassers being within 2 years
in age of each other, and (ii) a dummy for both canvassers having the same education level
(undergraduate or graduate; as all staff members have completed some university education).
To preserve our statistical power to measure these effects, and because we do not observe the
age and education levels of supervisors, here we do not control for the main effects of age and
education and we do not study vertical homogeneity along these dimensions. Overall, our main
results are robust to including these controls.


5.5      Registration Outcomes

In Table 6, we look at the impacts of the three dimensions of ethnic homogeneity (horizontal,
vertical, external) on measures of voter registration collected with a restricted subset of voters
in our sample. As described in Section 3, this measure is only available for households we could
reach by phone in the last days before the registration deadline. The sample used to compute
the estimates presented in Table 6 is restricted to 3,151 households out of 4,019 who were ran-
domly selected for both the canvassing intervention and the phone survey.20 Here we regress
household-level registration outcomes on a specification analogous to equation (3) which in-
cludes 3 dummy variables indicating whether at least one of the two teams instructed to canvass
the household was homogeneous on the horizontal, the vertical, or the external dimension, as
well as controls and ethnicity main effects.
       For comparison with our earlier results, in columns (1) and (2) we reproduce our estimates
for visit completion and duration in this limited sample. As in Tables 3 through 5, these regres-
sions are conducted on a dataset at the household-week level; hence there are approximately
twice more observations in columns (1)-(2) than in the other columns. The effects of horizon-
tal and vertical homogeneity in this sample remain positive and negative, respectively, but the
effects on visit completion are no longer significant.
       The effects we find on registration outcomes are broadly consistent with these patterns, with
the caveat that we are underpowered to detect such effects. In columns (3) through (5), we look
at three alternative measures of registration: whether the respondent to the phone call reported
being registered (column (3)), whether all household members were reported to be registered
  20
       The response rate in our phone survey was 84%. Attrition was uncorrelated with the canvassing treatments.



                                                         21
(column (4)), and whether the respondent registered in a polling station in Kibera (column (5)).
Registration within Kibera is a relevant outcome of our canvassing intervention since registra-
tion outside of Kibera required much greater effort and preparation and was therefore likely
to have occurred without any canvassing (voters registered outside Kibera were likely infra-
marginal in terms of the canvassing campaign).21
       External ethnic homogeneity has no significant impact on these outcomes, which is perhaps
the most surprising result. The horizontal ethnic match dummy is positive and significant in
column (4) (the entire family registered), but not in columns (3) and (5). Vertical ethnic homo-
geneity has a negative effect across the board, significant in columns (4) and (5). The signs of
these coefficients are broadly consistent with our earlier results: in particular, vertical homo-
geneity negatively affected the performance of teams.


5.6      Time Use and Team Organization

Next, we show evidence on the organization of work within teams in Table 7. We look at several
outcomes in this table. First, we look at the total daily amount of time spent in the field. We
interpret this variable as a measure of effort, since it is entirely driven by the times at which
teams started and stopped working each day in Kibera. We then look at the daily amount of
time spent canvassing and the total number of visits conducted each day. We interpret these
variables as measures of productivity, since the time spent canvassing and the number of suc-
cessful visits are determined by the speed at which teams could successfully locate target house-
holds. This required quickly acquiring knowledge on how to move within the Kibera slum and
how to gather the relevant information from local elders and neighbors. Furthermore, Table 1B
shows that these measures of time use are all strongly correlated with registration outcomes.
Finally, we look at a measure of team organization: whether teams split to conduct canvassing
visits individually. Visits conducted individually provide a measure of team organization and
decision-making, since no clear instructions were given as to whether visits should always be
conducted by the pair, or whether team members were advised to split.22
       In columns (1) and (2), we show that ethnic homogeneity affects both the amount of time
spent in the field and the time spent canvassing. Horizontal homogeneity increases team effort
and productivity, while vertical homogeneity has the opposite effect. In column (3), we look
at the effects of horizontal and vertical homogeneity on the total number of visits completed
each day. Horizontal homogeneity has a positive, significant impact on this variable, while
vertical homogeneity has a positive, non-significant effect. Finally, in column (4), we find that
  21
      In columns (3) to (5), standard errors are two-way clustered by team 1 and team 2 (the two teams by which they
were visited).
   22
      The effect of splitting the team on performance is ex ante ambiguous. On the one hand, keeping the team together
at all times might have promoted synergies and learning. On the other hand, splitting visits obviously allowed the
team to conduct a larger number of visits.


                                                         22
horizontally homogeneous team complete more visits alone (we do not report results using the
fraction of visits conducted alone, which are similar).
      In addition to these regression estimates, we also report in Figure 5 the distributions of these
measures of time use, separately for teams that are ethnically homogeneous (along the horizon-
tal dimension) and those that are not. This figure provides additional support to the results we
report in Table 7.


5.7     Staff Survey Results

In Table 8, we present results from the survey conducted with the canvassing staff. This survey
covered a number of aspects of the team exercise, including self-reported measures of effort and
performance, team communication, and whether canvassers socialized with their teammates
outside or after the study. In odd-numbered columns of Table 8, we regress these outcomes
on the horizontal and the vertical ethnic match dummies, as well as ethnicity main effects and
basic demographic controls (age, gender, and years of education). In even-numbered columns,
we look separately at whether the canvasser was herself a co-ethnic of the manager, as opposed
to her coworker being a co-ethnic of the manager.
      In columns (1) and (2), we look at the canvasser's evaluation of their own performance,
measured on a 1-5 scale (from very bad to very good). In column (1), homogeneous teams
on both the horizontal and the vertical dimension report lower own performance, but these
effects are not significant. In column (2), canvassers who were themselves co-ethnics with the
supervisor report significantly lower performance. In columns (3) and (4) we look at a self-
reported measure of effort ­ daily hours worked. Hours worked are significantly lower for
vertically homogeneous teams, and this effect is driven by canvassers with a co-ethnic manager.
      In columns (5) and (6), we look at whether homogeneity affected the choice of language
spoken within the team. Only one team out of thirty spoke their native tongue, while all others
communicated in either English or Swahili. We therefore test whether homogeneity influenced
whether a canvasser spoke her most preferred language (the language she reports speaking
most often). We do not find significant results on this variable, suggesting that communication
(language) frictions were not a critical factor for our results.
      Finally, in columns (7) through (10) we look at two measures of socialization between team-
mates: whether the canvassers socialized outside fieldwork (columns (7)-(8)) and whether they
stayed in contact after the experiment (columns (9)-(10)). Teammates in horizontally homoge-
neous teams are 23-25 percentage points more likely to socialize outside of work (significant in
column (8)) and 32-34 percentage points more likely to be in contact 18 months after the exper-
iment, significant at 1%. The evidence on vertical homogeneity is more mixed. In column (8),
canvassers with a co-ethnic manager are significantly less likely to socialize with their teammate
outside of work.

                                                  23
         Overall, we interpret these results as evidence that the horizontal homogeneity acted as a
monitoring and disciplining device and improved work organization within the team, which
facilitated learning and possibly led to increased socialization after the experiment. Meanwhile,
vertical homogeneity led to less stringent norms and discipline and hence lower effort and per-
formance. This finding is consistent with Bandiera et al. (2009), who show that an increase in
the average level of social connections between managers and workers can reduce average firm
productivity by inducing distortions in managerial effort (under fixed wages).23 These results
highlight the importance of looking at different dimensions of diversity when analyzing the ef-
fect of diversity on performance. While there may be costs to diversity in terms of the horizontal
structure of the firm, these costs must be balanced against the gains from diversity we find in
the vertical dimension.


6         Conclusion
In this paper, we study the effects of team diversity on performance. We use a field experiment
implemented within a non-profit research organization based in Kenya as part of a door-to-door
canvassing exercise where pairs of canvassers were assigned a list of households to visit. We use
the data from this canvassing exercise, including data on time use in the field and data from a
survey of the staff, to compute measures of effort and performance. Our most innovative con-
tribution is that we are able to study the causal effects of diversity along various dimensions--
within teams, along the hierarchy of the organization, and between workers and clients--within
a single organization.
         We find that ethnic homogeneity between teammates (the horizontal dimension) improves
team performance, measured in terms of the completion and duration of each canvassing visit
assigned to the team, as well as some measures of time use and household-level voter registra-
tion. This effect intensifies over the duration of the canvassing exercise, suggesting that horizon-
tal homogeneity (instead of diversity) promotes learning in the context of our experiment. The
magnitude of the effect of ethnic homogeneity on performance is economically sizeable. For
example, ethnically homogeneous teams on the horizontal dimension complete about a third
more visits every day. However, vertical ethnic homogeneity between team members and the
manager often has the opposite effect: teams with this configuration report poorer performance
on average. Finally, we find no effect of an ethnic match between households and canvassing
teams or managers. This null result suggests that teams did not strategically direct their efforts
towards co-ethnic households.
         Our analysis suggests that while horizontally homogeneous teams do not spend more time
in the field, they organize their time more efficiently and spend more time actually canvassing
    23
         The introduction of managerial incentives can undo this effect, but such incentives were absent in our context.


                                                             24
households. Conversely, vertical homogeneity reduces both the time spent in the field and the
time spent canvassing, suggesting a lower level of effort in these teams. We interpret these
results in light of evidence from a survey of the canvassing staff. First, the survey helps us
rule out simple language explanations for the different performances of teams--homogeneous
teams are no more likely to use their tribal language, or their preferred language as their primary
working language. However, there is evidence that horizontally homogeneous teams are more
cohesive, interact more outside of fieldwork, and are more likely to divide up tasks.
   Our findings suggest much of the trade-off between diversity and homogeneity in organiza-
tions may come from the different effects diversity has along different dimensions of organiza-
tional structure. On the one hand, diversity may reduce efficiency within teams of workers, by
creating communication costs or other frictions, leading to a worse division of tasks and lower
performance. On the other hand, diversity along the organization's hierarchy has the opposite
effect in our context, since it improves both effort and performance.




                                                25
References
Aker, Jenny C., Paul Collier, and Pedro C. Vicente, "Is Information Power? Using Mobile
 Phones and Free Newspapers During an Election in Mozambique," Review of Economics and
 Statistics, 2017, 99 (2), 185­200.
Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, "Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114, 1243­1284.
Alesina, Roberto and Eliana La Ferrara, "Ethnic Diversity and Economic Performance," Journal
  of Economic Literature, 2005, 43 (3), 762­800.
Algan, Yann, Camille H´emet, and David Laitin, "The Social Effects of Ethnic Diversity: a Natu-
  ral Experiment with Exogenous Residential Allocation," Journal of Political Economy, 2016, 124
  (3), 696­733.
Anwar, Shamena, Patrick Bayer, and Randi Hjalmarsson, "The Impact of Jury Race in Criminal
 Trials," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (2), 1017­1055.
Apfelbaum, Evan P., Katherine W. Phillips, and Jennifer A. Richeson, "Rethinking the Base-
 line in Diversity Research: Should We Be Explaining the Effects of Homogeneity," Perspectives
 on Psychological Science, 2014, 9 (3), 235­244.
Arrow, Kenneth, "The Theory of Discrimination," in O. Ashenfelter and A. Rees, eds., Discrim-
  ination in Labor Markets, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1973.
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul, "Social Connections and Incentives in the
  Workplace: Evidence From Personnel Data," Econometrica, 2009, 77 (4), 1047­1094.
Banerjee, Abhjit V., Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su, "Do Informed Voters Make
  Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India," Working Paper, 2010.
Barr, Abigail and Abena Oduro, "Ethnic Fractionalization in an African Labour Market," Jour-
  nal of Development Economics, 2002, 68, 355­379.
Becker, Gary, The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago Press, 1957.
Berg, Erlend, Maitreesh Ghatak, R Manjula, D Rajasekhar, and Sanchari Roy, "Motivating
  Knowledge Agents: Can Incentive Pay Overcome Social Distance," Economic Journal, 2019,
  129 (617), 110­142.
Berge, Lars Ivar Oppedal, Kjetil Bjorvatn, Simon Galle, Edward Miguel, Daniel Posner, Bertil
  Tungodden, and Kelly Zhang, "Ethnically Biased? Experimental Evidence from Kenya,"
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 2020, 18 (1).
Bertrand, Marianne and Esther Duflo, "Field Experiments on Discrimination," NBER Working
  Papers 22014, National Bureau of Economic Research February 2016.
   and Sendhil Mullainathan, "Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and
  Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic Review,
  September 2004, 94 (4), 991­1013.

                                              26
Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen, "Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
  Across Firms and Countries," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1351­1408.

  , Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, "Do Management Interventions
  Last? Evidence from India," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April 2020, 12 (2),
  198­219.

  , Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, and John Roberts, "Does Management
  Matter? Evidence from India," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (1), 1­51.

Braconnier, C´ eline, Jean-Yves Dormagen, and Vincent Pons, "Voter Registration Costs and
  Disenfranchisement: Experimental Evidence from France," American Political Science Review,
  2017, 111 (3), 584­604.

Caliendo, Lorenzo, Giordano Mion, Luca David Opromolla, and Esteban-Rossi-Hansberg,
  "Productivity and Organization in Portuguese Firms," NBER Working Paper No. 21811, 2015.

Cameron, Colin, Jonah Gelbach, and Douglas Miller, "Bootstrap-Based Improvements for In-
  ference with Clustered Errors," Review of Economics and Statistics, 2008, 90, 414­427.

Cohen, Jessica and Pascaline Dupas, "Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing? Evidence from a
 Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2010, 125, 1­45.

Fafchamps, Marcel, "Ethnicity and Credit in African Manufacturing," Journal of Development
  Economics, 2000, 61, 205­235.

Fairlie, Robert W., Florian Hoffmann, and Philip Oreopoulos, "A Community College Instruc-
  tor Like Me: Race and Ethnicity Interactions in the Classroom," American Economic Review,
  2014, 104 (8), 2567­2591.

Fisman, Raymond, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikrant Vig, "Cultural Proximity and Loan Out-
  comes," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (2), 457­492.

Fryer, Roland Jr, "Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools: Evi-
  dence from Field Experiments," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129, 1355­1407.

Fujiwara, Thomas, "Voting Technology, Political Responsiveness, and Infant Health: Evidence
  From Brazil," Econometrica, 2015, 83, 423­464.

Gerber, Alan S. and Donald P. Green, Get Out the Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout, Washing-
 ton, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2015.

Giuliano, Laura, David I. Levine, and Jonathan Leonard, "Manager Race and the Race of New
  Hires," Journal of Labor Economics, October 2009, 27 (4), 589­631.

Hamilton, Barton H., Jack A. Nickerson, and Hideo Owan, "Team Incentives and Worker Het-
 erogeneity: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Teams on Productivity and Participation,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (3), 465­497.




                                              27
Hamilton, Barton H, Jack A Nickerson, and Hideo Owan, "Diversity and Productivity in Pro-
 duction Teams," Advances in the Economic Analysis of Participatory and Labor-Managed Firms,
 2012, 13, 99­138.

Hjort, Jonas, "Ethnic Divisions and Production in Firms," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014,
  129 (4).

  , Changcheng Song, and Christopher Yenkey, "Ethnic Investing and the Value of Firms,"
  Working Paper, 2019.

Hoogendoorn, Sander and Mirjam van Praag, "Ethnic Diversity and Team Performance: A
 Field Experiment," Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 2012-068/3, 2012.

  , Simon C. Parker, and Mirjam van Praag, "Ability Dispersion and Team Performance: A
  Field Experiment," Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 2014-053/VII, 2014.

Kandel, Eugene and Edward P. Lazear, "Peer Pressure and Partnerships," Journal of Political
 Economy, 1992, 100 (4), 801­817.

Karaca-Mandic, Pinar, Nicole Maestas, and David Powell, "Peer Groups and Employment
 Outcomes: Evidence Based on Conditional Random Assignment in the U.S. Army," 2013.

Katherine, S.Y. Kim-Jun Phillips and S. Shim, "The Value of Diversity in Prganizations: A
 Social Psychological Perspective," in R. van Dick David De Cremer and K. Murnighan, eds.,
 Social Psychology and Organizations, New York, NY: Routledge, 2011.

Lang, Kevin, "A Language Theory of Discrimination," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1986,
  101 (2), 363­382.

Lazear, Edward P., "Globalisation and the Market for Team-Mates," The Economic Journal, 1999,
  109, C15­C40.

  , Kathryn L. Shaw, and Christopher T. Stanton, "The Value of Bosses," Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics, 2015, 33 (4), 823­861.

Levine, Sheen S., Evan P. Apfelbaum, Mark Bernard, Valerie L. Bartelt, Edward J. Zapac, and
  David Stark, "Ethnic diversity deflates price bubbles," PNAS, 2014, 111 (52), 18524­18529.

Lyons, Elizabeth, "Team Production in International Labor Markets: Experimental Evidence
  from the Field," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2017, 9 (3), 70­104.

Marx, Benjamin, Thomas M. Stoker, and Tavneet Suri, "There Is No Free House: Ethnic Pa-
 tronage in a Kenyan Slum," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October 2019, 11
 (4), 36­70.

Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti, "Peers at Work," American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1),
 112­145.

Miguel, Edward and Mary Kay Gugerty, "Ethnic Diversity, Social Sanctions, and Public Goods
 in Kenya," Journal of Public Economics, 2005, 89, 2325­2368.


                                              28
Nickerson, David W., "Quality Is Job One: Professional and Volunteer Voter Mobilization
  Calls," American Journal of Political Science, 2007, 51 (2), 269­282.

Pons, Vincent and Guillaume Liegey, "Increasing the Electoral Participation of Immigrants:
  Experimental Evidence from France," forthcoming Economic Journal, 2018.

Prat, Andrea, "Should a Team be Homogeneous?," European Economic Review, 2002, 46, 1187­
  1207.

Price, Joseph and Justin Wolfers, "Racial Discrimination among NBA Referees," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1859­1887.

Reinhard, Selten and Massimon Warglien, "The Emergence of Simple Languages in an Exper-
  imental Coordinate Game," PNAS, 2007, 104 (18), 7361­7366.

Shayo, Moses and Asaf Zussman, "Judicial Ingroup Bias in the Shadow of Terrorism," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2011, 126, 1447­1484.

Wantchekon, Leonard, Marko Klasnja, and Natalija Novta, "Education and Human Capital
 Externalities: Evidence from Colonial Benin," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 129, 703­
 757.

Young, Alwyn, "Channeling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical Insignificance of
  Seemingly Significant Experimental Results*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 11 2018, 134
  (2), 557­598.

Zenger, Todd R. and Barbara S. Lawrence, "Organizational Demography: The Differential Ef-
  fects of Age and Tenure Distributions on Technical Communication," Academy of Management
  Journal, 1989, 32 (2), 353­376.




                                              29
                     Table 1A: Summary Statistics

                                                            Mean         SD       N
 Household-Week Level Data
 Visit Completed                                             0.41        0.49    30947
 Duration of Visit                                           1.82        3.02    29302
 Duration of Visit, Trimmed at 99th pctile                   1.67        2.48    29017
 Duration, Conditional on Finding Household                  4.79        3.13    11135
 External Ethnic Match                                       0.30        0.46    27543

 Team-Level Data
 Total Visits Allocated to Team                             1045.07     117.72    30
 Total Visits Completed by Team                             426.00      73.27     30
 Horizontal Ethnic Match                                     0.23        0.43     30
 Vertical Ethnic Match                                       0.23        0.43     30
 Total EAs Allocated to Team                                 20.00       0.37     30

 Team-Day Level Data
 # of Visits Conducted by Team-Day                          32.85       18.32    279
 % of Alone Visits Conducted by Team-Day                     0.14         0.09   279
 Time Spent Canvassing                                      155.97       97.88   279
 Time Spent in Field                                        319.41      132.78   274

 Staff Level Data
 Gender (Dummy for Male)                                     0.43        0.50     60
 Age                                                         26.73       3.08     59
 Years of College Education                                   3.04       1.24     58
 Staff of Kikuyu Tribe                                       0.37        0.49     60
 Staff of Kisii Tribe                                         0.10       0.30     60
 Staff of Luhya Tribe                                        0.28        0.45     60
 Staff of Luo Tribe                                          0.12        0.32     60
 Staff of Other Tribe                                        0.13        0.34     60

 Registration Data (Household Level)
 Respondent Registered (self-report)                         0.80        0.40    3391
 Entire Family Registered                                    0.69        0.46    3339
 Registered in Kibera                                        0.58        0.49    3391
Note: Each of the 30 teams was composed of two staff members.
     Each team covered 10 EAs each week for a total of two weeks.
     Each household was visited twice, each time by a different team.
     Duration data is missing for 1,645 completed visits.
     The external match is missing when household ethnicity is unobserved.




                                           30
                  Table 1B: Correlations between Team Performance and Voter Registration

                                              Total Registered                    Family Registered                      Registered in Kibera
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)        (8)        (9)
       Number of visits              0.334                                  0.281                                    0.255
                                      (0.022)                                (0.018)                                  (0.019)
       Time spent in field                        1.668                                  1.371                                  1.194
                                                   (0.254)                                (0.209)                                (0.186)
       Time spent canvassing                                   3.247                                 2.713                                 2.476
                                                                (0.250)                               (0.200)                               (0.207)
       R2                              0.497        0.182        0.374       0.488        0.169        0.361          0.486      0.155      0.364
       Dep Var Mean                    14.81        14.77        14.81       12.52        12.48        12.52          10.89      10.86      10.89
       Observations                     279          274          279         279          274          279            279        274        279
31




     Note: Correlations are computed from the team-day level data. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
      Registration was self-reported and collected via phone with a subset of our sample (see text for details).
      `Number of visits' is the number of successful (completed) canvassing visits completed by a team in a given week.
      `Time spent in field' and `time spent in canvassing' are measured in hours and aggregated by team-week.
      `Total registered' indicates the total number of registrations among the target households allocated to a team in a given week.
      `Family Registered' aggregates all instances where the entire family registered (as reported by households).
      `Registered in Kibera' aggregates all instances where the household registered in a Kibera polling station .
                       Table 2A: Randomization Checks
                                               Mean       Horizontal Match       Vertical Match
  Staff Level Variables
  Gender (Dummy for Male)                      0.4333          -0.1925                  0.087
                                                               (0.1251)               (0.1646)
  Same Gender as Teammate                      0.5333          -0.1366                 0.0497
                                                               (0.2192)               (0.2196)
  Age                                          26.7288         -0.0468                 1.2921
                                                                (0.876)               (1.2313)
  Years of College Education                   3.0431           0.0373                 0.1786
                                                               (0.3379)               (0.3409)
  Senior Canvasser in Team                       0.5            0.0932                -0.0932
                                                               (0.2196)               (0.2196)
  EA Level Variables
  Log Consumption per Capita                   10.4168           0.0052                0.0155
                                                                (0.0224)              (0.0534)
  EA Poverty Rate                              0.1467           -0.0047                -0.019
                                                                (0.0084)              (0.0232)
  Number of Households in EA                   52.2533           2.0954                7.2829
                                                                (2.6427)              (6.0092)
  Average Age of Household Head                35.4021          -0.1605                0.2986
                                                                (0.2733)               (0.682)
  Head Years of Education                      9.2715           -0.0151                0.2899
                                                                (0.1992)              (0.3367)
  Household Head Owns a Business               0.1496          -0.0307**              -0.0281
                                                                (0.0144)              (0.0336)
  Household Head Unemployed                    0.3157           -0.0228               -0.0454
                                                                (0.0152)              (0.0364)
  Fraction of Youth Unemployed                 0.1682           0.0252*               -0.0168
                                                                (0.0151)              (0.0324)
  Households with a Radio                      0.7542            0.0055                0.0176
                                                                (0.0157)              (0.0354)
  Households with a TV                         0.4143             0.029                0.0167
                                                                 (0.023)              (0.0682)
  Households with Mud Cement Walls              0.511            0.0326                0.0034
                                                                (0.0474)              (0.0744)
  Households with Cement Floor                 0.6331            0.0343                0.0766
                                                                (0.0312)              (0.0778)
  Households with Piped Water                  0.6813            0.0528                0.0784
                                                                (0.0588)               (0.095)
  Households with Covered Pit                  0.6582            0.0577               -0.0847
                                                                (0.0485)              (0.0838)
  Households Cooking with Paraffin             0.5325             0.028               -0.0296
                                                                (0.0244)              (0.0462)
  Households with Electricity                  0.5135             0.037               -0.0168
                                                                (0.0305)               (0.087)
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Column (1) shows the mean of each row variable. In columns (2) and (3), each cell
      shows estimates from a regression of the row variable on the column variable.


                                                32
                                       Table 2B: Randomization Checks
                                                Mean         Horizontal Match          Vertical Match        External Match
     Household Level Variables
     Household Size                             3.6692             -0.0073                  0.0731               -0.0546
                                                                   (0.0583)                  (0.13)              (0.0332)
     Nb of children in HH                       1.5524             -0.0032                  0.0811               -0.0229
                                                                   (0.0412)                 (0.102)              (0.0217)
     Household pays rent                        0.9231             -0.0007                 -0.0009                0.0003
                                                                   (0.0036)                (0.0094)              (0.0045)
     Housing Rent (log)                         7.2695             -0.0892                  0.0318               -0.0198
                                                                   (0.0531)                (0.0735)              (0.0175)
     Household ever evicted in Kibera           0.1222              0.0036                 -0.0162                0.0069
                                                                    (0.005)                (0.0145)              (0.0072)
     Years in Same Structure                    8.2269               0.002                  0.0249                0.0588
                                                                   (0.2278)                 (0.504)              (0.1739)
     Years in Kibera                           15.5485             -0.2448                 -0.4171               -0.0185
33




                                                                    (0.286)                (0.6273)              (0.1968)
     Household Has Phone                        0.5125              0.0118                   0.045               -0.0111
                                                                    (0.025)                (0.0328)              (0.0074)
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
           Column (1) shows the mean of each row variable.
           In columns (2), (3) and (4), each cell shows estimates from a regression of the row variable on the column variable.
     Table 3: Effect of Ethnic Composition on Team Performance

                                           Visit Completion                            Visit Duration
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
Horizontal Ethnic Match          0.085         0.075         0.083          0.703       1.243           1.280
                                  (0.022)      (0.032)       (0.032)        (0.268)      (0.324)         (0.325)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.002]      [0.193]       [0.137]        [0.085]      [0.081]         [0.070]
Randomization Inference           [0.022]      [0.170]       [0.145]        [0.081]      [0.058]         [0.056]

Vertical Ethnic Match                            -0.033       -0.035                    -1.435      -1.407
                                                (0.042)      (0.045)                     (0.374)     (0.394)
Wild Bootstrap                                  [0.564]      [0.504]                     [0.048]     [0.050]
Randomization Inference                         [0.643]      [0.653]                     [0.053]     [0.070]

External Ethnic Match                                         -0.002                                     -0.035
                                                             (0.007)                                    (0.051)

Random Visit Order               -0.004       -0.004        -0.004          -0.034      -0.035      -0.032
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
IEBC Treatment                   -0.055       -0.110        -0.124           0.134       -0.470         -0.554
                                  (0.015)      (0.027)       (0.032)        (0.189)      (0.275)        (0.295)
R2                                 0.022        0.023         0.031          0.031       0.036           0.040
Dep Var Mean                        0.41         0.41          0.42           1.82        1.82            1.87
Strata FE                           Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
Clusters                             30           30            30             30          30              30
Observations                       30947        30947         27543          29302       29302           26067
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets for horizontal & vertical matches.
      All specifications include ethnicity dummies for each staff member.
      Columns (3) and (6) also include household ethnicity dummies.




                                                   34
                   Table 4: Ethnic Composition and Learning

                                                Visit Completion                           Visit Duration
                                              (1)           (2)       (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)
Horizontal Ethnic Match × Day             0.010           0.008     0.009      0.083           0.083     0.090
                                           (0.003)        (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.031)         (0.032)   (0.033)
Wild Bootstrap                             [0.011]        [0.061]   [0.136]    [0.014]         [0.041]   [0.071]
Randomization Inference                    [0.018]        [0.078]   [0.080]    [0.019]         [0.034]   [0.031]

Vertical Ethnic Match × Day                               -0.005    -0.005                      0.009     0.009
                                                          (0.004)   (0.004)                    (0.021)   (0.020)
Wild Bootstrap                                            [0.053]   [0.015]                    [0.691]   [0.558]
Randomization Inference                                   [0.289]   [0.221]                    [0.689]   [0.692]

External Ethnic Match × Day                                          0.001                                0.001
                                                                    (0.002)                              (0.013)

Horizontal Ethnic Match                     0.007          0.019     0.016      0.014          0.636     0.599
                                           (0.033)        (0.036)   (0.038)    (0.290)         (0.343)   (0.348)
Vertical Ethnic Match                                      -0.024    -0.011                 -1.949       -1.798
                                                          (0.064)   (0.066)                  (0.409)      (0.409)
External Ethnic Match                                                -0.016                               -0.047
                                                                    (0.021)                              (0.118)
Day                                         0.002          0.003     0.001      0.028           0.026     0.022
                                           (0.004)        (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.024)         (0.026)   (0.029)
R2                                          0.028         0.030     0.037       0.038          0.045        0.049
Dep Var Mean                                0.435         0.435     0.443       1.939          1.939        1.977
Strata FE                                    Yes           Yes       Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes
Clusters                                      30            30        30          30            30            30
Observations                                24360         24360     21842       22900          22900        20518
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets.
      All specifications include ethnicity dummies for each staff member.
      All specifications also include controls for the daily visit order and IEBC treatment.
      Columns (3) and (6) also include household ethnicity effects.
      Day refers to the day in the two week period of canvassing (see text for details).




                                                     35
          Table 5: Gender Composition and Team Performance
                                              Visit Completion                                 Visit Duration
                                     (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)        (8)
                                                                                                                
Horizontal Gender Match            0.036      0.060         0.013          0.007     0.098     0.134    0.530      0.691
                                  (0.022)     (0.018)      (0.024)        (0.021)   (0.182)   (0.172)   (0.200)    (0.191)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.222]     [0.051]      [0.787]        [0.983]   [0.697]   [0.642]   [0.214]    [0.166]
Randomization Inference           [0.182]     [0.022]      [0.716]        [0.855]   [0.654]   [0.533]   [0.120]    [0.104]

Vertical Gender Match                          0.050                       -0.015              0.031                0.338
                                              (0.030)                     (0.018)             (0.236)              (0.251)
Wild Bootstrap                                [0.261]                     [0.620]             [0.963]              [0.545]
Randomization Inference                       [0.202]                     [0.717]             [0.917]              [0.549]

Horizontal Ethnic Match                                    0.074          0.064                         0.806      1.136
                                                           (0.018)        (0.032)                       (0.264)    (0.368)
Wild Bootstrap                                             [0.006]        [0.326]                       [0.096]    [0.268]
Randomization Inference                                    [0.032]        [0.353]                       [0.083]    [0.132]

Vertical Ethnic Match                                                      -0.012                                  -2.031
                                                                          (0.044)                                   (0.438)
Wild Bootstrap                                                            [0.814]                                   [0.105]
Randomization Inference                                                   [0.907]                                   [0.066]

Random Visit Order               -0.004 -0.004 -0.004 -0.004 -0.035 -0.035 -0.034 -0.035
                                  (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.007) (0.007) (0.008) (0.008)
IEBC Treatment                    -0.046      -0.037      -0.065 -0.106              0.274    0.409      -0.060    -0.833
                                   (0.019)    (0.020)      (0.017) (0.033)          (0.164)   (0.177)   (0.192)     (0.204)
R2                                 0.015       0.017       0.023          0.024     0.017     0.019     0.036       0.042
Dep Var Mean                        0.41        0.41        0.41           0.41      1.82      1.82      1.82        1.82
Strata FE                           Yes         Yes         Yes            Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes
Clusters                             30          30          30             30        30        30        30          30
Observations                       30947       30947       30947          30947     29302     29302     29302       29302
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization p-values reported in brackets.
      All specifications include gender dummies for each staff member.
      Columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) also include staff ethnicity dummies.




                                                          36
                 Table 6: Self-Reported Registration Outcomes
                               Visit Completion Visit Duration Registered Family Registered Kibera Registered
                                        (1)                  (2)              (3)                 (4)                    (5)

Horizontal Ethnic Match               0.035               1.188            -0.023               0.045                   0.002
                                     (0.033)              (0.396)          (0.034)              (0.025)                (0.021)
Wild Bootstrap                       [0.620]              [0.125]          [0.670]              [0.301]                [0.946]
Randomization Inference              [0.520]              [0.097]          [0.697]              [0.285]                [0.957]

Vertical Ethnic Match                -0.030              -1.568            -0.060               -0.068                 -0.130
                                     (0.052)              (0.523)          (0.045)               (0.025)                (0.034)
Wild Bootstrap                       [0.727]              [0.080]          [0.539]               [0.116]                [0.117]
Randomization Inference              [0.719]              [0.118]          [0.446]               [0.129]                [0.046]

External Ethnic Match                -0.024               -0.180            0.011                0.011                  0.014
                                     (0.016)               (0.082)         (0.015)              (0.017)                (0.027)

Random Visit Order                   -0.002               -0.027           -0.001                0.001                 0.006
                                     (0.001)               (0.010)         (0.002)              (0.002)                (0.003)
IEBC Treatment                       -0.089               -0.425            0.031                0.013                  0.038
                                      (0.036)             (0.371)          (0.080)              (0.057)                (0.056)
R2                                    0.022                 0.041           0.004                0.007                  0.011
Clusters                                30                    30              30                   30                     30
Dep var mean                          0.483                 2.123           0.801                0.687                  0.587
Observations                          7387                  6932            3151                 3100                   3151
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization p-values reported in brackets for the horizontal and vertical ethnic matches.
      The sample is restricted to households randomly selected to be canvassed and contacted by phone.
      All specifications include ethnicity dummies for households and staff members.
      Registered (column 3) indicates whether the head of household registered.
      Family (column 4) indicates whether the entire household registered.
      Kibera (column 5) indicates whether the head of household registered to vote in Kibera.




                                                       37
                                      Table 7: Time Use
                                 Field Time      Canvassing Time          # Visits        # Visits Alone
                                      (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)

Horizontal Ethnic Match           88.202              125.340            14.444              3.013
                                   (31.899)            (33.815)           (4.483)            (1.574)
Wild Bootstrap                      [0.140]             [0.060]           [0.054]            [0.283]
Randomization Inference             [0.115]             [0.030]           [0.051]            [0.225]

Vertical Ethnic Match            -140.513                -52.613            5.465             1.772
                                   (48.144)             (39.910)           (4.948)           (1.450)
Wild Bootstrap                      [0.092]              [0.399]           [0.405]           [0.381]
Randomization Inference             [0.095]              [0.419]           [0.423]           [0.445]

R2                                   0.117              0.201               0.131             0.124
Clusters                              30                  30                  30               30
Dep Var Mean                        321.77              152.15              32.39             5.13
Observations                          266                266                 266               266
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization p-values reported in brackets.
      All regressions are at the team-day level and include ethnicity dummies for each staff member.




                                                   38
                                                    Table 8: Staff Survey Results
                                              Performance           Work Hours            Language              Socialize        In Contact
                                              (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)     (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)

     Horizontal Ethnic Match                 -0.138     -0.124     -0.199     -0.167    0.037 0.039 0.231 0.249 0.323 0.338
                                            (0.194)    (0.195)    (0.286)    (0.287)   (0.211) (0.213) (0.149) (0.144) (0.103) (0.108)
     Wild Bootstrap                         [0.875]    [0.847]    [0.587]    [0.612]   [0.989] [0.936] [0.051] [0.040] [0.016] [0.014]
     Randomization Inference                [0.508]    [0.556]    [0.477]    [0.556]   [0.841] [0.839] [0.132] [0.095] [0.005] [0.005]

     Vertical Ethnic Match                   -0.156               -0.881               -0.113               -0.149              0.157
                                            (0.364)               (0.495)              (0.307)             (0.248)             (0.206)
     Wild Bootstrap                         [0.954]               [0.325]              [0.874]             [0.263]             [0.699]
     Randomization Inference                [0.670]               [0.117]              [0.707]             [0.540]             [0.471]

     Vertical Ethnic Match, Self                      -0.802                -1.042                -0.156             -0.483               0.244
                                                       (0.294)               (0.455)             (0.298)             (0.237)             (0.176)
     Wild Bootstrap                                    [0.031]               [0.071]             [0.712]             [0.110]             [0.463]
39




     Randomization Inference                           [0.020]               [0.052]             [0.591]             [0.096]             [0.210]

     Vertical Ethnic Match, Not Self                    0.215                -0.472               -0.072              0.138               0.225
                                                       (0.243)               (0.438)             (0.317)             (0.230)             (0.225)
     Wild Bootstrap                                    [0.055]               [0.848]             [0.959]             [0.389]             [0.490]
     Randomization Inference                           [0.412]               [0.324]             [0.829]             [0.566]             [0.339]

     R2                                      0.351      0.456      0.174     0.186      0.217    0.219     0.244      0.336    0.441     0.453
     Clusters                                  30         30         30        30         30       30        30         30       30        30
     Dep Var Mean                            4.351      4.351      9.105     9.105      0.509    0.509     0.544      0.544    0.351     0.351
     Observations                              57         57         57        57         57       57        57         57       57        57
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
           Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets.
           All regressions include Staff ethnicity dummies and demographic controls (gender, age, and education).
           Performance is a personal evaluation of the canvasser's own performance on a 1-5 scale.
           Work hours are self-reported daily work hours.
           Language is a dummy indicating the canvasser spoke his most preferred language with his coworker.
           Socialize is a dummy indicating the canvasser socialized with his coworker outside the experiment.
           In Contact is a dummy indicating the canvasser stayed in touch with his coworker after the experiment.
                                                                         Figure 1: Sample Tracking Sheet



     NYUMBA HADI NYUMBA: SECOND VISIT                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                       TREATMENT STATUS: Treatment 2
     WARD:                                          VILLAGE: Kichinjio                   EA NUMBER:  201008                                            TEAM: 21 
                                                                                                                                                       ORDER: 4                                                
     Enumerator Code:                               First and Last Name: _________________ / __________________                                        Date: |__|__| / |__|__|/ 2012       (DD/MM/YYYY)


          Household         HHID        GPS Lat.            GPS Long.    Result    First and Last name of      Relation    Person is      Person       Who else was        Relation    Start       End        Enumerator
          Head Name                                                                individual spoken with      to Head     Registered     has ID       present?            to head     time        time       Likelihood 
                                                                                                                           1=Yes          1=Yes        First and Last                                         that 
                                                                                                                           2=No           2=No         names                                                  respondent 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              registers 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              w/in a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              week 
                                                                                   ____________________ /                                                                    |__|      |__|__|:    |__|__|            
                                                                                                                                                                                                   : 
                                                                          |__|     _____________________         |__|         |__|            |__|             |__|          |__|      |__|__|     |__|__|        |__| 
                                                                                                                                                                             |__|                                    
                                                                                   ____________________ /                                                                    |__|      |__|__|:    |__|__|
40




                                                                                                                                                                                                      : 
                                                                          |__|     _____________________         |__|         |__|            |__|             |__|          |__|      |__|__|     |__|__|        |__| 
                                                                                                                                                                             |__|
                                                                                   ____________________ /                                                                    |__|      |__|__|:    |__|__|           
                                                                                                                                                                                                   : 
                                                                          |__|     _____________________         |__|         |__|            |__|             |__|          |__|      |__|__|     |__|__|        |__| 
                                                                                                                                                                             |__|                                    
                                                                                   ____________________ /                                                                    |__|      |__|__|:    |__|__|
                                                                                                                                                                                                      : 
                                                                          |__|     _____________________         |__|         |__|            |__|             |__|          |__|      |__|__|     |__|__|        |__| 
                                                                                                                                                                             |__|
                                                                                   ____________________ /                                                                    |__|      |__|__|:    |__|__|           
                                                                                                                                                                                                   : 
                                                                          |__|     _____________________         |__|         |__|            |__|             |__|          |__|      |__|__|     |__|__|        |__| 
                                                                                                                                                                             |__|                                    
                                                                                   ____________________ /                                                                    |__|      |__|__|:    |__|__|           
                                                                                                                                                                                                      : 
                                                                          |__|     _____________________         |__|         |__|            |__|             |__|          |__|      |__|__|     |__|__|        |__| 
                                                                                                                                                                             |__|
      
                                                         Figure 2: Map of Kibera
41




     Note: Satellite image of the Kibera slum, with Enumeration Areas (EAs) outlined in yellow.
           The Kibera slum in Nairobi covers about five square km of area and over 30,000 households across more than 600 Enumeration Areas.
                 Figure 3: Horizontal Homogeneity Over Distribution of Duration
42




     Note: The bar chart is a histogram of visit duration (for completed visits only) for durations 10 minutes or less.
           The solid black line is a kernel density of the horizontal ethnic match over values of visit duration.
                    Figure 4: Vertical Homogeneity Over Distribution of Duration
43




     Note: The bar chart is a histogram of visit duration (for completed visits only) for durations 10 minutes or less.
           The solid black line is a kernel density of the vertical ethnic match over values of visit duration.
                    Figure 5: Time Use in the Field, by Horizontal Ethnic Diversity




             .006
             .004
             .002
44




             0




                    0                       200                       400                          600                        800
                                                                     Minutes

                                 Field time, Diff ethnicity                            Field time, Same ethnicity
                                 Canvass time, Diff ethnicity                          Canvass time, Same ethnicity

     Note: All plots are kernel densities. Time use is measured in minutes per day.
               Canvassing time is measured as the sum of the durations of all visits conducted each day.
               Field time is calculated as the difference between the end of the last visit and the beginning of the first visit each day.
Appendix Table 1: Ethnic Composition and Team Performance,
                  Alternative Specifications

                                                               Visit completed
                                     (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)           (6)
                                                                                          
Horizontal Ethnic Match           0.083        0.063   0.088           0.166      0.090        0.054
                                  (0.032)      (0.032) (0.029)         (0.027)    (0.031)      (0.023)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.137]      [0.325] [0.142]         [0.204]    [0.067]      [0.168]
Randomization Inference           [0.145]      [0.242] [0.087]         [0.078]    [0.121]      [0.146]

Vertical Ethnic Match             -0.035        0.047       -0.044     -0.072      -0.052      -0.047
                                  (0.045)      (0.046)      (0.039)     (0.031)   (0.041)      (0.037)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.504]      [0.485]      [0.497]     [0.343]   [0.925]      [0.496]
Randomization Inference           [0.653]      [0.513]      [0.494]     [0.371]   [0.456]      [0.407]

External Ethnic Match              -0.002      -0.000        0.002      0.006      0.002        -0.004
                                  (0.007])     (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)    (0.008)      (0.007)

Random Visit Order               -0.004                     -0.004 -0.003 -0.004               -0.003
                                  (0.001)                    (0.001) (0.001) (0.001)            (0.001)
IEBC Treatment                   -0.124                     -0.130                            -0.099
                                  (0.032)                    (0.028)                           (0.032)
R2                                 0.031       0.018         0.022     0.059      0.023         0.012
Dep Var Mean                        0.42        0.42          0.42      0.42       0.42          0.42
Ethnicity effects                   Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        Yes           Alt.
Controls                            Yes         No            Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes
Strata FE                           Yes         No            No        No         No            No
EA FE                               No          No            No        Yes        No            No
Supervisor FE                       No          No            No        No         Yes           No
Clusters                             30          30            30        30         30            30
Observations                       27543       27543         27543     27543      27543         27543
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets.
      In col. (6), staff ethnicity effects are parametrized as dummies for any ethnicity being represented
      on the team (see text for details).




                                                       45
Appendix Table 2: Ethnic Composition and Team Performance,
                  Alternative Specifications

                                                            Visit duration
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Horizontal Ethnic Match           1.280      1.146       1.248       1.902        1.280         0.480
                                  (0.325)    (0.333)     (0.327)     (0.327)      (0.341)       (0.240)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.070]    [0.104]     [0.074]     [0.066]      [0.070]       [0.229]
Randomization Inference           [0.056]    [0.063]     [0.050]     [0.035]      [0.062]       [0.170]

Vertical Ethnic Match            -1.407 -0.985 -1.394 -2.331 -1.561                              -0.458
                                  (0.394) (0.446) (0.428) (0.440) (0.418)                       (0.279)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.050] [0.189] [0.053] [0.096] [0.578]                       [0.194]
Randomization Inference           [0.070] [0.205] [0.082] [0.066] [0.060]                       [0.240]

External Ethnic Match             -0.035      -0.029      -0.023       0.044      -0.026         -0.039
                                  (0.051)    (0.052)     (0.050)      (0.051)     (0.051)       (0.043)

Random Visit Order               -0.032                 -0.033 -0.029 -0.033                   -0.032
                                  (0.008)                (0.009) (0.008) (0.009)                (0.009)
IEBC Treatment                    -0.554                 -0.551                                  -0.015
                                  (0.295)                (0.303)                                (0.247)
R2                                 0.040      0.030       0.035       0.073        0.035        0.026
Dep Var Mean                        1.87       1.87        1.87        1.87         1.87         1.87
Ethnicity effects                   Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Alt.
Controls                            Yes        No          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Strata FE                           Yes        No          No          No           No           No
EA FE                               No         No          No          Yes          No           No
Supervisor FE                       No         No          No          No           Yes          No
Clusters                             30         30          30          30           30           30
Observations                       26067      26067       26067       26067        26067        26067
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets.
      In col. (6), staff ethnicity effects are parametrized as dummies for any ethnicity being represented
      on the team (see text for details).




                                                   46
              Appendix Table 3: Ethnic Composition and Team Performance,
                   Controlling for Other Demographic Homogeneity
                                                       Visit Completion                                 Visit Duration
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)      (6)         (7)       (8)
     Horizontal Ethnic Match              0.056        0.073       0.073       0.094       1.316       1.559      1.560      1.382
                                          (0.027)      (0.027)     (0.037)     (0.031)     (0.278)     (0.294)    (0.381)    (0.305)
     Wild Bootstrap                       [0.249]      [0.209]     [0.295]     [0.262]     [0.106]     [0.088]    [0.109]    [0.159]
     Randomization Inference              [0.314]      [0.215]     [0.334]     [0.166]     [0.044]     [0.026]    [0.066]    [0.068]

     Vertical Ethnic Match                -0.015       -0.020       -0.073      -0.085     -1.970 -2.054 -2.769 -1.843
                                          (0.044)      (0.045)     (0.070)     (0.055)      (0.455) (0.428) (0.647) (0.616)
     Wild Bootstrap                       [0.781]      [0.744]     [0.515]     [0.363]      [0.112] [0.101] [0.037] [0.145]
     Randomization Inference              [0.871]      [0.839]     [0.612]     [0.443]      [0.067] [0.027] [0.058] [0.176]

     Horizontal Gender Match               0.018                                0.020      0.459                              0.204
                                          (0.019)                              (0.018)     (0.128)                           (0.166)
47




     Horizontal Age Match                              0.035                   0.036                   0.455                  0.280
                                                       (0.016)                 (0.019)                 (0.194)               (0.249)
     Horizontal Education Match                                     -0.030     -0.039                              -0.432    -0.326
                                                                   (0.023)      (0.016)                            (0.263)   (0.285)

     IEBC Treatment                      -0.105 -0.104 -0.128 -0.139 -0.850 -0.786 -1.118                                    -0.710
                                          (0.032) (0.034) (0.038) (0.033) (0.212) (0.222) (0.311)                            (0.360)
     Random Visit Order                  -0.004 -0.004 -0.004 -0.004 -0.034 -0.034 -0.034 -0.034
                                          (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008) (0.008)
     R2                                    0.024       0.025        0.025       0.025          0.041   0.041       0.040     0.039
     Dep Var Mean                           0.41        0.41         0.41        0.41           1.82    1.82        1.82      1.82
     Strata FE                              Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes     Yes         Yes       Yes
     Observations                          30947       30947        30947       30947          29302   29302       29302     29302
     Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
           Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values in brackets for the horizontal and vertical ethnic matches.
           Teams have an age match if the age of both canvassers is within 2 years of each other.
           Teams have an education match if both canvassers have completed the same education level (undergraduate or graduate).
                        Appendix Table 4:
    Ethnic Composition and Learning, Alternative Specifications

                                                              Visit completed
                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)     (6)
Horizontal Ethnic Match*Day         0.009         0.008       0.008        0.005       0.008     0.009
                                    (0.004)      (0.005)     (0.005)      (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.005)
Wild Bootstrap                      [0.136]      [0.062]     [0.074]      [0.137]     [0.149]    [0.044]
Randomization Inference             [0.080]      [0.136]     [0.152]      [0.351]     [0.159]    [0.098]

Vertical Ethnic Match*Day            -0.005    -0.011       -0.010        -0.001    -0.010       -0.009
                                     (0.004)    (0.003)      (0.004)      (0.005)    (0.004)      (0.003)
Wild Bootstrap                       [0.015]    [0.018]      [0.018]      [0.011]    [0.011]      [0.030]
Randomization Inference              [0.221]    [0.011]      [0.022]      [0.880]    [0.022]      [0.027]

External Ethnic Match*Day             0.001       0.002       0.002        0.001       0.002      0.001
                                     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.003)    (0.003)

Horizontal Ethnic Match               0.016       0.015       0.032      0.079         0.033      -0.028
                                     (0.038)     (0.040)     (0.042)     (0.031)      (0.045)    (0.035)
Vertical Ethnic Match                -0.011     0.122         0.030       -0.010       0.027      0.049
                                     (0.066)    (0.057)      (0.060)      (0.064)     (0.063)    (0.044)
External Ethnic Match                -0.016      -0.019      -0.015       -0.001      -0.015     -0.011
                                     (0.021)     (0.024)     (0.024)      (0.019)     (0.024)    (0.024)
Day                                   0.001     -0.008        0.005        0.009       0.004      0.004
                                     (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.005)    (0.004)
R2                                   0.037       0.023        0.026       0.069       0.026       0.025
Dep Var Mean                         0.443       0.443        0.443       0.443       0.443       0.443
Ethnicity effects                     Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Alt.
Controls                              Yes         No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Strata FE                             Yes         No           No          No          No          No
EA FE                                 No          No           No          Yes         No          No
Supervisor FE                         No          No           No          No          Yes         No
Clusters                               30         30            30          30          30          30
Observations                         21842       21842        21842       21842       21842       21842
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets.
      Day refers to the day in the two week period of canvassing (see text for details).




                                                    48
                        Appendix Table 5:
    Ethnic Composition and Learning, Alternative Specifications

                                                                 Visit duration
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)
Horizontal Ethnic Match*Day          0.090        0.079        0.082        0.159          0.081      0.078
                                     (0.033)      (0.035)      (0.037)       (0.038)       (0.038)    (0.038)
Wild Bootstrap                       [0.071]      [0.049]      [0.048]       [0.074]       [0.054]    [0.070]
Randomization Inference              [0.031]      [0.060]      [0.061]       [0.033]       [0.073]    [0.081]

Vertical Ethnic Match*Day             0.009        -0.017       -0.014      0.070          -0.013     -0.021
                                     (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.022)      (0.034)        (0.022)    (0.019)
Wild Bootstrap                       [0.558]      [0.538]      [0.663]      [0.491]        [0.505]    [0.399]
Randomization Inference              [0.692]      [0.453]      [0.572]      [0.303]        [0.594]    [0.322]

External Ethnic Match*Day             0.001        0.003        0.004        0.009          0.004      0.004
                                     (0.013)      (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.011)        (0.014)    (0.014)

Horizontal Ethnic Match              0.599        0.626        0.678        0.845          0.707      -0.220
                                     (0.348)      (0.360)      (0.352)      (0.412)        (0.374)    (0.320)
Vertical Ethnic Match               -1.798        -1.136      -1.575       -3.184          -1.704     -0.322
                                     (0.409)       (0.416)     (0.419)      (0.449)         (0.420)   (0.331)
External Ethnic Match                 -0.047       -0.063       -0.055      -0.017         -0.058     -0.063
                                     (0.118)      (0.136)      (0.131)      (0.099)        (0.132)    (0.135)
Day                                   0.022      -0.072         0.040        -0.006         0.038      0.032
                                     (0.029)      (0.018)      (0.027)      (0.052)        (0.027)    (0.028)
R2                                    0.049        0.039        0.042        0.084          0.042     0.036
Dep Var Mean                          1.977        1.977        1.977        1.977          1.977     1.977
Ethnicity effects                      Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes       Alt.
Controls                               Yes          No           Yes          Yes            Yes       Yes
Strata FE                              Yes          No           No           No             No        No
EA FE                                  No           No           No           Yes            No        No
Supervisor FE                          No           No           No           No             Yes       No
Clusters                               30            30           30           30             30        30
Observations                          20518        20518        20518        20518          20518     20518
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values reported in brackets.
      Day refers to the day in the two week period of canvassing (see text for details).




                                                    49
      Appendix Table 6: Robustness to Outliers in Duration

                                               Trimmed Duration           Log (1+Duration)
                                                  (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)
Horizontal Ethnic Match                       1.160         0.600        0.324              0.143
                                               (0.295)      (0.294)       (0.089)          (0.090)
Wild Bootstrap Horizontal                      [0.052]                    [0.057]
Randomization Inference Horizontal             [0.051]                    [0.054]
Vertical Ethnic Match                         -1.394       -1.856        -0.358        -0.483
                                               (0.337)      (0.385)       (0.101)       (0.118)
Wild Bootstrap Vertical                        [0.023]                    [0.036]
Randomization Inference Vertical               [0.046]                    [0.057]

Horizontal Ethnic Match*Day                                 0.077                         0.025
                                                             (0.025)                       (0.008)
Wild Bootstrap Horizontal                                    [0.035]                       [0.045]
Randomization Inference Horizontal                           [0.018]                       [0.016]
Vertical Ethnic Match*Day                                    0.012                          0.000
                                                            (0.019)                        (0.005)
Wild Bootstrap Vertical                                     [0.615]                        [0.228]
Randomization Inference Vertical                            [0.552]                        [0.991]
Day                                                          0.013                          0.004
                                                            (0.022)                        (0.007)
R2                                              0.050        0.062         0.040           0.053
Dep Var Mean                                     1.71        1.805          0.65           0.678
Strata FE                                        Yes          Yes           Yes             Yes
Clusters                                          30           30            30              30
Observations                                    25812        20291         26067           20518
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team in parentheses.
      The dep var in cols. 1-2 is duration trimmed at the 99th percentile (10 minutes).
      The dep var in cols. 3-4 is log of (1+duration).
      Wild bootstrap and randomization inference p-values in brackets.
      Day refers to the day in the two week period of canvassing (see text for details).




                                                50
       Appendix Table 7: Unpacking Visit Duration

                                                    Visit Duration
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)
                                  Baseline       Mean           p10            p90
Horizontal Ethnic Match           1.243         0.716        1.023           0.363
                                   (0.324)       (0.187)      (0.255)        (0.190)
Wild Bootstrap                     [0.081]       [0.110]      [0.084]        [0.355]
Randomization Inference            [0.058]       [0.060]      [0.059]        [0.273]

Vertical Ethnic Match            -1.435         -0.947       -1.231         -0.620
                                  (0.374)        (0.257)      (0.311)        (0.271)
Wild Bootstrap                    [0.048]        [0.080]      [0.045]        [0.194]
Randomization Inference           [0.053]        [0.077]      [0.061]        [0.181]

Random Visit Order               -0.035         -0.013       -0.026           0.001
                                  (0.008)        (0.005)      (0.006)        (0.006)
IEBC Treatment                    -0.470         0.055        -0.251        0.407
                                  (0.275)       (0.159)       (0.223)        (0.118)
R2                                 0.036         0.059         0.043          0.055
Dep Var Mean                        1.82          4.79          3.06           6.78
Strata FE                           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Clusters                             30            30            30             30
Observations                       29302         29302         29302          29302
Note: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Standard errors clustered by team.
Column 1 reproduces the baseline estimates from Table 3, column 5.
In col.2, we impute duration at the mean of conditional duration for incomplete visits.
In col.3, we impute duration at the 10th percentile of conditional duration (2 minutes).
In col.4, we impute duration at the 90th percentile of conditional duration (8 minutes).




                                           51
