                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


  CORRECTING PERCEIVED SOCIAL DISTANCING NORMS TO COMBAT COVID-19

                                        James Allen IV
                                       Arlete Mahumane
                                       James Riddell IV
                                       Tanya Rosenblat
                                          Dean Yang
                                           Hang Yu

                                      Working Paper 28651
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28651


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 2021, Revised June 2021


Faustino Lessitala provided top-notch leadership and field management. Patricia Freitag, Ryan
McWay, and Maggie Barnard provided excellent research assistance. Julie Esch, Laura Kaminski,
and Lauren Tingwall's grant management was world-class. We appreciate feedback from
participants in Michigan's Health, History, Development, and Demography (H2D2) Seminar and
the Conference on Experimental Insights from Behavioral Economics on COVID-19 (JHU-LSE).
This work is supported by the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) Innovation in
Government Initiative through a grant from The Effective Altruism Global Health and
Development Fund (grant number IGI-1366), the UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development
Office awarded through Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) Peace & Recovery Program (grant
number MIT0019-X9), the Michigan Institute for Teaching and Research in Economics (MITRE)
Ulmer Fund (grant number G024289), and the National Institute on Aging of the National
Institutes of Health (award number T32AG000221). Our protocols were reviewed and approved
by Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) at the University of Michigan (Health Sciences and Social
and Behavioral Sciences IRB, approval number HUM00113011) and the Mozambique Ministry
of Health National Committee on Bioethics for Health (CNBS reference number 302/CNBS/20).
The study was submitted to the AEA RCT Registry on May 26, 2020, registration ID number
AEARCTR-0005862: 10.1257/rct.5862-1.0. The content of this paper is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the aforementioned
institutions or of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2021 by James Allen IV, Arlete Mahumane, James Riddell IV, Tanya Rosenblat, Dean Yang,
and Hang Yu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Correcting Perceived Social Distancing Norms to Combat COVID-19
James Allen IV, Arlete Mahumane, James Riddell IV, Tanya Rosenblat, Dean Yang, and Hang
Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 28651
April 2021, Revised June 2021
JEL No. D91,I12,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

Can informing people of high community support for social distancing encourage them to do
more of it? In theory, the impact of such an intervention on social distancing is ambiguous, and
depends on the relative magnitudes of free-riding and perceived-infectiousness effects. We
randomly assigned a treatment providing information on true high rates of community social
distancing support. We estimate impacts on social distancing, measured using a combination of
self-reports and reports of others. While experts surveyed in advance expected the treatment to
increase social distancing, we find that its average effect is close to zero and significantly lower
than expert predictions. The treatment's effect is heterogeneous, as predicted by theory: it
decreases social distancing where current COVID-19 cases are low (where free-riding
dominates), but increases it where cases are high (where the perceived-infectiousness effect
dominates).

James Allen IV                                   Tanya Rosenblat
Department of Economics and                      School of Information and
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy           Department of Economics
University of Michigan                           University of Michigan
735 S. State Street                              4332 N Quad
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              Ann Arbor, MI 48109
alleniv@umich.edu                                trosenbl@umich.edu

Arlete Mahumane                                  Dean Yang
Beira Operational Research Center (CIOB)         University of Michigan
Rua Correia de Brito 1323                        Department of Economics and
Beira City                                       Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
Sofala Province                                  735 S. State Street, Room 3316
Mozambique                                       Ann Arbor, MI 48109
cynthiwea@gmail.com                              and NBER
                                                 deanyang@umich.edu
James Riddell IV
Department of Internal Medicine                  Hang Yu
University of Michigan Medical School            National School of Development
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                              Peking University
jriddell@umich.edu                               hangyu@umich.edu
1    Introduction
Social distancing is one of the most important public health recommendations for reducing
the spread of COVID-19 (CDC, 2020). Social norms in support of social distancing have
changed rapidly during the pandemic (Janzwood, 2020; Reicher and Drury, 2021; Habersaat
and Scheel, 2020). Because of this rapid change, people often underestimate support for
social distancing in their communities. In our Mozambican sample, 98% thought that people
should be social distancing, but estimated that only 69% of others in the community felt
similarly. This gap suggests a public health messaging strategy: simply inform people of
high rates of community support for social distancing. What impact would such messaging
have on social distancing behavior?
    We implemented a randomized controlled trial testing the impact of informing people
about high local support for social distancing. The treatment updated beliefs upwards or
confirmed beliefs about high rates of support for social distancing. We analyze impacts
through the lens of a simple theoretical model. Individuals weigh benefits (avoiding infec-
tion) against effort costs of social distancing. They have imperfect information on commu-
nity support for social distancing and on the infectiousness of the disease. Informing people
that a higher proportion of their community supports social distancing has two opposing
effects. When the local infection rate is low, free-riding effects dominate, and the treatment
leads to less social distancing.
    By contrast, if local infection rates are high enough, a perceived-infectiousness effect
dominates, causing more social distancing. Intuitively, someone underestimating local so-
cial distancing support will conclude that the disease is more infectious than initially be-
lieved, leading them to do more social distancing. Our model is related to the literature
on decision-making under misspecified subjective models (Spiegler, 2020). Agents hold in-
correct assumptions on one model parameter (e.g., share of population social distancing),
leading them to incorrect conclusions about other parameters (e.g., disease infectiousness).
    Abiding by COVID-19 protocols, we conducted all treatments and surveys by phone
among 2,117 Mozambican households. The perceived social norm is a respondent's esti-
mated share in the community supporting social distancing. The true social norm is the
community average of respondents' stated support for social distancing. Alongside the social
norm correction treatment, we also randomly assigned a "leader endorsement" treatment (an
endorsement of social distancing by a community leader).
    We construct a novel measure of social distancing, improving on prior research on two
fronts. Most prior studies ask for self-reports about general social distancing compliance.
When we do so, 95% claim to observe government social distancing recommendations. Our
first improvement is to also ask respondents to self-report several social distancing actions;
this alone leads the social distancing rate to drop to 36%. Second, we ask others in the
community to report on the respondent's social distancing. This helps reduce biases in self-


                                              1
reported outcomes due to experimenter demand effects (Orne, 1962; Rosenthal, 1966; Zizzo,
2010; De Quidt et al., 2018).1 We are aware of no prior study that makes use of other-reports
on a respondent's social distancing behavior. Other-reports also make a major difference,
leading the share observing social distancing to fall further to just 8%. (See Figure 1 and
Section 3.3.) This is the first finding of the paper: improved measurement leads the social
distancing rate to fall by an order of magnitude, from 95% to 8%.
    The average effect of the social norm correction treatment in the full sample is small
and not statistically significantly different from zero. As theory predicts, there is substantial
treatment effect heterogeneity: the treatment effect is statistically significantly more positive
when local COVID-19 cases (per 100,000 population) are higher. In districts with few cases,
the treatment effect is negative. In the district with the most COVID-19 cases, the treatment
increases social distancing by 9.3 percentage points (statistically significant at the 5% level),
a 75% increase over that district's control-group mean.
    This pattern is consistent with the theoretical prediction that as infection rates rise,
the perceived-infectiousness effect should increasingly dominate the free-riding effect of the
social norm correction treatment, leading the treatment effect to become more positive. We
also test a further implication of the model: expectations of future infection rates should
show similar treatment effect heterogeneity. Empirical analyses confirm this prediction,
providing additional support for the theoretical model.
    The leader endorsement treatment has a very small effect on social distancing that is not
statistically significantly different from zero. We also find no treatment effect heterogeneity
for this treatment with respect to COVID-19 cases.
    This paper contributes to research on interventions promoting social distancing to com-
bat COVID-19. Related work studies public health messaging on self-reported social distanc-
ing behavior or intentions, randomizing messages framed as altruistic or selfish (Sasaki et al.,
2020), deontological or consequentialist (Bos et al., 2020), emotional or rational (Capraro
and Barcelo, 2020), individual- or group-oriented (Lunn et al., 2020), and self-interested or
prosocial (Jordan et al., 2020; Banker and Park, 2020). These studies typically find that
any kind of public health messaging increases self-reported social distancing, but differ on
whether self- versus others-oriented language is more effective. No prior study has tested
the impact of providing information on community support of social distancing.
    This paper also contributes to understanding the impact of providing information about
social norms (Benabou and Tirole, 2011; Bicchieri and Dimant, 2019). Banerjee et al. (2019)
find that informing Nigerian young adults of peers' attitudes on healthy sexual relationships
did not change respondents' own attitudes. Yu (2020) and Yang et al. (2021) find (in
an overlapping Mozambican sample) that correcting overestimates of stigmatizing attitudes
   1 Jakubowski et al. (2021) find that self-reported mask wearing is overstated relative to measures based

on observations of others.




                                                    2
promoted HIV testing.2 Van Bavel et al. (2020) recommend social-norm-based interventions
to combat COVID-19, suggesting they are most effective when specific to an individual's
social identity (Centola, 2011) or promoted by those central in social networks (Kim et al.,
2015). Some studies measure respondent perceptions of social distancing norms (Papanas-
tasiou et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2020; Arroyos-Calvera et al., 2021). Martinez et al. (2021)
show that respondents are influenced by others' social distancing actions in hypothetical
vignettes. Alsan et al. (2020) find that correcting social norms about mask-wearing leads
to more correct norm perceptions. Adida et al. (2021) find that information about social
group support for mask-wearing raises one's support for mask-wearing.
    Our emphasis on interactions between free-riding and perceived-infectiousness effects
is novel, but each effect has been studied separately. Free-riding has been studied in the
context of vaccination decisions (Hershey et al., 1994; Lau et al., 2019) and social distancing
(Cato et al., 2020; Paakkari and Okan, 2020).3 Perceived COVID-19 infection risk (e.g., due
to vaccine anticipation, Andersson et al. (2021)) has been shown to raise social distancing
intentions. These mechanisms differ from prior work emphasizing norm conformity (Cialdini
and Goldstein, 2004; Wood, 2000); our approach is distinctive in that we do not assume that
individuals value social norm adherence per se (Bernheim, 1994; Benabou and Tirole, 2011;
Krupka and Weber, 2013).
    Our leader endorsement treatment relates to research on opinion leaders and health
behavior change (Valente and Pumpuang (2007) provide a review). Opinion leaders help
promote healthy behaviors related to HIV/AIDS (Kelly et al., 1992), and diffuse health
information (Banerjee et al., 2019). Banerjee et al. (2020) find that celebrity endorsement
videos raise COVID-19 symptom reporting and have positive spillovers in India. Adida et al.
(2021) find positive effects of celebrity endorsement of mask-wearing. In a different context,
we find that community leaders' social distancing endorsements are ineffective.


2     Theory
We consider a community where people have random pairwise meetings. People believe that
a share x of the population supports social distancing and that the probability of becoming
infected from unprotected meetings is . People treat x as given, but infer the infectiousness
 from the current infection rate R in the community which they can observe (we describe
this inference below). The true infectiousness of the disease is  ^.
    Importantly, people in the community have miscalibrated beliefs : the true share of the
population supporting social distancing is x ^ (we are interested in the case x ^ > x). People
infer the true infectiousness ^ of the disease only if they are correctly calibrated (x = x
                                                                                          ^).
  2 Norm-based interventions have also been shown to change energy consumption (Schultz et al., 2007)

and female labor force participation (Bursztyn et al., 2018).
  3 Relatedly, positive health spillovers have been found to reduce demand for health goods (Dupas, 2014).




                                                    3
Individual Effort. A supporter engages in preventative effort e and assumes that other
supporters choose effort e (in equilibrium we have e = e ). Non-supporters choose effort
e = 0.
   When someone supporting social distancing meets another person, she escapes exposure
with probability:


                                  
                A(e, eother )   = e + eother
                                   
                                     e + e if other person is supporter
                                =                                                                         (1)
                                     e       if other person is non-supporter

   Hence, the marginal benefit of effort decreases both with own effort e as well as the other
person's effort e .4
   The expected probability of escaping exposure is therefore:
                                                            
                                    A(e, e ) = (1 - x) e + x e + e                                        (2)

   An agent becomes exposed with probability 1 - A(e, eother ). If exposed she gets infected
with probability  and suffers disutility -C from infection.5 If she is not exposed then
she does not get infected. Her baseline utility from no infection equals U . The cost of
preventative effort is e. Hence, her total utility equals:

                                     U - (1 - A(e, eother ))C - e                                         (3)

The agent chooses e to maximize her utility, giving us the following first-order condition:
                                                                     
                                    C                       1
                                      1 - x(1 -                      ) = 1                                (4)
                                    2 e                   1+    e
                                                                 e


In equilibrium it has to be the case that the population effort e equals e. Hence, we can
characterize equilibrium effort as:
                                                                        2
                                            C           1
                                     e=       1 - x(1 -  )                                                (5)
                                            2            2

This demonstrates the free-riding effect : increasing the share x of supporters decreases effort
because the marginal utility from own effort decreases. Also, effort increases if the disease
   4 We assume the other person's effort is unobservable. This is consistent with our finding that respondents

underestimate the extent of social distancing. Many precautions such as hand-washing are unobservable.
   5 For simplicity, we assume that infectiousness does not vary with the agent's type (supporter or non-

supporter). Otherwise, we would need to keep track of two levels of infectiousness. The qualitative results
would not change.



                                                      4
is more infectious (higher ) and if illness is costlier (higher C ).

Infection Rate. People observe the current infection rate in the community. Infections
                                                                    
come from two sources: non-supporters become sick at rate  (1 - x e) while supporters
become sick at rate (1 - A(e, e)). Hence, people in the community assume that the current
infection rate is generated by the following process:
                                                                          
                                                                          
                R   =  (1 - x)(1 - x e) + x 1 - e(1 + ( 2 - 1)x)
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
                        non-supporters          supporters
                                                  
                                          1                 
                    =  1 - e 2x 1 - x 1 -                                                (6)
                                                            
                                                            
                                           2                
                                             =G(x)


However, the true process determining current infections is actually:
                                                   
                                     R=^ 1-        eG(^
                                                      x)                                 (7)

In other words, the true infection process is driven by the same social distancing effort of
supporters but different infectiousness ^ and different x
                                                        ^.


2.1    Basic Equilibrium
Supporters initially assume that the disease has low infectiousness and they adjust their
estimate of  upwards until the current infection rate R stabilizes.

Proposition 1 In equilibrium, effort level e, the current infection rate R, and the assumed
infectiousness  satisfy Equations 5, 6 and 7. Moreover,   ^ >  if x ^ > x.

In equilibrium, both the assumed infection process (Equation 6) and the real infection rate
(Equation 7) must produce observed infection rate R. For the second part, note that G(x)
is increasing in x  [0, 1]: hence, x
                                   ^ > x implies ^ >  to generate the same infection rate R.


2.2    Treatment Effect
We now consider the effect of our treatment informing people that the population share
supporting social distancing is really x
                                       ^ > x.
   Proposition 1 implies that if supporters are informed that the true population share
supporting social distancing is x^ > x, they must infer higher disease infectiousness than



                                               5
they initially assumed (because their estimated disease infectiousness immediately jumps
from  to true   ^ ). This is the perceived-infectiousness effect.
   Supporters of social distancing will adjust their effort level to a new level e
                                                                                 ^, but there
are two countervailing effects:

   1. Holding assumed infectiousness  constant, the free-riding effect decreases effort.

   2. The perceived-infectiousness effect increases effort, because the agent now believes the
      disease is more infectious than initially thought (perceived  increases), increasing the
      gain from social distancing.

Intuitively, the perceived-infectiousness effect varies monotonically with R: when infections
are low, supporters' effort is low, and both supporters and non-supporters get infected at
similar rates. Hence, agents revise the estimate of infectiousness  only slightly upwards in
response to the treatment. On the other hand, when infections are high, supporters' effort
is high and the upward revision will be larger.
    The following theorem makes this intuition precise. Instead of doing comparative statics
on R (which is determined in equilibrium) we state the comparative statics results in terms
of the infectiousness  ^ (for given x and x
                                          ^). Note that R increases with   ^.

Theorem 1 Assume an agent is informed that a share x       ~ > x of the population supports
                                              
social distancing. Then there is a threshold ^ such that for any ^<   ^  the free-riding effect
dominates and equilibrium effort decreases, and for ^>  ^  the perceived-infectiousness effect
dominates and the equilibrium effort increases.

See Appendix A for the proof.
    In our theoretical approach, there is no gain from social norm adherence per se, for
example to signal conformity (Benabou and Tirole, 2011), avoid norm-violation social sanc-
tions (Bernheim, 1994), or avoid direct utility losses from norm violation (Bicchieri, 2005;
Krupka and Weber, 2013). Adding such motives would increase the likelihood that the so-
cial norm correction treatment increases social distancing, but would not by itself generate
heterogeneous treatment effects (with respect to current infection rates) that are central to
our analysis.6 The social norm adherence channel would have to be stronger when R is high
in order to generate the heterogeneous effects of our treatment.
    The interplay between free-riding and perceived-infectiousness effects also yields analo-
gous predictions about a central belief about COVID-19: the future infection rate. In the
endline survey, we ask respondents to estimate this. The expected future rate differs from
the current infection rate R, because this study occurs at a point when infection rates are
   6 Bicchieri and Dimant (2019) discuss how norm interventions can backfire when descriptive and injunctive

norms differ from each other. Our model provides micro-foundations for such a mechanism in a pandemic
context.



                                                     6
clearly evolving. The social norm correction treatment changes respondent beliefs about
social distancing support and about infectiousness, and therefore should change expected
future infection rates.
    Recall that non-supporters are always infected with higher probability than supporters.
The higher the infectiousness parameter       ^ , the higher should be future infection rates for
both groups.
    When    ^ is currently small, the perceived-infectiousness effect is small. Simultaneously,
the treatment corrects beliefs about the share of social-distancing supporters upwards, which
should reduce estimates of future infection rates because supporters have lower infection
rates. Thus, the expected future infection rate decreases when        ^ is currently small.
    In contrast, when  ^ is currently large, the treatment leads to a large increase in perceived
infectiousness, implying that the disease will infect higher shares of both supporters and
non-supporters. This will tend to increase expected future infection rates.
    To summarize, the social norm correction treatment effect on the expected future infec-
tion rate should show heterogeneity similar to that described in Theorem 1. The treatment
effect on the expected future infection rate is strictly negative if the current local infection
rate (R) (which moves monotonically with           ^ ) is small enough. The treatment effect on
the expected future infection rate increases with the current infection rate, and can become
positive if current infection rates are sufficiently high.
    In our empirical analyses, we test these predictions regarding heterogeneity in the social
norm correction treatment effect.


3     Sample and Data
3.1    Context
The Mozambican government declared a State of Emergency due to the COVID-19 pandemic
on March 31, 2020 (of Mozambique, 3/31/2020), recommending social distancing (at least
1.5 meters) and requiring it at public and private institutions and gatherings. The govern-
ment also suspended schools, required masks at funerals and markets, banned gatherings of
20 or more, and closed bars, cinemas and gymnasiums (of Mozambique, 4/1/2020). The gov-
ernment stopped short of implementing a full economic "lockdown" due to its economic costs
(Siuta and Sambo, 2020; Jones et al., 2020). On August 5, 2020, the government renewed
the State of Emergency (of Mozambique, 8/5/2020), called for improved mask-wearing, and
announced a schedule for loosening restrictions (Nyusi, 8/5/2020). In September, the gov-
ernment loosened some restrictions including resuming religious gatherings at 50% capacity
(Nyusi, 9/5/2020; U.S Embassy in Mozambique). Throughout this period, the government's
social distancing recommendation remained constant.



                                               7
3.2        Data
We implemented three survey rounds by phone in July-November 2020. Respondents were
from households with phones in the sample of a prior study (Yang et al., 2021).7 We surveyed
one adult per household. Appendix B provides details on study communities.
    Appendix Figure A.2 depicts the study timeline below a rolling average of new Mozam-
bican COVID-19 cases. We piloted surveys in Round 1. Immediately before the Round 2
(baseline) survey, we randomly assigned households to treatments and registered our pre-
analysis plan (PAP). Treatments immediately followed the baseline survey. Round 3 was
our endline survey. There was a minimum of 3.0 weeks and average of 6.3 weeks between
baseline and endline surveys for all respondents. While the Round 1 survey occurred when
new COVID-19 cases were low, Rounds 2 and 3 occurred when cases were rising rapidly.
    The Round 3 sample size is 2,117 respondents, which followed a sample size of 2,226
in Round 2 and 2,412 in Round 1. The retention rate between Round 2 (baseline) and
Round 3 (endline) is 95.1% overall, at least 94.4% in each of the seven districts surveyed,
and balanced across treatment conditions.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics. 99% of respondents support social distancing,
but respondents underestimate the community share expressing such support, on average
estimating 69% in the Round 1 survey and 80% in Round 2.


3.3        Primary Outcome
The primary outcome is an indicator that the respondent practiced social distancing, as pre-
specified in our PAP. It is constructed from self-reports of social distancing as well as others'
reports of the respondent's social distancing. Incorporation of others' reports on social
distancing yields an improvement over sole reliance on self-reported social distancing, which
is subject to experimenter demand effects. The outcome is equal to one if the respondent
is practicing social distancing according to both self-reports and other-reports, and zero
otherwise.
    Respondents are social distancing according to their self-report if both of the following
are true: 1) they answer "yes" to "In the past 14 days, have you observed the government's
recommendations on social distancing?", and 2) they report doing at least seven out of eight
"social distancing actions" (listed below) in the past seven days (higher than the sample
median number, six).8
    Social Distancing Actions: Is this something your household has been doing for the
   7 The AEA RCT Registry record for Yang et al. (2021) is here: https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.3990-5.1
   8 While  this threshold was pre-specified, regression results (in Appendix K) are robust to alternate defi-
nitions of this component, such as a threshold of six, or dropping social distancing actions 4 and 6 for which
respondents might misinterpret and answer "no" if not showing symptoms.




                                                      8
last seven days? (Answers indicating social distancing in parentheses.9 Summary statistics
presented in Appendix F.)

   1. Shop in crowded areas like informal markets (No)

   2. Gather with several friends (No)

   3. Help the elderly avoid close contact with other people, including children (Yes)

   4. If show symptoms of coronavirus, immediately inform my household and avoid people
      (Yes)

   5. Drink alcohol in bars (No)

   6. Wear a face mask if showing symptoms of coronavirus (Yes)

   7. Instead of meeting in person, call on the phone or send text message (Yes)

   8. Allow children to build immunity by playing with children from other households (No)

    To collect others' reports on a respondent's social distancing, study participants were
asked about their social interactions with ten other community study participants. These
ten others were identified from social network contact data, as well as geographic proximity.
Additionally, community leaders (in the leader endorsement intervention) were also asked
about social interactions with all community study participants. Each respondent household
was known at baseline by 0.98 community leaders and 3.21 neighboring survey respondents
on average. Other-reports were collected at baseline and endline.
    In collecting other-reports, we asked others whether they had seen anyone from the
respondent household in the last 14 days. If so, we then asked: 1) Did he/she come closer
than 1.5 meters to you or others not of his/her household at any point in the last 14 days?; 2)
Did he/she shake hands, try to shake hands, or touch you or others not of his/her household
in the last 14 days?; and 3) In general, did he/she appear to be observing the government's
recommendations on social distancing (avoid large gatherings and keep at least 1.5 meters
distance from people not of his/her household)? Respondents are considered to be social
distancing according to others if all others responded "no", "no", and "yes" (respectively)
to these three questions, reported having not seen the respondent in the past 14 days, or
reported not knowing the respondent.10
    Figure 1 displays how these questions lead to the social distancing outcome. 95% of
respondents say "yes" to the self-report on general social distancing. When considering self-
reports of doing at least seven out of eight social distancing actions, the social distancing
   9 For items 4 and 6 that are conditional on showing symptoms, survey staff instructed respondents to

answer "Yes" (doing social distancing) if not showing symptoms.
  10 At baseline, 90.55% of respondent households were known by some other respondent or community

leader.


                                                  9
rate falls to 36%. Finally, incorporating others' reports reduces the rate further to 8%.
Incorporating additional information into the social distancing measure ­ using self-reports
of specific social distancing behaviors as well as other-reports ­ leads to substantially lower
social distancing rates.


4     Research Design
4.1      Treatments
We implement a randomized controlled trial estimating impacts on social distancing of two
treatments: 1) social norm correction, and 2) leader endorsement. Before the Round 2
survey, we randomly assigned households completing the Round 1 survey to one of two
treatments or a control group; probabilities were 30% for each of the treatment conditions
and 40% for the control condition. Survey staff implemented treatments immediately after
completing the Round 2 baseline survey. Complete treatment protocols are in Appendix C.
    Social norm correction treatment: We asked in Round 1 whether respondents them-
selves support social distancing, to calculate the share in the community supporting social
distancing. We then asked individuals in Round 2 to estimate that share (reported as an
integer out of 10). Individuals underestimating the share were told the true share support-
ing social distancing, also as an integer out of 10. Individuals correctly estimating the share
were told that they were correct. In practice, 92.4% of treated respondents received this
treatment, 53.2% of whom underestimated community support for social distancing and
46.8% of whom correctly estimated it. The small minority overestimating the share were
not provided additional information.
    Leader endorsement treatment: We identified and surveyed community opinion
leaders prior to the Round 2 survey. These were local leaders serving in an official capacity
(e.g., village chief), as well as individuals nominated in prior surveys (Yang et al., 2021)
as community members who were best at circulating information within the community.11
During our survey, we requested their permission to tell others in their community that
they "support social distancing, are practicing social distancing, and encourage others to do
the same". Then, in this treatment, we reported this endorsement of social distancing to
respondents, mentioning the community leader(s) by name.
    We also randomly assigned treatments to improve COVID-19 knowledge in the same
sample. Randomization of the social norm correction and leader endorsement treatments
were stratified within 76 communities and within the separate knowledge treatment condi-
tions. Further details are in Appendix D, where we also present regression results showing
that there are no interactions between the knowledge treatments and this paper's treatments
of interest.
 11 We   followed the "gossips" methodology of Banerjee et al. (2019).


                                                     10
    Sample sizes by treatment condition were as follows: social norm correction (N=628,
29.7% of sample), leader endorsement (N=637, 30.1%), and control group (N=852, 40.3%).
Attrition between Rounds 2 (baseline) and 3 (endline) is low (4.9%). In Appendix E, we
show that attrition between Rounds 2 and 3 and key baseline variables are balanced across
treatment conditions.


4.2       Regressions
The following ordinary-least-squares regression equation provides treatment effect estimates:12

                                                    others
            Yijd = 0 + 1 T 1ijd + 2 T 2ijd + Bijd + ijd      leaders
                                                           + ijd     + jd + ijd                           (8)

    where Yijd is the social distancing indicator for respondent i in community j and dis-
trict d ; T 1ijd and T 2ijd are indicator variables for the social norm correction and leader
endorsement treatment groups, respectively; Bijd is the baseline value of the dependent
variable; jd are community fixed effects; and ijd is a mean-zero error term. We report
robust standard errors.
    We also control for the number of other respondents and community leaders who report
knowing the respondent at baseline. ijd  others
                                                is a vector of dummy variables for the number
of other respondents who report knowing the respondent's household from 0 to 8. ijd   leaders
                                                                                              is
a vector of dummy variables for the number of community leaders who report knowing the
respondent's household from 0 to 4.13 Including these controls reduces residual variance,
because they are predictive of social distancing.
    Coefficients 1 and 2 represent the impacts of the social norm correction and leader
endorsement treatments (respectively) on social distancing.
    We modify Equation 8 to estimate heterogeneity in treatment effects with respect to
local COVID-19 case loads:

           Yijd = 0 + 1 T 1ijd + 2 T 2ijd + 3 (T 1ijd  Covidd ) + 4 (T 2ijd  Covidd )
                                                                                                          (9)
                                                            others   leaders
                                                    +Bijd + ijd    + ijd     + jd + ijd
   Equation 9 adds interactions between treatment indicators and the cumulative number
of COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population at the district level at the start of the endline
survey.14 Coefficients 1 and 2 in Equation 9 now represent the impacts of the treatments
in districts where COVID-19 cases are zero (slightly out of sample); 3 and 4 represent
the change in the respective treatment effect for a one-unit increase in COVID-19 cases per
100,000 population.
  12 We show in Appendix G that all conclusions are robust to estimating logit and probit regressions instead.
  13 As                       others at the first integer that covers over 90% of the sample, and  leaders at
       pre-specified, we cap ijd                                                                    ijd
the maximum number of leaders found in any community.
  14 The main effect of Covid is absorbed by  .
                             d                   jd




                                                     11
   In Equation 9, interaction terms with district-level characteristics are of interest. Because
we have only seven districts, in Appendix L we show robustness to clustering standard errors.
Clustering by 76 communities or 7 districts has minimal impact on standard errors, and does
not affect whether any coefficients are statistically significant at conventional levels.


4.3     Hypotheses
We pre-specified the hypothesis that each treatment (1 and 2 in Equation 8) would have
positive effects. Subject-matter experts (surveyed without knowing results) concurred with
this expectation.15 The mean expert predictions were that the social norm correction and
leader endorsement treatments would increase social distancing by 5.23 and 5.56 percentage
points, respectively.
    We also test the hypotheses that the impact of the social norm correction treatment on
social distancing and on the expected future infection rate will be more positive the higher
the current COVID-19 infection rate (3 in Equation 9 will be positive). We did not specify
these hypotheses in advance, but advance them on the basis of our theoretical model.


5     Results
5.1     Average Treatment Effects
We first examine (in Appendix H) whether the treatments affected perceptions of the social
norm. (We did not pre-specify this analysis.) Respondents report their perceived social
norm in integers out of 10, which we convert to a 0-1 scale. The social norm correction
treatment has a positive effect on this measure (p-value 0.12). Examination of the full CDF
of the perceived social norm (Figure A.3) shows that the treatment effect is concentrated
on the lower end of the distribution, reducing the frequency of perceptions below 50%.
In regression analysis, the treatment has a positive and statistically significant effect on
perceiving at least 50% of households support social distancing.16 By contrast, the leader
endorsement treatment has no statistically significant effect on the perceived social norm in
any specification.
    This analysis likely understates the social norm correction treatment effect on actual
perceived social norms. Stated perceived social norms may be biased upwards due to exper-
imenter demand effects. Half of respondents in all rounds estimate 100% support of social
distancing. If some share of these respondents overstate social norm perceptions before
  15 71 individuals provided predictions at https://socialscienceprediction.org/ (survey closing date January

2, 2021).
  16 There is also a positive, statistically significant, effect on whether respondents increase their perceived

community support between baseline and endline.




                                                      12
treatment, and the treatment led them to raise their actual social norm perceptions, this
would not be observable to us.
    We now turn to treatment effect estimates (Table 2). In the regression for our primary
outcome (Column 1), both treatment coefficients are small in magnitude and neither is sta-
tistically significantly different from zero. These findings diverge from expert predictions of
treatment effects, which were each positive and roughly 5-6 percentage points. We strongly
reject the null that our T1 and T2 treatment effect estimates are equal to the mean expert
predictions (p-value<0.001 in each case).


5.2    Treatment Effect Heterogeneity
In Table 2 Column (2), we present regression estimates of treatment effect heterogeneity
(Equation 9) with respect to the local infection rate (COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population
in the respondent's district).
    The social norm correction treatment effect is heterogeneous with respect to local COVID-
19 cases. The coefficient on the interaction term with T 1ijd is positive and statistically
significant at the 1% level. The coefficient on the T 1ijd main effect is the predicted effect
of social norm correction in a district with zero cases (slightly out of sample), and suggests
that the social norm correction would reduce social distancing by 3.4 percentage points in
such a location (statistically significant at the 5% level).
    Figure 2 displays this treatment effect heterogeneity. We plot district-specific treatment
effects (estimating Equation 8 separately in each of seven districts) on the y-axis (with 95%
confidence intervals) against district case counts on the x-axis. In the six districts with the
lowest case counts, coefficients are negative. By contrast, in Chimoio, the district with the
most cases (39.08/100,000) and that accounts for one-quarter of the sample, we estimate a
large positive effect: 9.3 percentage points (a 75% increase over that district's control group,
statistically significant at the 5% level).
    This heterogeneous treatment effect finding does not depend on inclusion of Chimoio
in the sample. When estimating Equations 8 and 9 for the sample excluding Chimoio
(Appendix I), results are very similar.
    By contrast, the leader endorsement treatment effect is not heterogeneous with respect
to local case loads. The coefficient on the corresponding interaction term in Column (1) is
small in magnitude and not statistically significantly different from zero.
    The interplay between the free-riding and perceived-infectiousness effects is the distinc-
tive feature of our theoretical model. When the perceived-infectiousness effect is large
enough, it overcomes the countervailing free-riding effect, and the social norm correction
treatment leads to more social distancing. An additional implication of the theory is that
the treatment should have similar heterogeneous effects on the expected future infection
rate.


                                              13
    We conduct this additional test of the theory, examining treatment effects on the ex-
pected future infection rate.17 In Columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, the outcome is the share
of the community the respondent thinks will get sick from COVID-19 (responses were inte-
gers out of 10; we divide by 10 to yield a 0-1 scale). In Column (3), we estimate average
treatment effects. Each coefficient is small in magnitude and not statistically significantly
different from zero.
    In Column (4), we estimate heterogeneity in treatment effects with respect to local
cases, and find the same pattern as in Column (2). The social norm correction decreases
the expected future infection rate in districts with no cases, and this impact becomes more
positive as current cases rise (the T 1ijd main effect and interaction term coefficients are
both statistically significant at the 5% level).
    These treatment effect heterogeneity findings (Columns 2 and 4, Table 2) jointly support
the theoretical model. When current infection rates are low, the social norm correction
treatment does not change perceived infectiousness much, but leads to realizations that social
distancing support is higher than previously thought. People therefore reduce estimates of
the future infection rate, and also reduce their own social distancing (choosing to free-ride).
By contrast, when current infection rates are high, the treatment causes larger increases
in perceived infectiousness. Notwithstanding an increase in the share of social distancing
supporters, people increase their estimate of the future infection rate, and increase their
social distancing.


6     Conclusion
Support for social distancing has increased substantially during the COVID-19 pandemic.
If people are unaware of the extent to which norms have changed, would revealing true high
rates of such support lead to more social distancing? In theory, the impact of providing such
information is ambiguous: it could reduce social distancing, if free-riding effects dominate,
but could have a positive effect on social distancing if perceived-infectiousness effects dom-
inate. Perceived-infectiousness effects are more likely to dominate when the current local
infection rate is higher.
    We implemented a randomized controlled trial testing the impact of a "social norm cor-
rection" treatment revealing high community support for social distancing. The treatment
effect on social distancing exhibits the spatial heterogeneity predicted by theory: negative
in areas with low infection rates (reflecting the dominance of free-riding effects), and more
positive in areas with higher rates (as perceived-infectiousness effects become increasingly
 17 The  question is "For every 10 people in your community, how many do you think would get sick from
coronavirus?" Sample sizes in these regressions are smaller. We implemented this question midway through
the endline survey, after finding preliminary evidence suggesting the need to explore mechanisms behind
treatment effect heterogeneity.



                                                  14
prominent). In the area with the most cases, amounting to one-quarter of our sample, the
treatment effect is positive and large in magnitude. The treatment effect on the expected
future infection rate shows similar heterogeneity, confirming an additional theoretical pre-
diction.
    Our results suggest that when local infection rates are high, interventions shifting percep-
tions of community social distancing support upwards could help promote social distancing.
These findings may also help predict the impacts of analogous public health messaging
revealing social norms of support for preventive measures against other infectious diseases.




                                              15
References
Adida, C. L., C. Cottiero, L. Falabella, I. Gotti, S. Ijaz, G. Phillips, and M. Seese (2021). Taking the Cloth:
  How Religious Appeals Increase Compliance with COVID-19 Prevention Measures. SocArXiv Working
  Papers .
Alsan, M., F. Cody Stanford, A. Banerjee, E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, S. Eichmeyer, P. Goldsmith-
  Pinkham, L. Ogbu-Nwobodo, B. A. Olken, C. Torres, A. Sankar, P. Vautrey, and E. Duflo (2020).
  Comparison of Knowledge and Information-Seeking Behavior After General COVID-19 Public Health
  Messages and Messages Tailored for Black and Latinx Communities: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
  Annals of Internal Medicine 174, 484­492.
Andersson, O., P. Campos-Mercade, A. Meier, and E. Wengstrom (2021). Anticipation of COVID-19 Vac-
  cines Reduces Social Distancing. SSRN Working Paper (3765329).
Arroyos-Calvera, D., M. Drouvelis, J. Lohse, and R. McDonald (2021). Improving Compliance with COVID-
  19 Guidance: A Workplace Field Experiment. SSRN , 19.
Banerjee, A., M. Alsan, E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, A. Chowdhury, E. Duflo, P. Goldsmith-Pinkham,
  and B. A. Olken (2020). Messages on Covid-19 Prevention in India Increased Symptoms Reporting and
  Adherence to Preventive Behaviors Among 25 Million Recipients with Similar Effects on Non-recipient
  Members of Their Communities. NBER Working Paper (27496).
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2019). Using Gossips to Spread Informa-
  tion: Theory and Evidence from Two Randomized Controlled Trials. The Review of Economic Studies 86,
  2453­2490.
Banerjee, A., E. La Ferrara, and V. H. Orozco-Olvera (2019). The Entertaining Way to Behavioral Change:
  Fighting HIV with MTV. NBER Working Paper (26096).
Banker, S. and J. Park (2020). Evaluating Prosocial COVID-19 Messaging Frames: Evidence from a Field
  Study on Facebook. Judgment and Decision Making 15, 7.
Benabou, R. and J. Tirole (2011). Identity, Morals, and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 126, 805­855.
Bernheim, B. D. (1994). A Theory of Conformity. Journal of Political Economy 102, 841­877.
Bicchieri, C. (2005). The Grammar of Society: The Nature and Dynamics of Social Norms. Cambridge
  University Press.
Bicchieri, C. and E. Dimant (2019). Nudging with care: The risks and benefits of social information. Public
  choice , 1­22.
Bos, B., M. A. Drupp, J. Meya, and M. Quaas (2020). Moral Suasion and the Private Provision of Public
  Goods: Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic. SSRN , 24.
Bursztyn, L., A. L. Gonzalez, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2018). Misperceived Social Norms: Women Working
  Outside the Home in Saudi Arabia. American Economic Review 110, 2997­3029.
Capraro, V. and H. Barcelo (2020). Priming Reasoning Increases Intentions to Wear a Face Covering to
  Slow Down COVID-19 Transmission. arXiv .
Cato, S., T. Iida, K. Ishida, A. Ito, K. McElwain, and M. Shoji (2020). Social Distancing as a Public Good
  Under the COVID-19 Pandemic. Public Health 188, 51­53.
CDC (2020). COVID-19 and Your Health: Social Distancing. Center for Disease Control and Prevention .
Centola, D. (2011). An Experimental Study of Homophily in the Adoption of Health Behavior. Science 334,
  1269­1272.
Cialdini, R. B. and N. J. Goldstein (2004). Social Influence: Compliance and Conformity. Annual Review
  of Psychology 55, 591­621.
De Quidt, J., J. Haushofer, and C. Roth (2018). Measuring and Bounding Experimenter Demand. American
  Economic Review 108, 3266­3302.
Dupas, P. (2014). Short-Run Subsidies and Long-Run Adoption of New Health Products: Evidence From a
  Field Experiment. Econometrica 82, 197­228.


                                                      16
Habersaat, K. B. and A. E. Scheel (November 2020). Pandemic Fatigue: Reinvigorating the Public to Prevent
   COVID-19: Policy Framework for Supporting Pandemic Prevention and Management. Copenhagen,
   Denmark: World Health Organization.
Hershey, J. C., D. A. Asch, T. Thumasathit, J. Meszaros, and V. W. Waters (1994). The Roles of Altruism,
   Free Riding, and Bandwagoning in Vaccination Decisions. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
   Processes 59, 177­187.
Jakubowski, A., D. Egger, C. Nekesa, L. Lowe, M. Walker, and E. Miguel (2021). Self-Reported Mask
   Wearing Greatly Exceeds Directly Observed Use: Urgent Need for Policy Intervention in Kenya. medRxiy
   Preprint .
Janzwood, S. (April 27, 2020). The Social Distancing Norm Cascade: The Role of Belief Systems in
   Accelerating Normative Change during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Canada: Cascade Institute.
Jones, S., E. Egger, and R. Santos (2020). Is Mozambique Prepared for a Lockdown During the COVID-19
   Pandemic? UNU-WIDER Blog .
Jordan, J., E. Yoeli, and D. Rand (2020). Don't Get it or Don't Spread it? Comparing Self-Interested
   Versus Prosocially Framed COVID-19 Prevention Messaging. PsyArXiv Preprint .
Kelly, J. A., J. St.Lawrence, Y. S. ad Allan Hauth, S. Kalichman, Y. Diaz, T. Brasfield, J. Koob, and
   M. Morgan (1992). Community AIDS/HIV Risk Reduction: The Effects of Endorsements by Popular
   People in Three Cities. American Journal of Public Health 82, 1483­1489.
Kim, D. A., A. R. Hwong, D. Stafford, A. D. Hughes, J. A. O'Malley, J. H. Fowler, and N. A. Christakis
   (2015). Social Network Targeting to Maximise Population Behaviour Change: A Cluster Randomised
   Controlled Trial. Lancet , 145­153.
Krupka, E. L. and R. A. Weber (2013, 06). Identifying Social Norms Using Coordination Games: Why Does
   Dictator Game Sharing Vary? Journal of the European Economic Association 11 (3), 495­524.
Lau, K., M. Miraldo, M. M. Galizzi, and K. Hauck (2019). Social Norms and Free-riding in Influenza Vaccine
   Decisions in the UK: An Online Experiment. The Lancet 394, 65.
Lunn, P. D., S. Timmons, C. A. Belton, M. Barjakova, H. Julienne, and C. Lavin (2020). Motivating Social
   Distancing During the Covid-19 Pandemic: An Online Experiment. Social Science and Medicine .
Martinez, D., C. Parilli, C. Scartascini, and A. Simpser (2021). Let's (not) get together! The role of social
   norms on social distancing during COVID-19. PLoS ONE 16, 1­14.
Ministry of Health (2020). COVID-19 Epidemiological Situation, Republic of Mozambique. Maputo, Mozam-
   bique: Government of Mozambique.
National Institute of Statistics (INE) (2017). Mozambique Population and Housing Census 2017. Maputo,
   Mozambique: Government of Mozambique.
Nyusi, F. J. (August 5, 2020a). Communication to the Nation of His Excellency Philip Jacinto Nyusi, Pres-
   ident of Republic of Mozambique, on the New State of Emergency, within the Scope of the Coronavirus
   Pandemic COVID-19. Maputo, Mozambique: Maputo Mozambique.
Nyusi, F. J. (September 5, 2020b). Communication to the Nation of His Excellency Philip Jacinto Nyusi,
   President of Republic of Mozambique, on the New State of Emergency, within the Scope of the Coron-
   avirus Pandemic COVID-19. Maputo, Mozambique: Maputo Mozambique.
of Mozambique, R. (April 2, 2020c). "Bulletin of the Republic", I Series, No. 64. Maputo, Mozambique.
of Mozambique, R. (August 5, 2020a). "Bulletin of the Republic", I Series, No. 149. Maputo, Mozambique.
of Mozambique, R. (March 31, 2020b). "Bulletin of the Republic", I Series, No. 62. Maputo, Mozambique.
Orne, M. T. (1962). On the Social Psychology of the Psychological Experiment: With Particular Reference
   to Demand Characteristics and Their Implications. American Psychologist 17, 776­783.
Paakkari, L. and O. Okan (2020). COVID-19: Health Literacy is an Underestimated Problem. The Lancet
   Public Health 5.
Papanastasiou, A., B. J. Ruffle, and A. Zheng (2020). Compliance with Social Distancing: Theory and
   Empirical Evidence from Ontario during COVID-19. SSRN , 38.




                                                     17
Reicher, S. and J. Drury (2021). Pandemic Fatigue? How Adherence to COVID-19 Regulations has been
   Misrepresented and Why it Matters. British Medical Journal 372, 137.
Rosenthal, R. (1966). Experimenter Effects in Behavioral Research. New York, USA: Appleton-Century-
   Crofts.
Sasaki, S., H. Kurokawa, and F. Ohtake (2020). Short-term Responses to Nudge-based Messages for Pre-
   venting the Spread of COVID-19 Infection: Intention, Behavior, and Life Satisfaction. Osaka University
   Discussion Papers In Economics And Business , 1­31.
Schultz, W. P., J. M. Nolan, R. B. Cialdini, N. J. Goldstein, and V. Griskevicius (2007). The Constructive,
   Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms. Psychological Science 18, 429­434.
Siuta, M. and M. Sambo (April 1, 2020). COVID-19 Em Mocambique: Dimensao e Possiveis Impactos.
   Boletim No. 124p. Maputo, Mozambique: Instituto de Estudos Socias e Economicos.
Spiegler, R. (2020). Behavioral implications of causal misperceptions. Annual Review of Economics 12 (1),
   81­106.
U.S Embassy in Mozambique (2020). COVID-19 Information.
Valente, T. and P. Pumpuang (2007). Identifying Opinion Leaders to Promote Behavior Change. Health
   Education and Behavior 34, 881­896.
Van Bavel, J. J., K. Baicker, P. S. Boggio, V. Capraro, A. Cichocka, M. Cikara, M. J. Crockett, A. J. Crum,
   K. M. Douglas, J. N. Druckman, J. Drury, O. Dube, N. Ellemers, E. J. Finkel, J. H. Fowler, M. Gelfand,
   S. Han, S. Haslam, J. Jetten, S. Kitayama, D. Mobbs, L. E. Napper, D. J. Packer, G. Pennycook,
   E. Peters, R. E. Petty, D. G. Rand, S. D. Reicher, S. Schnall, A. Shariff, L. J. Skitka, S. S. Smith, C. R.
   Sunstein, N. Tabri, J. A. Tucker, S. van der Linden, P. van Lange, K. A. Weeden, M. J. A. Wohl, J. Zaki,
   S. R. Zion, and R. Willer (2020). Using Social and Behavioural Science to Support COVID-19 Pandemic
   Response. Nature human behaviour 4, 460­471.
Wood, W. (2000). Attitude Change: Persuasion and Social Influence. Annual Review of Psychology 51,
   539­570.
Xie, K., B. Liang, M. A. Dulebenets, and Y. Mei (2020). The Impact of Risk Perception on Social Distancing
   During the COVID-19 Pandemic in China. International journal of environmental research and public
   health 17.
Yang, D., J. Allen IV, A. Mahumane, J. Riddell IV, and H. Yu (2021). Knowledge, Stigma and HIV Testing:
   An Analysis of a Widespread HIV/AIDS Program. NBER Working Paper (28716).
Yu, H. (2020). Three Essays in Development Economics. Dissertation. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
   Michigan.
Zizzo, D. J. (2010). Experimenter Demand Effects in Economic Experiments. Experimental Economics 13,
   75­98.




                                                     18
                                                    Figure 1: The Social Distancing Measure
19




     Notes: Definition of primary social distancing (SD) outcome measure. Definition was pre-specified in pre-analysis plan (PAP) and submitted
     to AEA RCT Registry on Aug. 25, 2020. Data for constructing the measure were then collected in our Rounds 2 and 3 phone surveys (from
     August through November 2020). To be considered social distancing (SD), respondents must: 1) self-report they are following government SD
     recommendations, 2) self-report they are doing at least seven out of eight SD actions, and 3) be reported by others in community to be doing SD.
     Percentages reported are all shares of full sample (N=2,117). See Table 1 and Section 3.3 of main text for social distancing question definitions.
Figure 2: District-Level Social Norm Correction Treatment Effects by Cumulative
COVID-19 Cases




Notes: Social norm correction treatment effects (triangles) estimated separately for each of seven
study districts (with 95% confidence intervals). District-level treatment effects plotted on vertical
axis against district COVID-19 case loads at start of endline survey (per 100,000 population) on
horizontal axis.




                                                 20
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Social Distancing Support, Norms, and Behavior

        VARIABLES                                                   N      Mean      SD     Min   Max


 (1)    Pre-baseline: Respondent supports social distancing (SD)   2,117   0.976    0.153    0     1
 (2)    Pre-baseline: Perceived share of community supporting SD   2,109   0.689    0.313    0     1
 (3)    Respondent supports SD                                     2,117   0.989    0.104    0     1
 (4)    Perceived share of community supporting SD                 2,114   0.800    0.262    0     1

 (5)    Primary SD indicator                                       2,117   0.0784   0.269    0     1
 (6)      Self-report of SD indicator                              2,117    0.355   0.479    0     1
 (7)         Self-report: Followed govt rules in past 14 days      2,117    0.949   0.219    0     1
 (8)         Self-report: SD behaviors above median                2,117    0.361   0.481    0     1
 (9)      Others' report of SD indicator                           2,117   0.232    0.422    0     1
 (10)        Other households' report of SD                        2,117   0.378    0.485    0     1
 (11)        Leaders' report of SD                                 2,117   0.519    0.500    0     1



Notes: "Pre-baseline" refers to data collected during the Round 1 phone survey from July 10 to
August 16, 2020. All other summary statistics are baseline data collected during the Round 2
telephone survey from August 26 to October 4, 2020. See study timeline in Figure A.2. Variables
are as follows. Rows 1 & 3: indicator equal to one if respondent answers "yes" to supporting "the
practice of social distancing to prevent the spread of coronavirus" and zero otherwise. Rows 2 &
4: perceived share of households (asked as "for every 10 households") in community that support
social distancing (SD). Row 5: indicator for SD equal to one if respondent is SD according to self
(Row 6) and others' reports (Row 9), and zero otherwise. Row 6: indicator for SD according to
self if respondent answered "yes" to observing the government's recommendations on SD in the last
14 days (Row 7) and the report carrying out at least seven out of eight (above the sample median)
social distancing behaviors (Row 8), and zero otherwise. Row 9: indicator for SD according to
others if all other respondents (Row 10) and community leaders (Row 11) reported not knowing the
respondent household, not seeing the respondent household in the past 14 days, or--if seen--that the
respondent household 1) did NOT come closer than 1.5 meters to others outside their household; 2)
did NOT shake hands, try to shake hands, or touch others outside their household; and 3) appeared
to be observing the government's recommendations on SD, and zero otherwise.




                                                    21
Table 2: Treatment Effects on Social Distancing and Expected COVID-19 Ill-
nesses

                                      (1)                    (2)                        (3)                         (4)
 VARIABLES                    Primary SD Indicator   Primary SD Indicator   Perceived share of people   Perceived share of people
                                                                             in community that will      in community that will
                                                                               get sick from Covid         get sick from Covid


 T1: Social Norm Correction          0.00425               -0.0466**                  0.0418                    -0.194**
                                    (0.0140)                (0.0191)                (0.0322)                    (0.0944)
 T2: Leader Endorsement             -0.00541                 -0.0258                 -0.0209                     -0.0598
                                    (0.0137)                (0.0198)                (0.0308)                    (0.0944)
 T1 × District Covid Cases                                0.00304***                                           0.00725**
                                                           (0.00106)                                           (0.00291)
 T2 × District Covid Cases                                  0.00122                                              0.00127
                                                          (0.000992)                                           (0.00287)

 Observations                        2,117                  2,117                     812                         812
 R-squared                           0.158                  0.163                    0.146                       0.152
 Control Mean DV                     0.0857                 0.0857                   0.359                       0.359
 Control SD DV                       0.280                   0.280                   0.369                       0.369


Notes: Dependent variable in Columns 1-2 defined in Table 1. Dependent variable in Columns
3-4 is the expected future infection rate: "For every 10 people in your community, how many do
you think would get sick from coronavirus?" (converted to share from 0 to 1). "T1: Social Norm
Correction" is equal to one if respondent was randomly assigned to the social norm correction treat-
ment, and zero otherwise. "T2: Leader Endorsement" is equal to one if respondent was randomly
assigned to the leader endorsement treatment, and zero otherwise. "T1 x District Covid Cases" &
"T2 x District Covid Cases" are the respective treatment indicators interacted with district-level
cumulative COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population at the start of the endline survey (as detailed
in Appendix J). All regressions control for a baseline measure of the dependent variable, a vector
of indicators for number of community leaders knowing the respondent at baseline (0 through 4),
and a vector of indicators for number of other respondents knowing the respondent at baseline
(0 through 8). All regressions also include community fixed effects. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                              22
Online Appendix
A      Proofs
A.1     Proof of Theorem 1
                                                                       
The agent will adjust her effort level in response to the treatment to e ^=    C
                                                                               ^
                                                                                2 H (^
                                                                                     x)   where
H (x) = 1 - x(1 - 2 ). Hence, the prior and posterior effort levels satisfy:
                   1


                                        
                                         e
                                         ~ ~ H (~
                                                x)
                                         =                                                (A.1)
                                         e  H (x)

We take the ratios of Equations 6 and 7:
                                                
                                         ^   1 - eG(x)
                                           =                                              (A.2)
                                             1 - eG(^
                                                    x)

We therefore obtain:
                                               
                                   e~    x)(1 - eG(x))
                                      H (^
                                    =                                                     (A.3)
                                   e  H (x)(1 - eG(^
                                                   x))
                       
Effort increases iff   e
                       e
                        ~
                            > 1:
                                            
                                      x)(1 - eG(x))
                                   H (^
                                                      > 1
                                   H (x)(1 - eG(^x))
                            
                                      x) - H (^
                            e [H (x)G(^       x)G(x)] > H (x) - H (^
                                                                   x)

Now note that G(x) = 2xH (x) such that:

                                                        1
                             e2H (x)H (^  x - x) > (1 -  )(^
                                       x)(^                  x - x)                       (A.4)
                                                         2
                                                         1
                                                     1-   2
                                               e >
                                                   H (x)H (^
                                                           x)

This shows that the perceived-infectiousness effect dominates if the initial effort level e is
high enough. Effort is determined by Equation 5 and increases with  (which increases with
^ ). Therefore, for sufficiently large 
                                       ^ the perceived-infectiousness effect dominates.




                                                1
B     Study Area and Timeline
Study participants come from 76 communities in central Mozambique. The study commu-
nities are in seven districts of three provinces: Dondo and Nhamatanda in Sofala province;
Gondola, Chimoio and Manica in Manica province; and Namacurra and Nicoadala in Zam-
bezia province. These 76 communities are mapped in Figure A.1. Compared to other
communities in Mozambique, the study areas are relatively accessible to main transport
corridors (highways and ports), and are thus important geographic conduits for infectious
disease.

                                Figure A.1: Study Area




    We collected survey data in three rounds between July 10 and November 18, 2020.
Appendix Figure A.2 depicts the study timeline below a rolling average of new Mozambican
COVID-19 cases. We piloted surveys in Round 1. Immediately before the Round 2 survey,
we randomly assigned households to treatments and submitted our pre-analysis plan to
the AEA RCT Registry. The Round 2 survey served as a baseline, and was immediately
followed (on the same phone call) by our treatment interventions. Round 3 was our endline
survey. Surveys collected data on COVID-19 knowledge, beliefs, and behaviors. While
data collection for Round 3 began only one day after completion of Round 2, there was a
minimum of 3.0 weeks and average of 6.3 weeks between Rounds 2 and 3 surveys for any
given respondent. While the Round 1 survey occurred when new COVID-19 cases remained


                                            2
relatively steady, both the Round 2 and Round 3 surveys occurred during a period of
substantial growth in new COVID-19 cases.


                                 Figure A.2: Study Timeline




Notes: Round 1 is pre-baseline survey to collect social distancing support data, Round 2 is baseline
survey, and Round 3 is endline survey. There is at least a three week gap between baseline and
endline survey for any given study participant. Pre-analysis plan uploaded and treatments randomly
assigned immediately prior to start of Round 2 baseline survey, on Aug. 25, 2021. Treatments
implemented immediately following baseline survey on same phone call. Baseline measures reported
in Table 1 come from Round 2 surveys and endline measures come from Round 3 surveys.




                                                 3
C     Treatment Scripts
Both treatments were implemented directly following the baseline survey, on the same phone
call. If a respondent was randomly assigned to a treatment, the corresponding intervention
text would appear on the enumerator's tablet. Enumerators read a script aloud exactly
as shown below. Following the treatment, respondents were asked if they would like the
information repeated.
    The social norm correction treatment involves sharing the level of "actual community
support for social distancing" with the respondent if they underestimate or correctly estimate
that level. We express this as integer units out of 10, rounded to the nearest integer based
on actual shares of respondents in the community expressing support for social distancing
in the Round 1 (pre-baseline) survey. In 63 out of 76 communities (82.9%) the number we
convey to respondents is 10 out of 10, and in 13 communities (17.1%) the number is 9 out
of 10.
    Script for T1: Social Norm Correction ­ "Now I want to give you some information about
social distancing. In this survey, you indicated that you think <insert respondent's answer
here> of every 10 households in your community support the practice of social distancing."

    · If response UNDERESTIMATES community support for social distancing: "However,
      more households support social distancing than you think! Based on the results of our
      first COVID-19 survey, approximately <insert actual community support for social
      distancing here> of every 10 households in your community support social distancing
      to prevent the spread of the coronavirus."

    · If response CORRECTLY ESTIMATES community support for social distancing:
      "You are correct! Based on the results of our first COVID-19 survey, approximately
      <insert actual community support for social distancing here> of every 10 household in
      your community support social distancing to prevent the spread of the coronavirus."

    · If response OVERESTIMATES community support for social distancing: (no infor-
      mation given)

   Script for T2: Leader Endorsement ­ "Our research team recently called and talked to
your <list leaders' titles and names here>. They said that they support social distancing,
are practicing social distancing themselves, and encourage others to do the same."




                                              4
D     Populated Pre-analysis Plan
On August 25, 2020, prior to baseline data collection, we uploaded our pre-analysis plan
(PAP) to the American Economic Association's RCT Registry, registration ID number
AEARCTR-0005862: https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.5862-1.0.
   In our PAP, we specify the following regression for our primary analysis, which is the
same as Equation 8 in the main text:


                                                others
        Yijd = 0 + 1 T 1ijd + 2 T 2ijd + Bijd + ijd      leaders
                                                       + ijd     + jd + ijd               (D.1)

     where Yijd is the social distancing indicator for household i in community j and district
d ; T 1ijd and T 2ijd are indicator variables for the social norm correction and leader endorse-
ment treatment groups, respectively; Bijd is the baseline value of the dependent variable;
jd are community fixed effects; and ijd is a mean-zero error term. We report robust stan-
dard errors. The regression also controls for the number of other survey respondents and
community leaders who report knowing the survey respondent at baseline (in Round 2).
Specifically, i others
                       is a vector of dummy variables for the distinct number of other surveyed
study respondents who report knowing the household (0, 1, 2. . . , 7, 8 or more; where 8 is the
first integer where over 90% of the sample is represented by previous non-negative integers),
and i  leaders
               is a vector of dummy variables for the distinct number of community leaders
who report knowing the household (0, 1, 2, 3, 4; where 4 is maximum number of leaders
found within one of the 76 sample communities). Including this control variable helps re-
duce residual variance in the dependent variable, because respondents who are known by
more others in the community will also have more reports of social interactions with others.
These results are presented in the main paper in Table 2 column (1) and are also replicated
in column (1) of Table A.1.
     Additionally, we pre-specified the following secondary analyses. First, we analyze impacts
of the social distancing treatments on the separate components of the social distancing
index--the others' and self-report. These results are presented in Table A.1 columns (2) &
(3), respectively. Treatment effects on these outcomes are very similar to those in column
(1).
     Second, we also pool SD1 and SD2 together to examine the effect of some endorsement
of social distancing (whether by other community members or by community leaders) on
the primary social distancing outcome. These coefficient in Table A.1 column (4) is small
in magnitude and not statistically significantly different from zero at conventional levels.




                                               5
                          Table A.1: Additional Prespecified Analyses
                                      (1)                     (2)                  (3)                   (4)
 VARIABLES                    Primary SD Indicator   Others' Report of SD   Self-Report of SD    Primary SD Indicator


 T1: Social Norm Correction          0.00425              0.000950                0.0134
                                    (0.0140)              (0.0181)              (0.0238)
 T2: Leader Endorsement             -0.00541               0.0145                -0.0189
                                    (0.0137)              (0.0183)              (0.0234)
 Pooled SD Treatments                                                                                 -0.000642
                                                                                                       (0.0116)

 Observations                        2,117                   2,117                2,117                  2,117
 R-squared                            0.158                  0.333                0.211                  0.158
 Control Mean DV                     0.0857                  0.211                0.406                 0.0857
 Control SD DV                       0.280                   0.408                0.491                  0.280

Notes: Dependent variables are defined in Table 1. "T1: Social Norm Correction" is an indicator
equal to one if respondent was randomly assigned to the social norm correction treatment, and
zero otherwise. "T2: Leader Endorsement" is an indicator equal to one if respondent was randomly
assigned to the leader endorsement treatment, and zero otherwise. "Pooled SD Treatments" is an
indicator equal to one if respondent was randomly assigned to the social norm correction treatment
or leader endorsement treatment, and zero otherwise. Controls are as defined in Table 2. All
regressions also include community fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance
levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.


    We also randomly assigned a family of treatments to improve COVID-19 knowledge
in the same study population.1 Randomization of the social norm correction and leader
endorsement treatments were stratified within 76 communities and within the separate
knowledge treatment conditions (i.e., the knowledge and social distancing treatments were
cross-randomized). As pre-specified, we run a regression on the primary social distancing
outcome with indicators for social distancing treatments, the cross-randomized knowledge
treatments and their interaction terms. Results are presented in Table A.2, and show no
large or statistically significant interaction effects between the social distancing and knowl-
edge treatments.
   1 The    pre-analysis  plan  (PAP)    for   the   knowledge     study                   can   be    found      here:
https://fordschool.umich.edu/mozambique-research/combatting-covid-19.




                                                         6
 Table A.2: Interactions between Social Distancing and Knowledge Treatments
                                                               (1)
                      VARIABLES                      Primary SD Indicator


                      T1: Social Norm Correction            -0.0237
                                                            (0.0214)
                      T2: Leader Endorsement                -0.0210
                                                            (0.0222)
                      K1: Incentive                         -0.0218
                                                            (0.0241)
                      K2: Feedback                          -0.00250
                                                            (0.0251)
                      K3: Incentive & Feedback              -0.0144
                                                            (0.0238)
                      T1 × K1                                0.0545
                                                            (0.0390)
                      T2 × K1                                0.0249
                                                            (0.0372)
                      T1 × K2                                0.0467
                                                            (0.0397)
                      T2 × K2                                0.0139
                                                            (0.0385)
                      T1 × K3                                0.0404
                                                            (0.0382)
                      T2 × K3                                0.0374
                                                            (0.0372)


                      Observations                           2,117
                      R-squared                              0.160
                      Control Mean DV                        0.0857
                      Control SD DV                          0.280

Notes: Dependent variable is defined in Table 1. Social distancing treatments are defined in
Table 2. "K1 Incentive", "K2 Feedback", and "K3 Incentive & Feedback" are indicators equal to
one if respondent was randomly assigned to one of these knowledge treatments, and zero otherwise.
Remaining regressors represent interactions between social distancing treatments and the knowledge
treatments. Controls are as defined in Table 2. Regression also includes community fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                7
E     Attrition and Balance
Appendix Table A.3 presents regressions examining whether attrition and baseline variables
are balanced with respect to treatment assignment2 . Attrition between Round 2 (baseline)
and Round 3 (endline) is only 4.9% and is less than 5.6% in each of the seven districts
surveyed. Balance in attrition is confirmed in column 1, which starts with the Round 2
(baseline) sample and regresses treatments on an indicator equal to one if the respondent
was not reached for the Round 3 (endline) survey. Balance in baseline social distancing
outcomes is confirmed in columns 2-4, which examines the Round 2 social distancing out-
comes. Balance in baseline household characteristics is confirmed in columns 6-8, which
examines the final Round 3 sample and regresses treatments on Round 1 measures of house-
hold income, an index of food insecurity, and an indicator for presence of an older adult
over 60 years. In not a single regression in the table is a coefficient on a treatment indicator
statistically significant at conventional levels.




  2 Figure A.2 shows the study timeline for the three survey rounds collected. Round 1 is a pre-baseline

measure, Round 2 measures baseline values and Round 3 measures endline outcomes.


                                                   8
                                                     Table A.3: Treatment Effect on Attrition and Balance

                                     (1)              (2)                     (3)                  (4)                   (5)               (6)            (7)                (8)
     VARIABLES                    Attrition   Primary SD Indicator   Others' Report of SD   Self-Report of SD   Perceived Social Norm   Hh Income   Food Insecurity   Older Adult in Hh


     T1: Social Norm Correction    -0.0127           -0.0176              -0.000450             -0.00956               -0.0101            -159.5       0.00107            -0.00293
                                  (0.0111)          (0.0134)               (0.0203)             (0.0247)              (0.0138)           (181.7)       (0.0191)           (0.0250)
     T2: Leader Endorsement       -0.00154          -0.00324               0.00897              0.00420                -0.0201            -39.95        -0.0240            0.0240
                                  (0.0113)          (0.0143)               (0.0206)             (0.0249)              (0.0137)           (181.8)       (0.0193)           (0.0252)

     Observations                   2,226             2,117                 2,117                2,117                  2,114             1,873         2,117               2,096
     R-squared                      0.030             0.096                 0.199                0.076                  0.047             0.043         0.090               0.058
     Control Mean DV               0.0533            0.0833                 0.229                0.356                  0.810             1176          0.842               0.342
     Control SD DV                  0.225             0.277                 0.420                0.479                  0.262             4029          0.365               0.475

    Notes: Dependent variables are as follows. Column 1: indicator if respondent attrited from the sample between baseline and endline. Columns
    2-4: baseline SD outcomes defined in Table 1. Column 5: baseline perceived share of community supporting SD, defined further in Table 1.
9




    Column 6: at pre-baseline, self-reported total income for the previous week (in Mozambican meticais). Column 7: indicator if, in the last 7
    days, household has 1) lacked food; 2) reduced number of meals/portions; or was unable to buy their usual amount of food due to 3) market
    shortages, 4) high prices, 5) reduced income. Column 8: indicator if adult age 60 or older is present in the household. Controls are as defined
    in Table 2. All regressions also include community fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, **
    p<0.05, * p<0.1.
F      Summary Statistics for Social Distancing Index
Below are the summary statistics for the questions that comprise the self-reported social
distancing index at baseline and endline. Respondents were asked "Is this something your
household has been doing for the last seven days?" about a randomly determined four social
distancing actions at baseline and all eight social distancing actions at endline. Responses
were coded as indicators equal to one if indicative of social distancing (answers that indicate
social distancing shown in parentheses), and zero otherwise.


    Table A.4: Summary Statistics for Components of Social Distancing Index
                                                                Baseline                  Endline

    VARIABLES                                            N       Mean      SD      N       Mean     SD


    Shop in crowded areas                               1,032     .642     .479   2,115     .678    .467
    like informal markets (No)
    Gather with several friends (No)                    1,047     .349     .477   2,113     .414    .493
    Help the elderly avoid                              1,094     .877     .329   2,114     .923    .266
    close contact with other people,
    including children (Yes)
    If show symptoms of coronavirus,                    1,050     .836     .370   2,113     .859    .347
    immediately inform my household
    and avoid people (Yes)
    Drink alcohol in bars (No)                          1,082     .226     .419   2,113     .272    .445
    Wear a face mask if                                 1,034     .902     .297   2,114     .885    .319
    showing symptoms of coronavirus (Yes)
    Instead of meeting in person,                       1,039     .935     .247   2,112     .930    .255
    call on the phone or send text message (Yes)
    Allow children to build immunity                    1,070     .439     .497   2,113     .456    .498
    by playing with children from
    other households (No)



Notes: Variables are coded as indicators equal to one if indicative of social distancing (answers
that indicate social distancing shown in parentheses), and zero otherwise. Respondents were asked
"Is this something your household has been doing for the last seven days?" about a randomly
determined four social distancing actions at baseline and all eight social distancing actions at
endline. The baseline sample was asked a subset of these questions which explains the smaller
number of observations at baseline.




                                                   10
G       Treatment Effect Estimates from Logit and Probit Re-
        gressions
The primary social distancing indicator is a binary variable that is analyzed using an or-
dinary least-squares (OLS) regression, as prespecified. As a robustness check, we adapt
Equation 8 to be run using logit and probit regression.
    Table A.5 presents results from the logistic regression on the primary outcomes, while
Table A.6 presents corresponding probit regression results. Regression coefficients are pre-
sented as marginal effects. Results in both tables are consistent with the results from OLS
linear probability models presented in Table 2.


          Table A.5: Treatment Effects Estimated Using Logistic Regression

                                     (1)                    (2)                          (3)                             (4)
VARIABLES                    Primary SD Indicator   Primary SD Indicator   Perceived share of households   Perceived share of households
                                                                              in community that will          in community that will
                                                                                get sick from Covid             get sick from Covid


T1: Social Norm Correction          0.0100                -0.0756**                    0.0270                       -0.403***
                                   (0.0221)                (0.0376)                  (0.0395)                         (0.138)
T2: Leader Endorsement             -0.00695                 -0.0398                   -0.0274                        -0.300**
                                   (0.0222)                (0.0349)                  (0.0394)                         (0.135)
T1 × District Covid Cases                                0.00384***                                                 0.0132***
                                                          (0.00131)                                                 (0.00397)
T2 × District Covid Cases                                  0.00162                                                  0.00842**
                                                          (0.00129)                                                 (0.00397)

Observations                        1,285                  1,285                       806                             806
Control Mean DV                     0.141                  0.141                      0.356                           0.356
Control SD DV                       0.349                  0.349                      0.368                           0.368


Notes: Dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. Coefficients presented are marginal
effects from logit regression. Social distancing treatments and controls are as defined in Table
2. All regressions also include community fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                   11
           Table A.6: Treatment Effects Estimated Using Probit Regression

                                     (1)                    (2)                          (3)                             (4)
VARIABLES                    Primary SD Indicator   Primary SD Indicator   Perceived share of households   Perceived share of households
                                                                              in community that will          in community that will
                                                                                get sick from Covid             get sick from Covid


T1: Social Norm Correction          0.00892               -0.0709**                    0.0288                       -0.401***
                                   (0.0212)                (0.0347)                  (0.0390)                         (0.132)
T2: Leader Endorsement             -0.00837                 -0.0356                   -0.0298                        -0.306**
                                   (0.0214)                (0.0330)                  (0.0392)                         (0.135)
T1 × District Covid Cases                                0.00369***                                                 0.0132***
                                                          (0.00126)                                                 (0.00384)
T2 × District Covid Cases                                  0.00139                                                  0.00851**
                                                          (0.00124)                                                 (0.00396)

Observations                        1,285                  1,285                       806                             806
Control Mean DV                     0.141                  0.141                      0.356                           0.356
Control SD DV                       0.349                  0.349                      0.368                           0.368


Notes: Dependent variables are defined in Tables 1 and 2. Coefficients presented are marginal
effects from probit regression. Social distancing treatments and controls are as defined in Table
2. All regressions also include community fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                   12
H      Effect on Perceived Social Norm
Using answers to the question "For every 10 households in your community, how many
support social distancing?", we estimate each respondent's perceived share of households
in the community who support social distancing. We note that this measure may be an
upward-based estimate of true perceptions of the social norm, since experimenter demand
effects may lead respondents to report higher shares of support for social distancing in order
to make their communities look favorable.
    Table A.7 presents the cumulative distribution of this perceived social norm measure in
the full samples at baseline and endline, and subdivided by treatment arm at endline. Even
at baseline, the distribution is skewed upwards with over 90% of the sample reporting that
the majority (50% or greater) of households in their community support social distancing
and over half of the sample reporting that 100% of households do the same. Therefore, this
measure may be limited in its ability to measure the effect of a social norm correction given
that there is "little room to improve" for many respondents in the sample. If some high
estimates are due to experimenter demand effects, then the social norm correction may still
boost respondents' true perception of the social norm in a way not captured by our measure.


    Table A.7: Sample Distribution (Cumulative %) by Perceived Social Norm
                                     Baseline               Endline

                  Perceived Share     Total     Total   Control       T1     T2
                        0%             2.7       2.8       3.5        2.2    2.5
                        10%            3.1       3.1       3.6        2.4    3.0
                        20%            4.4       4.4       5.9        2.9    3.9
                        30%            6.5       6.5       7.4        5.1    6.6
                        40%            9.6       8.8       9.5        6.9    9.9
                        50%            21.1      19.0     19.3     18.3     19.2
                        60%            27.1      23.9     24.2     23.0     24.5
                        70%            33.4      30.3     29.6     30.5     31.1
                        80%            43.4      40.8     39.8     39.1     44.0
                        90%            48.9      46.8     45.8     45.3     49.6
                       100%           100.0     100.0    100.0     100.0    100.0

Notes: Perceived share of households in the community who support social distancing is estimated
by dividing responses to the question "For every 10 households in your community, how many
support social distancing?" by 10, and hence has 11 categories from 0%, 10%... 90%, 100%. Cells
report cumulative percentages from 0% up to the row in question. At baseline, "Total" refers to the
Round 2 responses from the whole sample. At endline, "Total" refers to Round 3 responses from the
whole sample, "Control" from the control group, "T1" from the social norm correction treatment
group, and "T2" from the leader endorsement treatment group.



                                                13
    We find that the social norm correction treatment did increase respondents' perceived
social norm, particularly for those at the lower end of the distribution. Figure A.3 shows the
cumulative distribution function for the perceived social norm measure at endline. Relative
to the control group, those receiving the social norm correction treatment were less likely
to report that fewer than 50% of households in their community supported social distanc-
ing, instead reporting higher social norms. Further, Table A.8 presents three regressions
estimating the treatment effects on the perceived social norm. In column (1), the depen-
dent variable is the perceived share of households in the community who support social
distancing. The coefficient is positive and marginally statistically significant (p-value 0.12).
Regressions in columns (2) and (3) find that the social norm correction treatment has a
positive effect on an indicator for the respondent believing the majority (50% or more) of
households in their community support social distancing, and an indicator that the respon-
dent's perceived social norm increased between baseline and endline (both coefficients are
statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level).




                                              14
 Figure A.3: Cumulative Distribution of Perceived Social Norm by Treatment




Notes: Perceived share of households in the community who support social distancing is estimated
by dividing responses to the question "For every 10 households in your community, how many
support social distancing?" by 10, and hence has 11 categories from 0%, 10%... 90%, 100%. Figure
depicts the cumulative distribution function of this variable for the "Control" group and "Social
Norm Correction" treatment arm. The leader endorsement treatment is excluded for clarity.




                                               15
           Table A.8: Treatment Effects on Perceived Social Norm (PSN)
                                                (1)            (2)              (3)
            VARIABLES                       Continuous     Indicator if     Indicator if
                                               PSN         PSN  50%       PSN increased


            T1: Social Norm Correction        0.0196        0.0291**         0.0507**
                                              (0.0128)       (0.0138)         (0.0241)
            T2: Leader Endorsement            0.00405        0.00357           0.0358
                                              (0.0128)       (0.0149)         (0.0236)


            Observations                       2,116          2,116            2,113
            R-squared                          0.164          0.118            0.043
            Control Mean DV                    0.812          0.905            0.255
            Control SD DV                      0.268          0.293            0.436

Notes: Dependent variables are defined as follows. Column 1 is the perceived share of households in
community that support social distancing, which takes on the values shown in Table A.7. Column
2 is an indicator equal to one if respondent reports that majority (50% or more) of households in
community support social distancing, and zero otherwise. Column 3 is an indicator equal to one if
the respondent's perceived social norm increased between the baseline (pre-treatment) and endline
(post-treatment) surveys. "T1: Social Norm Correction" & "T2: Leader Endorsement" and controls
are as defined in Table 2, except column 3 does not include a baseline value of the outcome as a
control as it was used to calculate the outcome. All regressions also include community fixed effects.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                 16
I    Excluding Chimoio District
A central finding of the paper is the heterogeneity in the treatment effect of the social norm
correction treatment with respect to local COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population (Column
2 of Table 2). A question that arises is whether this heterogeneity is entirely driven by the
Chimoio district, which has the highest case loads in the sample by a fair margin (see Figure
2 and Appendix J). We therefore test the robustness of our findings to excluding from the
sample the 524 respondents in Chimoio district (one-quarter of the sample), thereby only
exploiting the more limited variation in district-level case loads across the remaining six
districts.
    Table A.9 below presents coefficient estimates from estimating Equations 8 and 9 in this
restricted sample. First of all, Column 1 reveals that the coefficient on the social norm
correction treatment is negative and statistically significant at the 10% level. Because this
sample drops the district with the highest case loads, this result is consistent with theoret-
ical predictions and previous findings that at lower case loads, the social norm correction
treatment effect is more likely to be negative.
    In Column 2, where we test for heterogeneity in the treatment effect, results are quite
similar to the findings in Column 2 of Table 2 in the main text. The T1 main effect and
interaction term coefficients are of similar magnitudes to those in Column 2 of Table 2, and
maintain statistical significance at conventional levels (the T1 interaction term coefficient is
now significant at the 10% instead of 5% level).
    In sum, our central findings regarding heterogeneity in the treatment effect of the social
norm correction treatment are robust to excluding from the sample respondents from the
district (Chimoio) with the highest COVID-19 case loads.




                                              17
Table A.9: Treatment Effects on Social Distancing, Excluding Chimoio District
                                        (1)                  (2)
      VARIABLES                 Primary SD Indicator Primary SD Indicator


       T1: Social Norm Correction                 -0.0237*                    -0.0410**
                                                  (0.0131)                     (0.0194)
       T2: Leader Endorsement                      -0.0150                      -0.0263
                                                  (0.0141)                     (0.0208)
       T1 × District Covid Cases                                              0.00186*
                                                                             (0.000989)
       T2 × District Covid Cases                                               0.00120
                                                                              (0.00103)

       Observations                                1,593                       1,593
       R-squared                                   0.141                       0.142
       Control Mean DV                             0.0710                      0.0710
       Control SD DV                               0.257                        0.257

Notes: Regressions exclude 524 respondents from Chimoio district. Dependent variable in Columns
1-2 defined in Table 1. "T1: Social Norm Correction" is equal to one if respondent was randomly
assigned to the social norm correction treatment, and zero otherwise. "T2: Leader Endorsement"
is equal to one if respondent was randomly assigned to the leader endorsement treatment, and zero
otherwise. "T1 x District Covid Cases" & "T2 x District Covid Cases" are the respective treatment
indicators interacted with district-level cumulative COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population at the
start of the endline survey (as detailed in Appendix J). All regressions control for a baseline measure
of the dependent variable, a vector of indicators for number of community leaders knowing the
respondent at baseline (0 through 4), and a vector of indicators for number of other respondents
knowing the respondent at baseline (0 through 8). All regressions also include community fixed
effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                  18
J    COVID-19 Cases
Data on district-level population come from Mozambique's 2017 Census (National Institute
of Statistics (INE), 2017). District COVID-19 case counts come from the government's
COVID-19 Mozambique dashboard (Ministry of Health, 2020) and correspondence with
provincial health offices. Each district's case count is as of the start date of the endline
survey in the district (ranging from October 5 to November 1, 2020). We also show the
number of respondents in our study sample in each district.


                           Table A.10: Covid Cases by District
                             (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)
                       Cumulative Covid     Cases per      Population   Number of Study
     DISTRICT               Cases         100,000 people                  Respondents
     Sofala Province
     Dondo                    8               4.136         193,382           323
     Nhamatanda              12               4.299         279,081           214
     Manica Province
     Gondola                  3               3.553          84,429           224
     Chimoio                 142             39.082         363,336           524
     Manica                  20               9.292         215,239           290
     Zambezia Province
     Namacurra                4               1.652         242,126           244
     Nicoadala               52              28.779         180,686           298




                                              19
K      Robustness of SD Measure

Table A.11: Treatment Effects on Social Distancing and Expected COVID-19
Illnesses for Modified Social Distancing Measures

                                     (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)
 VARIABLES                     Alternative SD    Alternative SD   Alternative SD    Alternative SD
                                Indicator 1       Indicator 1      Indicator 2       Indicator 2


 T1: Social Norm Correction        -0.00596        -0.0459**         -0.00133         -0.0452**
                                   (0.0159)         (0.0215)         (0.0144)          (0.0198)
 T2: Leader Endorsement            -0.00729          -0.0313         -0.00179          -0.0372*
                                   (0.0159)         (0.0226)         (0.0144)          (0.0204)
 T1 × District Covid Cases                         0.00238**                          0.00262**
                                                   (0.00120)                          (0.00109)
 T2 × District Covid Cases                          0.00144                           0.00213**
                                                   (0.00117)                          (0.00106)

 Observations                       2,117             2,117            2,117            2,117
 R-squared                          0.197             0.199            0.163            0.167
 Control Mean DV                    0.124             0.124           0.0939            0.0939
 Control SD DV                      0.330             0.330           0.292             0.292

Notes: Dependent variable in Columns 1-2 is social distancing measure in which threshold number
of self-reported actions to be considered social distancing is 6 out of 8 (instead of 7 out of 8).
Dependent variable in Columns 3-4 is social distancing measure which excludes social distancing
actions 4 and 6 that are conditional on experiencing symptoms (threshold number of self-reported
actions is changed to 5 out of 6 actions). "T1: Social Norm Correction" is equal to one if respondent
was randomly assigned to the social norm correction treatment, and zero otherwise. "T2: Leader
Endorsement" is equal to one if respondent was randomly assigned to the leader endorsement
treatment, and zero otherwise. "T1 x District Covid Cases" & "T2 x District Covid Cases" are
the respective treatment indicators interacted with district-level cumulative COVID-19 cases per
100,000 population at the start of the endline survey (as detailed in Appendix J). All regressions
control for a baseline measure of the dependent variable, a vector of indicators for number of
community leaders knowing the respondent at baseline (0 through 4), and a vector of indicators
for number of other respondents knowing the respondent at baseline (0 through 8). All regressions
also include community fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance levels:
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                 20
L      Clustering Standard Errors

Table A.12: Treatment Effects on Social Distancing and Expected COVID-19
Illnesses, with Clustered Standard Errors

                                                                  Primary SD Indicator
                                       (1)                     (2)                        (3)                   (4)
 VARIABLES                    Clustered at Community   Clustered at District   Clustered at Community   Clustered at District


 T1: Social Norm Correction           0.00425                0.00425                 -0.0466***             -0.0466***
                                     (0.0133)                (0.0269)                  (0.0150)               (0.0124)
 T2: Leader Endorsement              -0.00541                -0.00541                   -0.0258                -0.0258
                                     (0.0132)                (0.0133)                  (0.0169)               (0.0163)
 T1 × District Covid Cases                                                           0.00304***             0.00304***
                                                                                     (0.000911)             (0.000514)
 T2 × District Covid Cases                                                             0.00122               0.00122**
                                                                                      (0.00103)             (0.000462)

 Observations                         2,117                   2,117                    2,117                   2,117
 R-squared                            0.158                   0.158                    0.163                   0.163
 Control Mean DV                      0.0857                  0.0857                   0.0857                  0.0857
 Control SD DV                         0.280                   0.280                   0.280                    0.280


Notes: Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the level of 76 communities (Columns 1
and 3) or 7 districts (Columns 2 and 4). Dependent variable is defined in Table 1. "T1: Social Norm
Correction" is equal to one if respondent was randomly assigned to the social norm correction treat-
ment, and zero otherwise. "T2: Leader Endorsement" is equal to one if respondent was randomly
assigned to the leader endorsement treatment, and zero otherwise. "T1 x District Covid Cases" &
"T2 x District Covid Cases" are the respective treatment indicators interacted with district-level
cumulative COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population at the start of the endline survey (as detailed
in Appendix J). All regressions control for a baseline measure of the dependent variable, a vector
of indicators for number of community leaders knowing the respondent at baseline (0 through 4),
and a vector of indicators for number of other respondents knowing the respondent at baseline (0
through 8). All regressions also include community fixed effects. Significance levels: *** p<0.01,
** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                            21
