                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SURVIVING THE FINTECH DISRUPTION

                                          Wei Jiang
                                        Yuehua Tang
                                      Rachel (Jiqiu) Xiao
                                         Vincent Yao

                                     Working Paper 28668
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28668


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Mark Chen, Qinxi Wu, and Baozhong Yang for sharing the list of fintech patent filings.
Ryan Chen, Mathew Evancho, Freddy Fang, Benjamin Nagoshi, Ryan Owens, and Mingyin Zhu
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Wei Jiang, Yuehua Tang, Rachel (Jiqiu) Xiao, and Vincent Yao. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Surviving the Fintech Disruption
Wei Jiang, Yuehua Tang, Rachel (Jiqiu) Xiao, and Vincent Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 28668
April 2021
JEL No. G30,J23,O33

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies how demand for labor reacts to financial technology (fintech) shocks based on
comprehensive databases of fintech patents and firm job postings in the U.S. during the past
decade. We first develop a measure of fintech exposure at the occupation level by intersecting
the textual information in job task descriptions and fintech patents. We then document a
significant decline of job postings in the most exposed occupations, and an increase in industry as
well as geographical concentration of these occupations. Firms resort to an upskilling strategy in
face of the fintech disruption, requiring "combo" (finance and software) skills, higher education
attainments, and longer work experiences in the hiring of fintech-exposed jobs. Financial firms
and those with high innovation outputs are able to offset the disruptive effect from the fintech
shock. Among innovating firms, however, only inventors (but not acquisition-driven innovators)
experience growth in hiring, sales, investment, and enjoy better returns on assets.


Wei Jiang                                        Rachel (Jiqiu) Xiao
Graduate School of Business                      Georgia State University
Columbia University                              35 Broad St NW 1214
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803                     Atlanta, GA 30303
New York, NY 10027                               jxiao4@gsu.edu
and NBER
wj2006@columbia.edu                              Vincent Yao
                                                 Georgia State University
Yuehua Tang                                      J. Mack Robinson College of Business
Department of Finance                            35 Broad Street NW
Warrington College of Business                   Atlanta, GA 30303
University of Florida                            wyao2@gsu.edu
Gainesville, FL 32611-7168
yuehua.tang@warrington.ufl.edu
1. Introduction

Advances in financial technology (fintech) are reshaping the landscape of financial services
in the United States and globally. The term "fintech" refers to technology and innovation
that aim to compete with traditional methods and channels for the delivery of financial ser-
vices. Telecommunications and information technology have been adopted by financial service
providers to create new options and to ease access by consumers (households and businesses)
to navigate the complexity and constraints they face. Although the term has gained its promi-
nence in the recent decade as an external disruptor, we are reminded that the evolution of
finance has always worked in tandem with the adoption of new technologies, from wire transfer
as a long-distance payment technology in the late 1800s to credit cards and automated teller
machines (ATMs) during the 1950s and 1960s. Post-financial crisis has marked a dramatic
shift toward decentralization (e.g., blockchains and crypto-asset) and disintermediation (e.g.,
peer-to-peer lending platforms), imposing disruption on the established financial institutions
(Brainard, 2016; Agarwal and Chua, 2020; Hikida et al., 2020).
       Economists have also long debated the trade-off between the new opportunities for busi-
nesses and consumers from technological advancement and the labor force displacements
caused by them. The common empirical challenge to quantify the effect of technologies on jobs
and firm's outcomes is due to the general lack of ex ante measures for exposure to technology
at the micro-level. Our study focuses on such relationship in the context of fintech innova-
tions, and our first objective is to overcome the challenge by developing a novel measure of
occupation exposure to fintech innovations. Such a measure is constructed by cross-analyzing
and extracting the similarity in the textual information in job task descriptions and that in
recent fintech patent filings.1 The procedure results in time-varying fintech exposure scores
for the universe of 772 occupations as classified by the six-digit O*NET Standard Occupation
   1
     Specifically, our fintech exposure measure captures both the cosine similarity between the two text corpuses
(i.e., job task descriptions and fintech patent filings) and the intensity of fintech innovations (e.g., the amount
of fintech patent filings). Intuitively, it measures the amount of "shadow" that a cloud of fintech innovations
casts on the job tasks of a given occupation.




                                                        1
Code (SOC), which can also be aggregated to the firm or industry level.2 As an overview, we
discover non-monotonic relations in that the occupations paying middle-ranged salaries and
requiring intermediate education attainments are the most exposed to fintech innovations.
Both ends of the spectrum, especially people with advanced degrees, tend to be the least
affected. Fintech exposure, while mostly gender neutral, also affects the prime-aged (between
35 and 50) workers the most.
   The second, and main objective of our study is to characterize and quantify how demand
for talent shifts in response to fintech shocks. To this end, we link job postings by firms (and
the states they reside in) from Burning Glass Technology (BGT) to individual occupations,
and then to our measure of exposure to recent fintech innovations. The resulting panel consists
of about 300,000 cohorts at occupation × state × year level, aggregated from the original 161.6
million BGT-listed vacancies during 2007, and 2010-2018. We find that the job posting of
occupations in the top quartile of fintech exposure ("the most exposed" hereafter) experienced
significant drops (as a share of all job postings in a given state and year) during the sample
period. After controlling for state by year fixed effects and competing technology exposures
(from AI and software), we find that the most exposed occupations experienced a 5 percent
loss of job posting shares from 2007 to 2018, confirming a disruptive effect of the technology on
jobs. Among all subfields of fintech innovations, data analysis, blockchain, and robo-advising
have the greatest effects.
   The loss of jobs exposed to fintech is not evenly borne across industries, firms, and geog-
raphy. Three industries most exposed to fintech innovations, including finance, professional,
management and administrative services (PMA), and information, accounted for 40% of all
job postings in the U.S. in 2007 but have lost nearly 13 percentage points by 2018. Like-
wise, traditional financial hubs, such as New York metro, Boston (MA), Washington metro
(DC, MD and VA), Charlotte (NC), Atlanta (GA), Chicago (IL), San Francisco (CA), Seattle
   2
     Since a burgeoning literature has studied the relation between technologies and labor market due to AI
and software, we compare our fintech exposure measure with the existing occupational measures developed
by Webb (2019) and find little resemblance and correlation between the two, confirming that our measure
captures different technological shocks from those explored by the literature.



                                                    2
(WA) and state of Texas have suffered the steepest losses of jobs that are most exposed to
fintech. Also, we find that fintech innovations are concentrated in four industries: finance,
information, manufacturing, and PMA. This pattern is confirmed by further finding that the
financial industry is both the target of disruption and a leader in the fintech innovation effort,
and that financial firms are both inventing and acquiring fintech patents more than others. This
is contrary to a conventional belief that fintech innovation is primarily sourced outside the
finance and related industries.
       Firms are not expected to be passive players in a wave of disruption. We examine one
aspect of their response, namely, the change in their recruiting strategies for jobs that have
been overall downsized in relation to fintech exposure. Firms resort to upskilling in hiring
of fintech-disrupted jobs, requiring more education attainments and longer work experiences.
The demand for "finance + software" skills and "software-only" skills rises as fintech exposure
increases, but that for "finance-only" skills goes in the reverse direction.3 However, firms'
human resource adjustments are limited by local market conditions. Ample supply of quality
labor and light labor protection regulations help firms weather the disruption better. Based
on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) constructed at occupation level, we also find that
jobs exposed to fintech become more concentrated across industries and states, suggesting
that workers associated the peripheral players (in terms of both industries and regions) are
the most vulnerable to the technology shock.
       A disruptive force on jobs due to technology does not speak to its impact on the operating
outcomes of firms, e.g., in terms of sales growth and returns to capital. Therefore, the last
main objective of the paper is to shed light on how firms fare when facing fintech exposure.
Though the most exposed firms indeed experience significantly lower employment growth
relative to other firms, confirming the relation at the occupation level, they do not suffer in
sales growth and return on assets (ROA), nor in research and development (R&D) investment.
   3
    While the impact along the skill/experience/education spectrum is similar to that of AI, it is in contrast to
the impact from software innovations which seem to disproportionately disrupt highly educated workers with
long work experience and from industrial robots that mainly affect manufacturing sector and in the low-skilled
and less-educated workers (e.g., Graetz and Michaels, 2018; Webb, 2019).



                                                       3
In fact, inventor firms (i.e., firms that are the original developers of the fintech patents), but
not acquisition-driven innovating firms (i.e., firms that acquire fintech patents), are the bright
spots on the landscape: they hire more, invest more in R&D, and enjoy higher sales growth
and return on assets. In sum, fintech constitutes a disruptive force for workers but not for
(shareholders of) firms, and there is a win-win situation at firms that are originators of new
technology.
   Our paper is related to a growing literature on the impact of technological changes, espe-
cially on jobs. This literature begins with studies that investigate the broad trends in terms
of wages and employment polarization and inequality in the U.S. labor market over the last
30 years (e.g., Autor et al., 2003; Autor and Dorn, 2013; Goos et al., 2014; Gregory et al.,
2016). Several papers make the case that a primary driver of these trends is routine-biased
technological change, resulting in firms' substitution of technology for labor. While most tech-
nological changes are a gradual, secular phenomenon, the adjustments to technological change
are more episodic with more rapid substitutions occurring during and immediately after eco-
nomic recessions and in the depressed local markets (Jaimovich and Siu, 2020; Hershbein and
Kahn, 2018). Later work in this area has turned to estimating the impact of major waves in
technology advancement, from automation to AI, on employment and wages. Acemoglu and
Restrepo (2018) find significant negative effects of adopting industrial robots on employment
and wages, as well as blue-collar occupations, in local labor markets exposed to robots. Graetz
and Michaels (2018) show an increasing productivity in industries adopting more robots, but
no clear employment patterns. More recently, Alekseeva et al. (2020) and Acemoglu et al.
(2020) document a dramatic increase in the demand for AI skills in online job postings over the
period 2010-2018, and significant changes in skill requirements by firms that are AI-exposed.
Babina et al. (2020) develop measures for firm-level AI investment and find that AI-investing
firms enjoy high growth as well as contribute to higher industry concentration.
   Our paper aims to be the first to study the effect of fintech on jobs and demand for skills.
While industrial robots are almost exclusively adopted by manufacturing firms and AI is
widely adopted by service sectors (Acemoglu et al., 2020), fintech is a technological disruption

                                                4
primarily targeted at the financial services industry. The impact of fintech disruption cannot
be deduced from the earlier research. Our paper also contributes to the literature on the
impact of technological innovations on incumbent firms. There is an extensive literature that
has modeled how innovation from outside of an industry can harm or benefit incumbent
firms (Arrow, 1962; Henderson and Cockburn, 1996; Christensen, 1997; Ellison and Ellison,
2011; Adner, 2013) and how incumbents use their own innovations to defend themselves from
outside threats (Dasgupta and Stiglitz, 1980; Gilbert and Newbery, 1982; Aghion et al., 2001).
Our analyses not only uncover the disruptive effects of fintech, but also explore how firms,
especially those in the financial industry and those that are innovative, adapt to the change.
       Our paper naturally belongs to the literature on fintech. Some papers in this field explore
design of specific fintech such as blockchain while others examine the fintech entry in various
consumer credit markets.4 For instance, Buchak et al. (2018) and Fuster et al. (2019) study
whether there is substitution or complementarity between fintech lenders and traditional banks
in the mortgage market. Vallee and Zeng (2019) examines how information provision to
investors by a marketplace lender affects investors' performance. In addition, a related study
by Chen et al. (2019b) uses machine-learning algorithms to identify fintech patents and then
estimates the value of fintech patents to innovators and the overall financial sector.5 Different
from all of these papers, ours focuses on the demand for talent by firms as they become
exposed to fintech innovations. Since we exploit the connections between finance and other
industries, our paper also shed some light on the spillover effect of fintech adoption.
       The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. We describe various data sources in
Section 2. In Section 3, we explain the construction of the occupational fintech exposure mea-
sures and describe sample construction and summary statistics. Our main baseline analysis is
   4
      Chen et al. (2019a) survey economic research on blockchains and its recent advances. Papers that study
fintech lenders in the unsecured personal loan market include, among others, Iyer et al. (2016), Havrylchyk
et al. (2019), Balyuk (2016), Cornaggia et al. (2017), Balyuk and Davydenko (2018), Danisewicz and Elard
(2018), De Roure et al. (2018), Hertzberg et al. (2018), Balyuk (2019), Chava et al. (Forthcoming), Tang
(2019), and Di Maggio and Yao (Forthcoming).
    5
      Chen et al. (2019b) adopt a methodology of anticipation-adjusted stock market reactions, similar to
Kogan et al. (2017), to quantify the value of innovations. In a more recent paper, Lerner et al. (2021) study
the evolution of financial innovation over the past two decades using patents from traditional financial firms
and information technology and other non-financial firms.


                                                      5
presented in Section 4 while Section 5 presents additional heterogeneity analysis of different
industries and firms. In Section 6, we explore the empirical relation between fintech exposure
and firm-level outcomes obtained from Compustat. Section 7 concludes.



2. Data Sources

2.1. Fintech Patents and Inventors

The first key data input is a comprehensive sample of fintech-related patent filings from 2003
to 2017 retrieved from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), following the pro-
cedure developed by Chen et al. (2019b). In the first step, the full set of Class G (Physics)
& H (Electricity) patent filings were narrowed down to a subset that are plausibly related
to financial services by a text-based filtering against a list of financial terms. Second, sev-
eral supervised machine-learning algorithms (including neural networks and support vector
machines) are applied to the textual data of the filtered patent filings to train and classify
those related to fintech.6 The two-step procedure results in a total of 6,511 fintech patent
filings which fall into one of seven categories: cybersecurity, mobile transactions, data ana-
lytics, blockchain, peer-to-peer (P2P), robo-advising, and internet of things (IoT).7 Textual
information from the title and abstract of each fintech patent allows us to perform a text
corpus on the scope and content of the underlying innovations, which could then be matched
to occupations.
       The objective of our study requires an accurate identification of inventors and assignees
behind the fintech patents. Each patent may provide information on its applicant, inventor,
and assignee. The applicant is the party responsible for managing the patent application; the
inventor has the exclusive right to their discoveries (before any transfers), and the assignee is
the recipient of the transfer of the legal rights (entire or a percentage) to the invention. For
   6
      This process involves three steps: (i) text preprocessing, (ii) creating a training sample, and (iii) training
the algorithms to produce a classification (Chen et al., 2019b). In particular, a training sample of 1,800 filings
is created through manual classification of the filings into nine different categories: seven fintech categories,
non-fintech financial filings, and filings unrelated to financial services.
    7
      Note that our sample covers the same set of fintech patent filings identified by Chen et al. (2019b).

                                                         6
this reason, we track each patent over its life cycle from the filing date, the publication date,
to the grant date, and post-granting. In addition to information from the patent data, the
supplemental assignments data available at USPTO helps to track down assignees for patents
that went through transfers.


2.2. O*NET Occupation Data

The second data inputs key to our research is the O*NET database8 maintained by the U.S.
Department of Labor, which outlines the specific tasks performed by individual occupations.
There are 967 occupations in O*NET, each identified by a SOC, and comes with a set of tasks
listed in natural language. For example, tasks associated with the occupation "accountants"
(SOC 13-2011) entail "review accounts for discrepancies and reconcile differences," "establish
tables of accounts and assign entries to proper accounts and assign entries to proper accounts,"
and "examine inventory to verify journal and ledger entries." An average occupation has 20
tasks, with a full range from 5 to 40. Each task is also given numerical values that indicate its
importance, relevance, and frequency within the occupation. These values become the natural
weights when we aggregate tasks to the occupation level.


2.3. Burning Glass Job Postings Data

The third, and the most critical, input is a proprietary dataset covering over 180 million
job postings in the United States in 2007 and 2010­2018. The dataset, provided by BGT,
gathers job postings from more than 40,000 online job boards and company websites with a
sophisticated de-duplication algorithm. The BGT dataset captures a near universe of online
jobs posting and covers between 60­70% of jobs posted in the U.S., either online or offline
(Carnevale et al., 2014). More importantly, online job ads exhibit similar trends and are
closely correlated with employer surveys over time as well as across industries and occupations
(Templin and Hirsch 2013). Therefore, BGT data provides a robust representation of job
  8
      Studies that use O*NET database include, among others, Howell and Wolff (1991), Autor et al. (2003),
Deming (2017), and Webb (2019).


                                                     7
openings in the U.S. (Hershbein and Kahn, 2018).
   The BGT dataset contains detailed occupation information at six-digit SOC level that can
be matched to occupational data, and location of job posting at the state level. It contains
information on employer identity and skill requirements scraped from the text of the vacancy.
For example, we are able to identify job openings that require different skills (e.g., finance,
software and other skill), different years of experience (e.g., 1-4 and more than 4 years) and
different educational attainment (e.g., high school, bachelor's and master's degrees). The
dataset allows us to construct several measures of job postings as labor market outcomes
variables following Modestino et al. (2019). These variables include changes in the fraction
of a occupation-state cohort's job postings relative to the state total postings and changes
in the fraction of job postings requiring certain skills, educational attainment, and years of

experiences.


2.4. Other Data

Several other databases enrich our set-up. First, the American Community Survey (ACS) is
provided by IPUMS which samples 1% of the U.S. population since 2005 (except for the census
bureau year 2010 when IPUMS samples 10% of the U.S. population). Our IPUMS sample
represents 150.8 million individuals (age between 16 and 64) in a single year on average in
2007-2018. We have access to individual-level demographic information including gender, age,
occupation (SOC 6-digit), location, education category (e.g., less than high school, completed
high school, college and above), and degree major (e.g., business, technology, etc.), which could
be collapsed into occupation × state × year-level variables, with weights commensurate with
those in the IPUMS surveys. Second, we obtain the annual employment and average wage at
occupation level from Occupational Employment Statistics (QES) released by U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). The state union membership data is provided and updated by Hirsch et
al. (2001). Finally, the financial information and stock returns of public firms in our sample are
retrieved from Compustat and CRSP, respectively.



                                                8
3. Research Design and Sample Overview

3.1. Measuring Fintech Exposure

3.1.1. Methodology

The premise to studying firm response to fintech shock is a measure that characterizes fintech
exposure at the occupation level. Because there exists no such measure in the literature,
we develop it by exploiting the overlap between the textual information of fintech patent
filings from USPTO and that of job descriptions from O*NET. Note that the text of fintech
patents contains key information about what the technological inventions do, and that of job
descriptions contains specific tasks that define each occupation. Thus an analysis over these
two text corpuses can inform whether and how much a body of fintech patents over a specific
period of time has been directed at the tasks of each occupation.
   Figure 1 illustrates the process we use to quantify the occupational exposure to fintech
innovations, similar to the one adopted by Webb (2019) for AI technology. We begin with
the text of fintech patent filings to capture the scope and the intensity of fintech innovations.
Specifically, we compile a list of fintech-related keywords by extracting the text from the titles
and abstracts of the patent filings, where the most critical and concise information about
the innovation is deposited. We tokenize the titles and abstracts of fintech patent filings by
removing punctuation and stop words. As an illustration, Figure 2 plots the clouds of the
most frequent keywords in fintech patents in three periods: 2003-2006 (early years), 2017
(latest) and 2003-2017 (all years). While transaction is among the frequent keywords in all
three panels, frequencies of other keywords such as card, information, device, and payment
vary over time. Next, we obtain detailed job task descriptions from O*NET database. We
tokenize the text of each task description and remove punctuation and stop words to create
task-specific keywords.


                                     [Insert Figure 1 Here.]
                                     [Insert Figure 2 Here.]


                                                9
   The overlap of the resulting two sets of the text captures the exposure of each occupation
to fintech innovations. We track the frequency of the unique keywords in the individual job
tasks and the fintech patent filings separately using two numerical vectors. The first vector,
ai,j , records the frequencies of keywords in the job task description j of occupation i. The
second vector, bt , captures the frequencies of keywords in the fintech patents filed during the
five-year period ending in year t. Then a given task's fintech exposure, F Ti,j,t , is the scalar
projection of the fintech vector bt onto the vector of a given task ai,j :

                                                               ai,j · bt
                                 F Ti,j,t = cos() bt =                   ,                     (1)
                                                                 ai,j

where · denotes the inner product and || · || is the Euclidean norm or the length of the vector,
cos is the cosine similarity function, and  is the angle between the two vectors. Numerically,
scalar projection calculates the length of the vector projection of vector bt onto vector ai,j . We
multiply the cosine similarity by the length of bt to consider the intensity of fintech innovations
over time. Intuitively, the scalar projection measures the amount of "shadow" that a cloud
of fintech innovations casts on a given job task. Moreover, the exposure measure is always
weakly increasing if we expand the time period for the set of fintech patents.
   Based on equation (1), exposure to fintech is an increasing function of the following two
factors: (i) the cosine similarity (i.e., cos()) between the task and fintech vectors, and (ii) the
amount/intensity of fintech innovations as captured by the norm of the fintech vector (i.e.,
 bt ). In a situation where there are a large amount of fintech patent applications and where
a job task has high overlap with those patent filings, this task is deemed as having a high
exposure to fintech innovations.
   Fintech exposure at the task level could be aggregated into the occupation level, F Ti,t , for
a given occupation i, by averaging over task-level scores:


                                 F Ti,t =          wi,j × F Ti,j,t /107 ,                      (2)
                                            j Ki




                                                    10
where Ki is the set of tasks in occupation i, and wi,j is the weight of individual task j in
occupation i assigned in the O*NET database. Finally, the scalar 107 merely puts the typical
values of the measure on a reasonable scale.
   Because of the five-year moving window for patent filings, the fintech exposure scores for
tasks and occupations are time varying but slow moving. Note that our method is readily
adaptable to forming alternative measures for robustness checks. For example, disaggregated
measures of exposure to each of the seven subsets of fintech innovations (including cyberse-
curity, mobile transactions, data analytics, blockchain, P2P, robo-advising, and IoT) could
be constructed analogously. An all-time exposure measures using fintech patent applications
from the full sample period of 2003 to 2017 is an alternative, and so is a measure based on
granted (rather than filed) fintech patents during the previous five years.
   Table 1 features two occupations with high fintech exposure (credit analysts and infor-
mation security analysts) and low fintech exposure (mathematical science teachers and or-
thodontists), respectively, based on the all-time exposure measure using fintech patent filings
from 2003 to 2017. For the economy of space, the table only shows the top three job tasks
for each occupation and the top five keywords for each task that overlap with the keywords
of fintech patents. We observe that a credit analyst's job is exposed to fintech innovations in
that the latter involve part of the tasks related to data, financial, transactions, and credit.
Information security analysts are exposed to the technologies that intersect tasks involving
systems, computer, data, information and security. In contrast, almost none of the keywords
underlying the tasks for mathematical science teachers and orthodontists have a meaningful
exposure to fintech patents.


                                    [Insert Table 1 Here.]


   Since patents vary greatly in their technical and economic significance, and hence their
disruptive force, we quantify the economic impact of individual patents on the financial indus-
try using the method proposed by Chen et al. (2019b). More specifically, we first estimate the
disruptive impact of patents based on the stock market reactions of financial firms to patent

                                               11
publication, and then classify the top 25% fintech patents with the most negative value as the
most disruptive. Applying the textual analysis method described above on the most disruptive
subset of fintech patents and its complement subset, we produce two separate fintech exposure
measures - exposure to the most-disruptive and less-disruptive innovations, respectively.


3.1.2. Overview of Fintech Exposure

Based on the procedure outlined in the previous sections, we are able to construct the fintech
exposure scores for all 772 occupations at six-digit SOC level for the full sample period of
2003-2017. Most occupations have a raw fintech exposure score between 0 and 1 though
there is no natural limit to the upper bound.9 Table 2 lists the ten occupations with highest
and ten with the lowest fintech exposure scores. It turns out that on the top of the list
are information security analysts, credit analysts, software developers (applications), travel
agents, and electronics engineers; while at the bottom there are carpenters, slaughters, police
and detectives, orthodontists, and dancers. In addition, our measure shows that personal
financial advisors have the highest exposure to innovations in robo-advising, as one would
expect. Thus, the scoring system mostly confirms casual observations.


                                            [Insert Table 2 Here.]


      To explore the time-varying nature of fintech exposure, Panel A of Figure 3 plots time series
of three fintech exposure scores constructed based on (i) cumulative fintech patent applications
since 2003 (i.e., 2003 to t); (ii) fintech patent applications during the five-year period ending
in a given year (i.e., t - 5 to t) and (iii) granted fintech patents during the five-year period.
Series (i) steadily increases over time as it reflects a cumulative effect of fintech innovations
over time. Series (ii) reveals more time-varying trends, where fintech exposure grew during
most of the sample period but peaked in 2016. Finally, series (iii) has a similar shape as
(ii) but in a smaller magnitude since only a fraction (about 48%) of fintech patent filings are
granted.
  9
      Figure A.1 plots the histogram of fintech exposure scores.


                                                       12
                                     [Insert Figure 3 Here.]


   Panel B of Figure 3 disaggregates fintech exposure into the seven fintech sub-categories,
based on filed patents during the more recent five-year period. The figure features staggered
waves over time. Cybersecurity led innovations in other fields and has posed the largest shock
to occupations. Mobile transaction kicked off around 2010 following the financial crisis and
grew exponentially after 2012. Data analytics has also gained momentum after the financial
crisis. P2P and blockchain were invented around 2012 and 2015, respectively; robo-advising
and IoT each has maintained a stable share of exposure since 2001.


3.1.3. Relation with Other Occupational Exposure

A burgeoning literature explores impact of various technological breakthroughs on the demand
for labor and employment. It is thus necessary for us to relate to as well as to differentiate from
the tech shocks analyzed in other studies. In particular, we compare with the two occupational
measures developed by Webb (2019) regarding AI and Software, as they represent the current
focuses in the discussions of technology. Our measure bears some similarities to the Webb
(2019) measures as they are all based on textual analyses of patents and O*NET occupation
descriptions. However, patents used in the matching procedures are different and they capture
different technological discovery. There are also methodological differences in that we process
the entire texts of both titles and abstracts of the patents, instead of using only verb-noun
pairs extracted from titles of patents, allowing the matching to build on richer information.
Finally, we incorporate time-series variation with a moving time window for fintech patents. As
a comparison, Figure 4 plots the average of fintech exposure (in percentile rank) against each
of the two occupational measures developed by Webb (2019). Overall, there is no apparent
correlation between fintech exposure and the AI or software series, suggesting that the impact
of fintech is likely to be distinct from the development in the other two areas.


                                     [Insert Figure 4 Here.]



                                                13
3.1.4. The Demographics of Fintech Exposure

Though occupations are the focal subjects of our study, the fintech shocks are ultimately borne
by people who work in the affected occupations. We are thus interested in gaining a glimpse
into the demographics sorted by fintech exposure, with the help of the individual-level data
from the 2007 IPUMS. Specifically, we consider the following four demographic characteristics:
occupation average hourly wage (in percentiles), educational attainments (broken down into
five levels: less than high school; high school; some college; college; master and above),
percent of female workers in an occupation, and individual age. Figure 5 plots the percentile
of cumulative fintech exposure from 2003 to 2017, at the occupation level, in relation to these
variables. When the demographic variables are recorded at the individual level (e.g., education
and age), the fintech exposure is averaged over all the workers in a given demographic group.


                                    [Insert Figure 5 Here.]


   Panel A of Figure 5 uncovers an inverse U-shaped curve between fintech exposure and
occupational wage in that the occupations paying middle-ranged salaries are most exposed
to fintech innovations, and both ends of the wage spectrum tend to be the least affected. A
similar pattern prevails in Panel B in that individuals with intermediate education attainments
(high school and some college) are more exposed to fintech than their less (no high school) or
more (college and above) educated peers. Interestingly, people with advanced degrees (master
and above) are the least affected. Panel C shows that fintech exposure is most likely gender
neutral, with a flat relation between fintech exposure and share of female workers. Finally,
Panel D shows that fintech innovations affect the prime-aged workers (between 35 and 50) the
most, while the exposure drops steeply for workers with age above 50.




                                              14
3.2. Linking Fintech Exposure to Job Postings

3.2.1. Sample Construction and Summary Statistics

Given the objective of our study to trace out how demand for talent responds to fintech shocks,
a key component of our empirical strategy is to link firm- or establishment-level job postings to
the occupational exposure to fintech innovations. Job posting variables are constructed using
data from BGT, including number of postings, share of postings in a local market as well
as job requirements for skills, education and work experience. Our default fintech exposure
measure is based on fintech patents filed during a five-year moving time window.
       Corresponding to fintech exposure measures at occupation × year level, the main variables
from BGT posting data are aggregated at occupation × state × year level to allow for cross-
sectional variations in local labor market conditions.10 We exclude postings without adequate
information to classify occupation, state or time from the sample. The base of our sample
consists 161.6 million vacancies during 2007, and 2010-2018. For the ease of interpretation,
we transform the fintech exposure raw score to percentiles or broader ranges such as quartiles
within each year. We follow Modestino et al. (2019) to construct two measures capturing the
relative change in the volume intensity of job postings. The first measure is the percentage-
point change (year over year) in the share of job postings by an occupation × state × year in
all postings in the same state × year. The second is the percentage-point change (year over
year) in the share of job postings requiring certain skill levels, educational attainments, and
years of experiences.11
       Table 3 presents the summary statistics of the variables in the main sample at the occu-
pation × state × year level, with about 300,000 cohorts and 772 occupations. There are 440
postings on average at cohort level, greater than the 75th percentile value of 275, suggesting
  10
     We also constructed alternative samples at occupation × year, occupation × industry × year and occu-
pation × firm × year level and repeated our baseline analysis as robustness tests.
  11
     As an overview, Figure A.2 in Appendix plots the time series of number of job postings by four quartiles
of occupational fintech exposure. Panel A suggests that the most exposed occupations contain most job
postings than others, but also recovered the slowest from the financial crisis. Panel B confirms that share of
the most exposed job postings have declined steadily since 2012, which is complemented by relative growth in
occupations in the second and third quartiles.



                                                     15
a right skewed distribution. An average cohort accounts for 15.7 basis points of total post-
ings within each state. While the full sample percentile scores are calibrated to a uniform
distribution, among the sub-categories, blockchain has a much lower average percentile (18.1)
than others, reflecting a relatively short-lived wave of blockchain innovation that disrupts ex-
isting occupations. To ensure reliability of the measure, we drop observation cells with fewer
than three postings, about 0.025% of the original sample. To further mitigate the influence
of outliers, following Modestino et al. (2019), we conduct weighted regressions as our main
specification where weights are the number of postings underlying each observation.12


                                        [Insert Table 3 Here.]


       By parsing the skill keywords contained in the posting, we identify that on average 86%
of the job postings have some skill requirements. The shares are 12% and 21% when we
break the skill requirements to finance and software, respectively. Table 3 further reports
shares of job postings with three mutually exclusive skill requirements ­ both finance and
software skills (5.1%), finance but not software (6.6%), software but not finance (15.5%) ­ to
analyze the specialized demand for talent by firms in face of fintech disruption. Similarly, we
also construct share of job postings that require different educational attainment and years
of experience. About 43% of job postings require minimum level of education, evenly split
between high school diploma and bachelor's degree and above (BA+). About 37% of job
postings require experience: 27% 1-4 years; 10% 4-plus years of experience. The last six rows
of Table 3 reports summary statistics of local socio-demographic characteristics from IPUMS.
The variables are first averaged at state by year level and then matched to our main sample.
The average median age is 40, and women on average account for 47% of the workforce. On
average, 32% of workers have a BA+ while 6.3% have a business major degree and 2.4%
have an IT related degree (i.e., a communication technology, computer or information science
degree).
  12
    As robustness check, we also report the unweighted regression results in Table A.1 in Appendix, which
are consistent with those using the main specification.



                                                   16
       Finally, Figure 6 shows that the cumulative posting share change from 2007 to 2018 at
the occupation level stays flat initially as fintech exposure increases but exhibits steep decline
above the 75th percentile of exposure, the total loss of 7 basis point loss of job postings (as a
share in the state) during the 2007-2018 period represents an 8 percent relative to the average
weighted posting share (90.2 basis point).


                                          [Insert Figure 6 Here.]


3.2.2. Identifying Fintech Innovators

We hypothesize that the firms' responses in their hiring strategies in exposure to the fintech
shock are likely to be quite different between those that are innovative themselves and the
rest. Hence this section outlines how we identify the fintech innovators.
       To identify innovators, we follow the life cycle of patents to locate information on both
inventors (who file the patents) and assignees (who currently own the patents, possibly via
transfers).13 We match the innovator firm's name to BGT data. We then classify firms
that are active innovators from otherwise based on whether a firm files fintech patents. In
our sample, 70.8% of patent filing firms file only one fintech patent application during the
whole sample period. These "one-time" inventors, in large numbers, may just have enjoyed
occasional discoveries that are not part of their core innovative competence. For this reason,
we classify firms with two or more fintech patent filings as fintech inventors. Among firms
not classified as inventors, we identify those who innovate primarily through acquiring fintech
patents as non-inventor innovators if they acquire at least one fintech patent. Large financial
firms engaged in more fintech patent acquisitions since 2001, as shown in Figure 7, catching
up with the fintech wave that started earlier.14
  13
      The inventor identity may also change after the initial filing under several scenarios. First, while some
patents are filed under individual inventor names, they are actually sponsored by their employers. The
information is usually updated before publication or grant date by the filing attorney. In this case, we treat
employer firms as inventors. Second, consistent with the evidence documented by Cohen et al. (2016, 2019),
Non-Practicing Entities (NPEs) actively acquire fintech patents, e.g., one of the largest NPEs in fintech domain
is III Holdings 1, LLC, which holds 121 fintech patents acquired from American Express.
   14
      Panel A of Table A.2 in the Appendix lists the top ten firms in each of the two categories (inventors and
acquisition innovators), and the number of fintech patents they own. Mastercard, Visa, American Express


                                                      17
                                          [Insert Figure 7 Here.]


    Among firms covered by the BGT data, there are 367 fintech inventors, 320 acquisition-
driven innovators, and more than 2 million other, non-innovating firms by our criteria. Not
surprisingly, fintech innovators tend to be large firms, with an average of 1,179 and 916 job
postings annually for inventors and acquisition innovators, respectively, compared to only 27
for non-innovators. On the other hand, NPEs have very few postings.
    Fintech innovations are concentrated in four industries: finance (NAICS 52), information
(NAICS 51), manufacturing (NAICS 31-33) and PMA (NAICS 54-56). Some inventors in
manufacturing, such as GE Capital and GM Financial, are financial subsidiaries of parent
companies that are rooted in manufacturing.15 Such an industry allocation is somewhat at
odds with a conventional belief that fintech innovation represents an external shock on the
financial industry. Data indicates that the financial industry is actually leading the innovation
effort in fintech. Financial industry is also a net buyer of fintech patents. Figure 7 shows that
over the period of 2003 to 2017, financial firms have acquired 369 and sold 216 fintech patents
based on USPTO assignment data, their activities accounting for more than a quarter of
all the fintech patent transactions.16 Acquisitions by financial firms have intensified since
2011 and continued until 2016 when Bank of America and Visa were on a shopping spree for
fintech patents from private firms and individuals. These transfers/acquisitions support the
contention that both original and acquired innovations are important ways for financial firms
to remain competitive facing the potential disruption from fintech.
and Bank of America lead other firms as the most prolific inventors in the fintech domain. And the rest of
the top ten are mostly large, publicly traded firms in payment-related businesses. The list of top non-inventor
innovators, however, is a mixture of large inventors such as Paypal and American Express and NPEs like
Liberty Peak Ventures, III Holdings 1, and Intellectual Ventures II.
   15
      See more details in Panel B of Table A.2 in the Appendix. Among all industries, finance accounts for
32.11% of the fintech patents, followed by information with 12.4% and PMA with 4.15%.
   16
      Two largest deals from finance to other industries are Xatra Fund MX LLC's acquisition of 44 fintech
patents from American Express; and III Holdings 1 LLC's purchase of 121 fintech patents from American
Express. Both acquirers are NPEs. See https://www.richardsonoliver.com/2014/07/16/intellectual-ventures-
is-buying-again/.




                                                      18
3.2.3. Distributions of Fintech Exposure and Jobs

A. Distribution across Industries

       Table 4 summarizes the distributions of fintech exposure and demand for jobs across differ-
ent industries (at the NAICS two-digit level).17 Industries most exposed to fintech innovations
include finance, PMA, and information, all with fintech exposure well above the 70th percentile.
Within the financial industry, firms in the banking and brokerage subsectors have higher ex-
posure than their peers in the asset management, payment and insurance subsectors. The
opposite end of the spectrum are accommodation and food services, educational services and
arts, entertainment and recreation. The three most exposed industries account for 40% of the
total postings at the beginning of our sample (2007), while the three least exposed industries
account for only 12%. However, the three most exposed industries also experienced the largest
loss in shares of postings from 2007 to 2018 (-12.8% combined); while the three least exposed
industries have gained 6.2% (combined) in their posting shares. If we take the perspective
at the occupation level, the most fintech-exposed occupations account for 71% of all losses in
the three most exposed industries. Overall, the coefficient of correlation between cumulative
change in job posting share and fintech exposure at occupation level is -0.51, signaling that
fintech has been a strong disruptive force on jobs.


                                          [Insert Table 4 Here.]


       We present evidence of heterogeneity across industries in Table 4. 74% (column (3) divided
by column (2)) of all jobs in finance are among the most exposed occupations, and that share
is 50% for information and 55% for PMA, respectively. In contrast, finance has only lost
38% (columns (5) divided by column (3)) of its most exposed jobs, and that share is 50%
for information and 34% for PMA, respectively. These numbers suggest that even facing
similar fintech disruption, industries have fared differently. Notably finance, the most exposed
  17
    The industry fintech exposure is defined as the job posting-weighted average of occupations' fintech expo-
sure in the industry. Because the most fintech exposed occupations (top quartile) accounts for approximately
40% of the total job postings, this job posting-weighted average exposure is right-skewed and all industries
are above the 39th percentile.


                                                     19
industry, retains healthy demand for labor relative to its two peer industries with closest
fintech exposure.18

       B. Distribution across Geography

       A parallel distributional analysis applies to geography. Panel A of Figure 8 plots the
average fintech exposure, weighted by postings, at the state level in 2007. It shows an uneven
geographic distribution of the impact from fintech. Traditional financial hubs, such as the
New York metro (e.g., NY, NJ and CT), Boston (MA), The Washington D.C. metro (e.g.,
MD and VA), Charlotte (NC), Atlanta (GA), Chicago (IL), San Francisco (CA), Seattle (WA)
and state of Texas, are most exposed to fintech innovations. States in Mountain and rest of
South are the least exposed. Panel B further shows that the most exposed occupations in NY,
NJ and CA also suffer the steepest job losses, followed by FL, PA, WA, WI and IL.


                                          [Insert Figure 8 Here.]



4. Fintech Shock, Job Postings, and Employment: Em-

        pirical Results

4.1. Empirical specification

The goal of this section is to estimate how firms adjust their hiring strategies and how em-
ployment responds post fintech shock. Our baseline analysis, at the occupation × state ×
year level, is as follows:


                         Yo,s,t-1->t = 1 · F To,t-1 + 2 · Xo + s,t + o,s,t .                                 (3)
  18
     In our sensitivity checks, we find that job posting share in finance is overall stable across the spectrum
of fintech exposure; but PMA and information industries are significantly affected by fintech innovations with
a similar pattern to that in Figure 6. Details are reported in Figure A.3 in the Appendix, which maps the
cumulative change of posting shares to fintech exposure percentiles for each of the seven industries that include
finance and a few related sectors.




                                                       20
       In the equation above, occupation, state, and year are indexed by o, s, and t, respectively.
The key independent variable, F To,t-1 , is fintech exposure (expressed in percentiles or in
top quartile classification) at the occupation level based on five-year moving time window of
fintech patents (as described in Section 3.1). The outcome variable, Yo,s,t-1->t , is change in
job posting shares in basis points, from year t - 1 to t, of postings in occupation o located
in state s and year t as a share of all postings in in state s and year t.19 Xo is a vector of
control variables, notably, the occupation-level software and AI exposure measures developed
by Webb (2019). The regression incorporates fixed effects at the state × year level (s,t ) to
absorb any confounding factors that would affect the supply and demand conditions of the
local labor market each year. Unless otherwise stated, all potentially unbounded variables are
winsorized at the 1% extremes. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.


4.2. Fintech Exposure and Job Posting

Table 5 reports the estimation results of Equation (3). In the first four columns, the key
independent variable, fintech exposure at the occupation-year level lagged by one year, is
measured in continuous percentiles; and in the last four columns, it is coded as a dummy
variable that equals one if the exposure falls into the top quartile in a given year (based on
the evidence in Figure 6, which we term as the "most exposed" occupations). We control
for the two competing cross-sectional occupation exposure measures in columns (3), (4), (7)
and (8), and also alternate specifications with different fixed effects: (i) year fixed effects in
columns (1) and (5), (ii) state and year fixed effects in columns (2)-(3) and (6)-(7), and (iii)
state × year fixed effects in columns (4) and (8).


                                         [Insert Table 5 Here.]


       In Panel A, estimates of the coefficient associated with fintech exposure are very similar
across specifications, and are uniformly statistically significant at 1% level. Moreover, the
  19
    The change in posting shares across all occupations within a state sum up to zero by construction. Given
the large number of observations within a state-year cohort (772 occupations), there is minimal compromise
on the degree of freedom due to this add-up constraint.

                                                    21
estimates are qualitatively similar but slightly larger after the inclusion of other occupational
exposure measures, suggesting that the impact from fintech exposure is distinct from that
from AI and software. Given the consistency of the results, we will designate the full-control
specifications in columns (4) and (8) as our default. Result in column (4) suggests that when
fintech exposure moves up by one percentile, occupation-level job posting share decreases by
0.084 basis point. Column (8) shows that relative to other occupations, those in the highest
exposed quartile see a 4.6 basis point decrease in job posting share. Relative to the average job
posting share (90 basis points as shown in Table 1), this represents about 5 percent decrease.
Both effects are within the same state-by-year so that macroeconomics or regional conditions
are not driving the disparity.
      We conduct a slew of robustness tests using alternative specifications of both dependent
and independent variables. First, we explore how the impact of fintech exposure is distributed
among different subfields, such as cybersecurity and blockchain. In Panel B Table 5, exposure
to individual components of fintech replaces the aggregate exposure. It turns out that exposure
to all subfields of fintech innovations have significant (at 1% level) and negative effects on job
postings. Among them, robo-advising, data analysis and blockchain have the greatest effect,
with one percentile increase in the exposure being associated with 5.7, 5.6 and 5.1 basis
points decrease of posting share, respectively. In contrast, the exposure to the other four
technologies brings about more modest effect, from 2.6 basis points for IoT to 4.5 basis points
in cybersecurity.
      Second, we cross-check job posting with actual employment. The main outcome variables
in our study are based on job postings, which reflect firms' desire to hire. While such informa-
tion captures firms' active strategies, it remains interesting to see if the relation shown in Table
5 also holds for actual employment. Using the IPUMS data covering the 2009-2018 period, the
coefficient estimate of fintech exposure, equivalent to that in column (1) of Table 5, suggests
that a one-percentile increase of fintech exposure is associated with a 0.27 basis point decrease
in the employment share.20 It is not surprising that the impact is multiple times higher in job
 20
      For full results, please see columns (1) of Table A.1 in the Appendix.


                                                       22
postings than in employment as the former represents the extensive margin where adjustment
takes place.
      Third, we validate the results using first-time job postings only. In our main set-up, we
include all job postings in our analysis. About 62% of job postings are likely repeated ones,
presumably because many positions remain vacant after a previous effort. While the total
number of postings is a reasonable proxy for the intensity of demand for talent, we also
consider unique, first postings as a measure for distinct new positions. Following Cen et al.
(2018), we classify a job posting as a re-posting if there is a previous posting with the same
job title and job hours by the same firm in the same county location within a year. We find
that an one-percentile increase in fintech exposure is associated with a 1.8 basis point decrease
in the posting share, about 40 percent of the estimated effect in Table 5.21 The effects are
significant and proportional relative to those estimated using all job postings.
      Finally, we experiment with alternative measures of fintech exposure as well as job post-
ing outcomes to ensure robustness. The alternative specifications including (i) replacing the
first difference model in Equation (3) with an occupation fixed effect, (ii) using unweighted
observations, (iii) relying on only granted (instead of filed) fintech patents, and (iv) adopting
all-time fintech measures or raw exposure scores. The coefficient estimates associated with
fintech exposure remain negative and significant at 1% level in all specifications, suggesting
robustness of our baseline result.22


4.3. Downskilling versus Upskilling

So far we have established the overall negative effect of fintech exposure on firm hiring. In this
section, we further investigate whether the recruiting strategies of the exposed firms exhibit
upskilling or downskilling in the overall downsizing trend.
      We formalize the analysis with a regression of change in job posting shares that require
different types of skills or levels of education/experience on fintech exposure measured by the
 21
      For full results, please see columns (2) of Table A.1 in the Appendix.
 22
      For full results, please see columns (3)-(8) of Table A.1 in the Appendix.



                                                       23
most exposed quartile dummy, controlling for exposures to AI and software innovations and
state × year fixed effects. Table 6 reports the results. Columns (1)-(3) show "finance &
software" skills and "software-only" skills are in significantly higher demand as fintech expo-
sure increases, and a reverse negative relation prevails in "finance-only" skills. This suggests
that while fintech innovations disrupt existing occupations, they also create job opportunities
for people who are well-versed in software language, and even more so for talents that are
bilingual in both finance and technology.

                                     [Insert Table 6 Here.]

   Columns (4)-(5) show a monotonic relation between fintech exposure and the length of work
experience or the level of education required. For example, the share of postings for jobs that
require 0-4 years of experience increases by 13.5 basis points for the most exposed occupations;
the same coefficient is more than twice as big, at 36.3 basis points for postings requiring four-
more years of experience. Such a pattern is echoed in education requirement. For the most
exposed jobs, the posting share of jobs that require high school education decreases by 12.0
basis points, but that for jobs requiring college degree and above increases by 50.6 basis points.
Each of the two effects are significant at the 1% level, and so is their difference.
   Thus, Table 6 shows strong evidence that firms resort to an upskilling recruiting strat-
egy after facing fintech disruption. While the impact along the skill/experience/education
spectrum is similar to that of AI, it is in contrast to the impact from software innovations
which see to disproportionately disrupt highly educated workers with long work experience
(e.g., Webb, 2019). It also contrasts the impact of industrial robots which is concentrated
in manufacturing sector and in the low-skilled and less-educated workers (e.g., Graetz and
Michaels, 2018).


4.4. Local Labor Market Frictions

Local market frictions such as lack of quality labor available in the existing pool and strong
labor protection regulations could limit firms' ability to adjust their labor force in response

                                               24
to an external shock such as fintech disruption. We formally test this hypothesis using data
on state-level skilled labor supply from the U.S. Census and data on unionization from Hirsch
et al. (2001). Specifically, we add to our baseline regressions interaction terms of the most
exposed quartile dummy and state-level labor force circumstances including the percent of
people with a BA+, with a business degree and with an information technology degree, re-
spectively, and that of union members in the non-agricultural sectors. Table 7 reports the
results, in which the dependent variable is change in job posting share in columns (1)-(4) and
change in employment share in columns (5)-(8).
   Coefficients on the interaction terms with local supply of business and IT talents are
positive and significant at the 10% and 5% level, respectively, suggesting that states with
more educated workers (with business or IT degrees) adjust better to the fintech exposure
and endure fewer employment loss in the most exposed occupations. Not surprisingly, the
supply of IT degree holders is about twice as important as that of business degree holders in
offsetting the disruption of fintech.
   The union status of the labor force in the state (as measured by percentage of labor force
that are unionized) has no discernible effect on firms' desire to hire (job posting shares), but
does affect employment. Based on the result in column (8), a one-standard deviation increase
in union membership (5.3 percentage points) offsets 11.2 basis points in the loss of employment
share among the most exposed occupation (significant at the 10% level).


                                        [Insert Table 7 Here.]


4.5. Occupation Redistribution and Concentration

Aside from new hirings, the fintech shock also reshapes the distribution of occupations (and
hence talents) across different industries and geographies. Figure 9 plots the HHI of occu-
pations calculated based on the posting shares across states (Panel A) and industries (Panel
B) over occupational fintech exposure percentile. Both Panels show that occupations become
more concentrated with increasing fintech exposure. In Table 8, we run regressions of changes


                                                 25
in HHI, both year over year (YOY) and cumulative change from 2007 to 2018, on the indicator
variable for the highest fintech exposure quartile at the occupation-year level. Results confirm
that occupations that are most exposed to fintech became significantly more concentrated in
terms of both industry and geography, where the HHI indices rose by 6.7 and 5.7, respec-
tively. In contrast, we find that occupations that are more exposed to AI became less (more)
concentrated across states (industries) over time, though the effects are small relative to that
of fintech exposure.


                                     [Insert Figure 9 Here.]
                                      [Insert Table 8 Here.]



5. Cross-Sectional Heterogeneity

In this section, we further explore the differential impact of the fintech exposure on finan-
cial firms as well as innovative firms. Such analyses aim to provide insights into the re-
distributional effects of the fintech shocks.


5.1. Finance versus Other Sectors

The term fintech already suggests that the disruption is aiming at the traditional financial
sector. Therefore, the financial industry warrants a separate analysis vis-a-vis other sectors.
Table 9 presents the regressions of change in job posting share on the two fintech exposure
measures that capture occupations' exposure separately to the most disruptive and less dis-
ruptive fintech innovations (as defined in Section 3.1.1). Column (1) shows that when both
fintech exposures are included as the explanatory variables, only the coefficient on the less dis-
ruptive fintech exposure is negative and significant while the exposure to the most-disruptive
fintech is not associated with any significant job posting change.
   Such a result is intriguing as fintech that is expected to disrupt traditional finance the most
is not causing job losses overall. Once we separate finance sectors from the others, results


                                                26
become more intuitive. Column (2) shows that finance sector jobs are indeed vulnerable to
disruptive technology while other sectors are not. On the other hand, technologies that have
lower disruptive power toward financial sector are associated with more job losses in other
sectors than in finance. The last two columns of the table confirm similar findings within each
sector by controlling the industry fixed effects.


                                     [Insert Table 9 Here.]


   How can firms in the financial sector survive the fintech innovations that are created
to disrupt the modus operandi of financial services? One hypothesis is that financial firms
respond to the disruptions by innovating and reinventing themselves. The incumbent may
succeed with their existing advantages such as capital, talents and platforms. We test this
hypothesis by analyzing financial firms' innovation in relation to fintech disruption and report
the results in Table 10. In this analysis, the dependent variable is the number of patents
(all and ones that fall into the most disruptive category, in logarithm) invented or acquired,
respectively, at the firm-year level. The main explanatory variables are firm's fintech exposure
to the most or less disruptive innovations, lagged by one year. The sample includes all firms
but we interact the key independent variables with the financial firm dummy. Finally, all
regressions incorporate both firm and year fixed effects.
   Columns (1) and (2) show that firms in all sectors generally change very little in their
innovation activities in relation to fintech exposure. However, column (3) shows that firms in
financial industry are inventing significantly more relative to other firms when they become
highly exposed to the most disruptive fintech. Among all firms that fall into the top quartile
of exposure to the most disruptive fintech patents, financial firms file 48.4 basis points more
fintech patents themselves compared to non-financial firms, and the difference is significant
at the 1% level. Moreover, column (4) further shows that financial firms themselves are filing
more disruptive fintech patents when they face high disruption. Columns (5)-(8) suggest a
similar pattern when it comes to fintech patent acquisition. That is, financial firms are signif-
icantly more likely to acquire fintech patents (especially the more disruptive ones) when they

                                               27
become highly exposed to disruptive technology. The notable difference between acquisition-
driven innovation (last four columns) and invention fintech (first four columns) is that even
when the exposure comes from less disruptive fintech patents, it still motivates financial firms
to engage in more (though with less intensity) acquisition-based innovation.


                                    [Insert Table 10 Here.]


5.2. Differential Responses between Innovator and Non-Innovator

      Firms

Previous analyses already suggest that firms respond to the fintech disruption differently de-
pending on whether they are innovating themselves. This section explores such heterogeneity
in more detail. For this purpose, we aggregate the BGT job posting data to three groups of
firms (inventor, acquisition-driven innovator, and non-innovator). Table 11 reports job post-
ing regressions at the firm type × occupation × state × year level. Among the independent
variables, fintech exposure ("FT Quartile 4") also interacts with the two types of innovators.
Columns (1)-(3) show that innovating firms see an increase in hiring in the most exposed
occupations relative to non-innovators. Moreover, acquisition-driven innovators completely
offset the negative impact of fintech exposure on job postings.


                                    [Insert Table 11 Here.]


   Columns (4)-(6) show that fintech inventors significantly increase job postings that require
software skills with and without being combined with finance skills. The emphases on skills
turns out to be different between the two types of innovators. Acquisition-driven innovators
favor talents with finance skills while inventors demand more people with both finance and
software skills. Overall, results in this section indicate that jobs in innovating firms have not
suffered due to fintech exposure. Moreover, software (finance) skill is more valued by inventor
(acquisition-driven innovator) firms.



                                               28
6. Firm Outcomes

While our main analysis estimates firm's adjustments in hiring and innovative activities in
relation to fintech exposure, a natural question to explore next is whether such adjustments
translate to real outcomes including operating performance and employment. More specifi-
cally, we estimate the firm outcomes in relation to fintech exposure at the firm × year level
using the following specification:


         Yi,   t-1->t   = 1 · F Ti,t + 2 · (F Ti,t × Inno T ypei,t ) + 3 · Inno T ypei,t

                                           +Xi,t-1 + j + t + i,t ,                            (4)


where Yi,   t-1->t   refers to the change in logarithm of employment, sales revenue and R&D
expenditure, and ROA; F Ti,t is the firm-level percentage of job postings that fall into the top
quartile fintech-exposed occupations; Inno T ypei,t is a set of indicator variables for inventor
and non-inventor innovators, respectively; Xi,t-1 include standard firm-year control variables
(e.g., total assets, firm age, cash holding, cash flow, capital expenditure, R&D dummy, and
industry fixed effects). Thus 1 captures the difference in firm outcomes between the most
exposed firms and other firms. 2 captures the incremental effect to innovators (relative
to non-innovator firms) when they are among the most exposed firms. Standard errors are
clustered at industry level.
   Table 12 reports the regression results. First, the most exposed firms show significant lower
employment growth relative to other firms, which confirms findings in the previous sections.
However, the most exposed firms do not exhibit any statistically significant differences in sales
growth or R&D investment as well as ROA. Second, relative to other firms that are highly
exposed to fintech innovations, inventors in fact experience higher growth employment growth,
which is consistent with Table 11. The same firms also have higher growth of sales and R&D
investment, and increases of ROA. In contrast, there is no statistically significant difference in
any of these firm outcomes between the acquisition-driven innovator and non-innovator firms.



                                                29
                                    [Insert Table 12 Here.]


   In summary, though fintech is a disruptive force for jobs overall, it is nevertheless neutral
for firms operating performance as firms adjust hiring and innovation strategies. Moreover,
both jobs and operating metrics gain at firms that are innovating themselves relative to others,
but even within this subset of firms the incremental demand for labor do not offset the overall
loss the fintech shock causes. Finally and perhaps most importantly, firms at the cutting
edge of innovation (i.e., inventors) experience boom for both labor and return to capital,
but innovator firms that do not develop original technology (but only obtain technology via
purchasing patents) still do not escape the fintech disruption.



7. Conclusion

This paper aims to inform the ongoing debate in whether and how fintech constitutes dis-
ruptions and/or presents the growth opportunities, especially with respect to labor demand
and employment. Building on a novel measure of fintech exposure at the occupation level by
conducting cross-textual analysis of job tasks and fintech patents, we discover that job post-
ings in the most exposed occupations suffer a significant decline both in absolute magnitude
and relative to other occupations. The exposed firms resort to upskilling (in terms of the
requirement of skills, experience and educational attainments) in hiring albeit among overall
downsizing. Fintech-exposed jobs also become more concentrated across industries and states.
Nevertheless, innovative firms and finance sector manage to offset the economy-wide negative
impact to different degrees. Finally, firms producing original fintech innovations themselves
gain in both employment and operating performance.




                                              30
References

Acemoglu, Daron, and David Autor, 2011, Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for
  employment and earnings, in Handbook of labor economics , volume 4, 1043­1171 (Elsevier).

Acemoglu, Daron, David Autor, Jonathon Hazell, and Pascual Restrepo, 2020, Ai and jobs:
  Evidence from online vacancies, NBER Working Paper 24196.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo, 2018, Artificial intelligence, automation, and work,
  NBER Working Paper 28257.

Adner, Ron, 2013, The wide lens: What successful innovators see that others miss (Penguin).

Agarwal, Sumit, and Yeow Hwee Chua, 2020, Fintech and household finance: a review of the
  empirical literature, China Finance Review International 10, 361­376.

Aghion, Philippe, Christopher Harris, Peter Howitt, and John Vickers, 2001, Competition,
  imitation and growth with step-by-step innovation, Review of Economic Studies 68, 467­
  492.

Alekseeva, Liudmila, Jos Azar, Mireia Gine, Sampsa Samila, and Bledi Taska, 2020, The
  demand for ai skills in the labor market, CEPR Working Paper.

Arrow, Kenneth J., 1962, Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention ,
  Readings in Industrial Economics.

Autor, David, and David Dorn, 2013, The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization
  of the US labor market, American Economic Review 103, 1553­1597.

Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane, 2003, The skill content of recent technologi-
  cal change: An empirical exploration, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1279­1333.

Babina, Tania, Anastassia Fedyk, Alex Xi He, and James Hodson, 2020, Artificial intelligence,
  firm growth, and industry concentration, SSRN Working Paper 3651052.


                                             31
Balyuk, Tetyana, 2016, An empirical study of related-party lending, SSRN Working Paper
  2803750.

Balyuk, Tetyana, 2019, Financial innovation and borrowers: Evidence from peer-to-peer lend-
  ing, SSRN Working Paper 2802220.

Balyuk, Tetyana, and Sergei A. Davydenko, 2018, Reintermediation in fintech: Evidence from
  online lending, SSRN Working Paper 3189236.

Brainard, Lael, 2016, The opportunities and challenges of fintech, Conference on Financial
  Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC.

Buchak, Greg, Gregor Matvos, Tomasz Piskorski, and Amit Seru, 2018, Fintech, regulatory
  arbitrage, and the rise of shadow banks, Journal of Financial Economics 130, 453­483.

Carnevale, Anthiny P., Tamara Jayasundera, and Dmitri Repnikov, 2014, Understanding on-
  line job ads data, Georgetown University, Center on Education and the Workforce, Technical
  Report (April).

Cen, Xiao, Vyacheslav Fos, and Wei Jiang, 2018, A race to lead: How chinese government
  interventions shape the sino-us production competition, SSRN Working Paper 3564494.

Chava, Sudheer, Nikhil Paradkar, Ganduri Rohan, and Zhang Yafei, Forthcoming, Impact of
  marketplace lending on consumers' future borrowing capacities and borrowing outcomes,
  Journal of Financial Economics .

Chen, Long, Lin Cong, and Yizhou Xiao, 2019a, A brief introduction to blockchain economics,
  SSRN Working Paper 3442691.

Chen, Mark A, Qinxi Wu, and Baozhong Yang, 2019b, How valuable is fintech innovation?,
  The Review of Financial Studies 32, 2062­2106.

Christensen, Clayton M., 1997, The innovator's dilemma: when new technologies cause great



                                            32
  firms to fail , The management of innovation and change series (Harvard Business School
  Press, Boston, Mass).

Cohen, Lauren, Umit G. Gurun, and Scott Duke Kominers, 2016, The growing problem of
  patent trolling, Science 352, 521­522.

Cohen, Lauren, Umit G Gurun, and Scott Duke Kominers, 2019, Patent trolls: Evidence from
  targeted firms, Management Science 65, 5461­5486.

Cornaggia, Jess, Brian Wolfe, and Woongsun Yoo, 2017, Crowding out banks: Credit substi-
  tution by peer-to-peer lending, SSRN Working Paper 3000593.

Danisewicz, Piotr, and Ilaf Elard, 2018, The real effects of financial technology: Marketplace
  lending and personal bankruptcy, SSRN Working Paper 3208908.

Dasgupta, Partha, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, Uncertainty, industrial structure, and the speed
  of RD, The Bell Journal of Economics 11, 1­28.

De Roure, Calebe, Loriana Pelizzon, and Anjan V. Thakor, 2018, P2p lenders versus banks:
  Cream skimming or bottom fishing?, SSRN Working Paper 3174632.

Deming, David J., 2017, The growing importance of social skills in the labor market, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 1593­1640.

Di Maggio, Marco, and Vincent Yao, Forthcoming, Fintech borrowers: Lax-screening or
  cream-skimming?, The Review of Financial Studies .

Ellison, Glenn, and Sara Fisher Ellison, 2011, Strategic entry deterrence and the behavior
  of pharmaceutical incumbents prior to patent expiration, American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics 3, 1­36.

Fuster, Andreas, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery, 2019, The role of
  technology in mortgage lending, The Review of Financial Studies 32, 1854­1899.



                                             33
Gilbert, Richard, and David M. Newbery, 1982, Preemptive patenting and the persistence of
  monopoly, American Economic Review 72, 514­26.

Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons, 2014, Explaining job polarization:
  Routine-biased technological change and offshoring, American Economic Review 104, 2509­
  2526.

Graetz, Georg, and Guy Michaels, 2018, Robots at work, The Review of Economics and
  Statistics 100, 753­768.

Gregory, Terry, Anna Salomons, and Ulrich Zierahn, 2016, Racing with or against the ma-
  chine? evidence from europe, SSRN Working Paper 2815469.

Havrylchyk, Olena, Carlotta Mariotto, Talal-Ur Rahim, and Marianne Verdier, 2019, The
  expansion of the peer-to-peer lending, SSRN Working Paper 2841316.

Henderson, Rebecca, and Iain Cockburn, 1996, Scale, scope, and spillovers: The determinants
  of research productivity in drug discovery, The RAND Journal of Economics 27, 32.

Hershbein, Brad, and Lisa B. Kahn, 2018, Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technological
  change? evidence from vacancy postings, American Economic Review 108, 1737­1772.

Hertzberg, Andrew, Andres Liberman, and Daniel Paravisini, 2018, Screening on loan terms:
  Evidence from maturity choice in consumer credit, The Review of Financial Studies 31,
  3532­3567.

Hikida, Ross, Jason Perry, et al., 2020, Fintech trends in the united states: Implications for
  household finance, Public Policy Review 16, 1­32.

Hirsch, Barry T, David A Macpherson, and Wayne G Vroman, 2001, Estimates of union
  density by state, Monthly Labor Review 124, 51­55.

Howell, David R., and Edward N. Wolff, 1991, Trends in the growth and distribution of skills
  in the U.S. Workplace, 1960­1985, ILR Review 44, 486­502.

                                             34
Iyer, Rajkamal, Asim Ijaz Khwaja, Erzo F. P. Luttmer, and Kelly Shue, 2016, Screening peers
  softly: Inferring the quality of small borrowers, Management Science 62, 1554­1577.

Jaimovich, Nir, and Henry E. Siu, 2020, Job polarization and jobless recoveries, The Review
  of Economics and Statistics 102, 129­147.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoffman, 2017, Technological
  innovation, resource allocation, and growth, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 665­
  712.

Lerner, Josh, Amit Seru, Nicholas Short, and Yuan Sun, 2021, Financial innovation in the
  21st century: Evidence from U.S. patenting, Working Paper.

Modestino, Alicia Sasser, Daniel Shoag, and Joshua Ballance, 2019, Upskilling: Do employers
  demand greater skill when workers are plentiful?, The Review of Economics and Statistics
  1­46.

Tang, Huan, 2019, Peer-to-peer lenders versus banks: Substitutes or complements?, The
  Review of Financial Studies 32, 1900­1938.

Templin, Thomas, and Lesley Hirsch, 2013, Do online job ads predict hiring?, New York City
  Labor Market Information Service.

Vallee, Boris, and Yao Zeng, 2019, Marketplace lending: A new banking paradigm?, The
  Review of Financial Studies 32, 1939­1982.

Webb, Michael, 2019, The impact of artificial intelligence on the labor market, SSRN Working
  Paper 3482150.




                                              35
Figure 1. Process of Constructing Fintech Exposure Measure at Occupation Level




 This diagram illustrates the process of how we construct the fintech exposure at occupation level.
 We extract a list of keywords in the titles and abstracts of fintech patent filings and another list
 of keywords in the description of each job task in O*NET occupation data. We then analyze the
 overlap between the two using the textual analysis. The fintech exposure measure captures both
 the cosine similarity between the two text corpuses and the intensity of fintech innovations (i.e.,
 the amount of fintech innovations). The task-level score is aggregated to occupation level using
 the weights based on task importance, relevance, and frequency in O*NET occupation data.




                                                 36
               Figure 2. Most Frequent Keywords in Fintech Patents

                        A: 2003-2006 Fintech Patent Applications




                           B: 2017 Fintech Patent Applications




                        C: 2003-2017 Fintech Patent Applications




This figure presents the clouds of keywords in the fintech patents filed in 2003-2006 (Panel A),
2017 (Panel B) and 2003-2017 (Panel C), respectively. Font size indicates the frequency of the
keywords. We only display top 75 keywords in each panel.




                                              37
                          Figure 3. Fintech Exposure Measures

                                      A: Fintech Exposure




                              B: Disaggregated Fintech Exposure




The figure plots the time trend of average fintech exposure measures over time. Panel A plots
three overall fintech exposure measures: (i) one constructed using all fintech patent applications
ending in a given year (blue line), (ii) one constructed using fintech patent applications in the
five-year period ending in a given year (red, the default used in our analysis), and (iii) one
constructed using granted fintech patents in the five-year period ending in a given year (green).
Panel B plots time series of average disaggregated fintech exposure measures constructed using
the subset of fintech patent in each of the seven fintech subcategories filed in the five-year period
ending in a given year.




                                                 38
       Figure 4. Correlation with Other Occupational Exposure Measures
                                         A: AI Exposure




                                     B: Software Exposure




The figure presents the correlation between occupational fintech exposure and two occupational
exposure measures constructed by Webb (2019): AI and software. We transform the fintech
exposure scores to percentiles at 6-digit SOC level and plot the average fintech exposure percentile
over the AI and software exposure measures. All the data series are at occupation level. The
fintech exposure measure is constructed by the authors based on fintech patent filings from 2003
to 2017.




                                                39
           Figure 5. Fintech Exposure by Demographic Characteristics
          A: Wage Percentile                                 B: Educational Attainment




 C: Occupation-Level Female Share                                       D: Age




The figure plots demographic characteristics of occupations with different fintech exposure. Panel
A shows the fractional-polynomial prediction of the average occupation-level fintech exposure
percentiles by occupational wage (measured as an occupation's mean hourly wage from OES
data released in May 2007). Panel B plots the fintech exposure percentiles averaged across all
workers in each educational category in the 2007 IPUMS. Panel C plots the prediction of the
average fintech exposure percentiles by the percent of female workers in each occupation in the
2007 IPUMS. Panel D plots the predicted average fintech exposure percentiles by the age cohort
of all workers in the 2007 IPUMS. The fintech exposure measure is constructed by the authors
based on fintech patent filings from 2003 to 2017.




                                               40
                   Figure 6. Cumulative Change in Posting Share




The figure plots the relation between occupation-level fintech exposure and cumulative change
in job posting shares. The y-axis is the cumulative change in job posting shares from 2007 to
2018 based on BGT data, and the x-axis is the time-invariant occupation-level fintech exposure
percentiles. The fintech exposure measure is constructed by the authors.




                                             41
      Figure 7. Fintech Patent Assignments In and Out of Finance Sector
        A: Finance to Finance                                   B: Finance to Other




                                    C: Others to Finance




This figure plots the time trend of fintech patent assignments transacted in 2003-2019. We
aggregate the assignments into three flows: Panel A shows flows from finance to finance, Panel
B shows those from finance to other industries, and Panel C shows those from other industries
to finance. Most fintech patents are transferred to finance from other industries, in particular
between 2012-2016. Two jumps in Panel B are results of purchases by NPEs from financial firms.
In 2007, Xatra Fund MX LLC, an intellectual venture, acquired 44 fintech patents from American
Express. In 2014, III Holdings 1, LLC purchased a 121 fintech patents from American Express.
In 2016, Bank of America and Visa acquired more than 10 fintech patents. This analysis is based
on patent assignment data available at USPTO.




                                              42
               Figure 8. Geographic Distribution of Fintech Exposure

                                      A: Fintech Exposure




    B:  Cumulative Change in Job Postings in the Most FT-Exposed Occupations




The figure plots the relation between fintech exposure and cumulative change in job posting
shares at state level. Panel A plots state-level average of occupational fintech exposure percentiles
weighted by job postings in 2007. Panel B plots the accumulative change of job posting shares
in the most FT exposed occupations (top quartile) from 2007 to 2018 at state level. The change
in job postings are calculated using BGT job postings in 2007 and 2018. The fintech exposure
measure is constructed by the authors based on fintech patent filings from 2003 to 2017.


                                                 43
                   Figure 9. Changes in Occupation Concentration

                              A: Occupation HHI across States




                            B: Occupation HHI across Industries




This figure plots the relation between occupation-level fintech exposure and cumulative change in
concentration of occupations across states (Panel A) and industries (Panel B), respectively, using
a locally weighted smoothing regression following Acemoglu and Autor (2011). Bandwidth is set
to 1.2 with 100 observations for Panel A and 1.6 for Panel B. The y-axis is the accumulative
change from 2007 to 2018 in the natural logarithm of occupational HHI index across states
in Panel A and across NAICS two-digit industry in Panel B. The x-axis is the time-invariant
occupation-level fintech exposure percentiles. The fintech exposure measures are constructed by
the authors based on fintech patent filings from 2003 to 2017.




                                               44
                    Table 1: Measuring Occupation-Level Fintech Exposure: An Illustration

Occupation                             Job                           Weight in                      Top 5                              FT
  Title                                Task                          Occupation               Keywords (frequency)                   Exposure
Credit Ana-       Analyze credit data and financial statements         0.114      data (7142), financial (3606), credit (2023),       0.144
lysts             to determine the degree of risk involved in                     risk (1421), determine (681)
                  extending credit or lending money.
                  Consult with customers to resolve complaints         0.112      financial (3606), transactions (2773), credit       0.100
                  and verify financial and credit transactions.                   (2023), verify (252), customers (235)
                  Generate financial ratios, using computer            0.105      financial (3606), using (3243), computer            0.126
                  programs, to evaluate customers' financial                      (2271), generate (556), customers (235)
                  status.
Information       Monitor current reports of computer viruses          0.096      systems (2662), computer (2271), determine          0.060
Security          to determine when to update virus protection                    (681), current (324), protection (80)
Analysts          systems.
                  Monitor use of data files and regulate access        0.093      data (7142), information (6333), computer           0.180
                  to safeguard information in computer files.                     (2271), access (1590), use (1474)
                  Confer with users to discuss issues such as          0.091      data (7142), computer (2271),          security     0.117
                  computer data access needs, security viola-                     (1616), access (1590), users (463)
                  tions, and programming changes.

Mathematical      Maintain regularly scheduled office hours to         0.066      maintain (50), assist (37), office (18), sched-     0.001
Science           advise and assist students.                                     uled (5), advise (1)
Teachers,         Maintain student attendance records, grades,         0.064      required (183), records (163), maintain (50),       0.006
Post-             and other required records.                                     grades (3), attendance (2)
secondary         Prepare and deliver lectures to undergrad-           0.063      deliver (26), discrete (22), differential (12),     0.001
                  uate or graduate students on topics such as                     prepare (6), linear (3)
                  linear algebra, differential equations, and dis-
                  crete mathematics.

Orthodontists     Adjust dental appliances to produce and              0.114      function (249), produce (58), maintain (50),        0.005
                  maintain normal function.                                       normal (31), adjust (23)
                  Fit dental appliances in patients' mouths to         0.108      position (110), relationship (83), fit (30), al-    0.002
                  alter the position and relationship of teeth                    ter (6), appliances (5)
                  and jaws or to realign teeth.
                  Study diagnostic records, such as medical or         0.106      models (179), records (163), medical (37),          0.004
                  dental histories, plaster models of the teeth,                  face (37), treatment (37)
                  photos of a patient's face and teeth, and X-
                  rays, to develop patient treatment plans.

                This table presents information about four occupations selected to illustrate the process of con-
                structing the occupational fintech exposure measure. In particular, we show top three tasks along
                with their weights and most frequent keywords matched with those in fintech patents for each
                of the four occupations. The two occupations on the top (i.e., credit analysts and information
                security analysts) have high exposure to fintech while the two in the bottom (i.e., mathematical
                science teachers and orthodontists) have low exposure to fintech.




                                                                     45
    Table 2: Occupations with Highest and Lowest Fintech Exposure Scores
  O*NET SOC                      Occupation Title                   FT Exposure   FT Percentile
                        Top 10 Occupations with the Highest FT Exposure
  15-1122         Information Security Analysts                        3.25           100
  13-2041         Credit Analysts                                      3.07           100
  15-1132         Software Developers, Applications                    2.74           100
  41-3041         Travel Agents                                        2.73           100
  17-2072         Electronics Engineers, Except Computer               2.52           100
  15-1121         Computer Systems Analysts                            2.47           100
  15-1133         Software Developers, Systems Software                2.43           100
  15-1142         Network and Computer Systems Administrators          2.40            99
  43-9111         Statistical Assistants                               2.37            99
  15-2041         Statisticians                                        2.26           99

                      Bottom 10 Occupations with the Lowest FT Exposure
  35-9011         Dining Room and Cafeteria Attendants ...             0.18            2
  25-1054         Physics Teachers, Postsecondary                      0.18            2
  35-3011         Bartenders                                           0.18            1
  47-3014         Helpers­Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers ...       0.17            1
  27-2031         Dancers                                              0.17            1
  53-3011         Ambulance Drivers and Attendants ...                 0.16            1
  29-1023         Orthodontists                                        0.16            1
  33-1012         First-Line Supervisors of Police and Detectives      0.16            1
  51-3023         Slaughterers and Meat Packers                        0.15            1
  47-3012         Helpers­Carpenters                                   0.11            1

This table lists top 10 and bottom 10 occupations based on their exposure to fintech innovations.
Fintech exposure is the time-invariant fintech exposure score based on all fintech patent applica-
tions filed in 2003-2017. Fintech percentile is the percentile rank based on the fintech exposure
measure.




                                                46
                                  Table 3: Summary Statistics
Variables                                   N      Mean       SD   P25    P50     P75     Min    Max
                                    Occupational Exposure   Measures
Fintech Score (5-Year Application)        290,895 0.27        0.20 0.14   0.22    0.33    0.02    1.74
Fintech Percentile                        290,895 51.95      28.81   27    53      77      1      100
Fintech Quartile 4 Dummy                  290,896 0.27        0.44    0     0       1       0       1
Fintech Percentile - Cybersecurity        290,895 51.83      28.90   27    53      77      1      100
Fintech Percentile - Mobile Transaction   290,895 51.72      28.82   27    52      77      1      100
Fintech Percentile - Data Analysis        290,895 52.43      28.64   28    53      78       1     100
Fintech Percentile - Blockchain           290,895 18.10      29.14    1     1      28      1      100
Fintech Percentile - P2P                  290,895 51.50      28.85   27    52      77      1      100
Fintech Percentile - Robo-advising        290,895 53.04      28.68   28    54      78      1      100
Fintech Percentile - IoT                  290,895 51.43      28.88   27    52      77      1      100
AI Percentile                             324,892 51.01      28.29   27    51      75      1      100
Software Percentile                       324,892 49.86      28.16   26    49      74       1     100
Robot Percentile                          324,892 48.89      28.23   25    47      73      1      100
                                       Job Posting Variables
No of Postings                          324,892 440 1,205      15          60      275    3      12,483
Unweighted Posting Shares (Basis Point) 324,892 15.70 40.19 0.83          3.17    13.25 0.01     1,975
  - Most Exposed Occupations             87,305 20.75 39.86 1.49          5.60    20.86 0.021     648
Weighted Posting Shares (Basis Point)   324,892 90.20
  - Most Exposed Occupations             87,305 86.71
Finance & Software Skills (%)           324,892 5.09      9.31  0          0.30    6.39     0    52.80
Finance No Software Skills (%)          324,892 6.57 10.90      0         1.90     8.33    0     66.10
Software No Finance Skills (%)          324,892 15.50 18.30 0.97           8.74   23.40     0    84.60
High School (%)                         324,892 21.80 22.20     0         16.20   35.70    0     95.70
Bachelor's Degree and above (%)         324,892 21.50 26.50    0          8.33    38.70    0      100
1-4 Years Experiences (%)               324,892 27.44 18.99 13.04         26.21   39.22   0.00   81.84
4+ Years Experiences (%)                324,892 9.82 13.10     0          3.96    14.90    0     61.70
                                  Local Socio-Demographic   Variables
Median Age                                324,892 40.34      0.79 39.96 40.35 40.77 37.17        42.63
Female (%)                                324,892 47.30      1.35 46.40 47.50 48.10 43.70        52.00
Bachelor's Degree and Above (%)           324,892 32.11      5.75 28.14 30.79 35.58 20.59        63.76
Business Major Degree (%)                 324,892 6.34       2.01 6.00 6.71 7.47 0.00             9.92
Tech Major Degree (%)                     324,892 2.37       0.94 1.96 2.38 3.02 0.00             5.81
Union Membership (%)                      324,892 10.60      5.32 5.80 10.20 14.50 1.60          25.20

 The table reports the summary statistics of the main sample at occupation × state × year level.
 Posting share is the fraction of job postings at cohort level to the state totals in a given year.
 The occupation-level fintech exposure measures are calculated by the authors (as described in
 Section 3.1.1). Occupational exposure to AI and software are from Webb (2019). All job posting
 variables, including number and share of postings as well as fraction of job postings that require
 different skills, experience, and educational attainment, are calculated using BGT data in 2007
 and 2010-2018. State-level demographic characteristics are from IPUMS and CPS datasets in
 2007-2018.




                                                 47
                          Table 4: Industry Distribution of Fintech Exposure
                                                                        Post Share0              Posting Share
NAICS    Industry                                 FT              All            Most          All            Most
Code      Title                                 Percentile     Occupations     FT-Exposed   Occupations     FT-Exposed
                                                   (1)            (2)                 (3)      (4)             (5)
11       Agriculture                              60.48           0.09            0.04          0.01           0.00
21       Mining                                   66.24           0.50             0.24        -0.19          -0.10
22       Utilities                                67.61           0.50             0.27        -0.13          -0.09
23       Construction                             59.86           1.44             0.67         0.17          -0.13
31-33    Manufacturing                            66.60           8.64             4.37        -2.24          -1.66
42-45    Wholesale and Retail Trade               62.13           7.04             1.88         6.20           1.18
48-49    Transportation and Warehousing           65.49          2.53             0.61          4.61           0.07
51       Information                              70.31          6.28              3.10        -2.73          -1.56
52       Finance and Insurance                    79.77          12.93             9.53        -4.38          -3.63
53       Real Estate Rental and Leasing           55.32           1.96             0.53         0.24          0.00
54-56    Professional, Management and Admin       71.72          21.08            11.53        -5.72          -3.93
61       Educational Services                     43.81          5.41             1.77          1.37          -0.09
62       Health Care and Social Assistance        51.74          18.93             4.84        -2.30          -0.99
71       Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation      48.71          0.51              0.14         0.67           0.10
72       Accommodation and Food Services          39.95           6.23             0.93         4.28           0.05
81       Other Services                           53.94          2.06             0.47         0.28           0.04
92       Public Administration                    59.73          3.82             1.41         -0.11          -0.06
All Industries                                    63.00           100             42.35        0.00           -10.73
Correlation with FT                                1.00           0.23             0.52        -0.51           -0.59

         This table reports industry distribution of fintech exposure and changes in job posting shares.
         Fintech percentile is the industry average of occupational fintech exposure percentiles weighted
         by job postings in 2007. All the job posting variables are calculated using BGT data in 2007
         and 2010-2018.




                                                          48
                        Table 5: Fintech Exposure and Job Posting Change
                                                 Panel A: Baseline Specification
Dep Var                                                    Basis Point Change in Posting Shares
                          (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)
FT Percentile          -0.067***      -0.064***        -0.085***     -0.084***
                       (-10.163)      (-11.408)         (-7.502)      (-7.580)
FT Quartile 4                                                                            -4.378***       -4.047***      -4.661*** -4.592***
                                                                                          (-8.391)        (-9.099)       (-7.548)  (-7.601)
AI Percentile                                          -0.028***     -0.028***                                          -0.028*** -0.029***
                                                        (-3.728)      (-3.930)                                           (-3.831)  (-4.043)
Software Percentile                                     0.053***      0.054***                                          0.055*** 0.055***
                                                         (8.094)       (8.178)                                           (7.883)   (7.955)
Year FE                  Yes            Yes              Yes              No                Yes            Yes            Yes          No
State FE                 No             Yes              Yes              No                No             Yes            Yes          No
State × Year FE          No             No               No               Yes               No             No             No           Yes
N                      277,075        277,075          277,075           277,075           277,075       277,075        277,075       277,075
R2                      0.012          0.026            0.031             0.090             0.013         0.026          0.031         0.089

                                         Panel B: Dis-aggregated FT Exposure
     Dep Var                                             Basis Point Change in Posting Shares
     Indep Var             Cyber-          Mobile                Data            Block-            P2P        Robo-             IoT
                           security      Transaction            Analysis         chain                       advising
                                (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)           (7)
     FT Quartile 4       -4.537***         -4.128***            -5.613*** -5.156*** -3.507*** -5.725***                    -2.634***
                           (-7.69)           (-7.45)              (-6.93)   (-6.15)   (-6.32)   (-6.47)                      (-6.60)
     AI Percentile       -0.031***         -0.035***            -0.025*** -0.036*** -0.045*** -0.021**                     -0.032***
                           (-4.25)           (-5.19)              (-3.33)   (-5.20)   (-6.97)   (-2.58)                      (-4.56)
     Software Percentile 0.055***           0.056***             0.050*** 0.048*** 0.050*** 0.042***                       0.054***
                           (7.99)            (7.88)               (7.69)    (7.96)    (7.96)    (7.14)                       (8.16)
     State x Year FE            Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
     N                     277,075             277,075          277,075          277,075      277,075        277,075        277,075
     R2                     0.089               0.089            0.092            0.087        0.087          0.093          0.086

     The table reports the baseline regressions that estimate the effect of fintech exposure on changes
     in job postings at occupation × state × year level. The dependent variable is the year-over-year
     change of job posting share. The posting share is calculated as the share of job posting in each
     cell relative to the state total in that year using the BGT data. The main explanatory variable
     is the lagged occupational fintech exposure percentile (SOC 6-digit) that varies over time and is
     constructed using fintech patent applications in 5-year rolling window ending in a given year. FT
     Quartile 4 dummy equals one if an occupation's fintech exposure is in the top quartile, and zero
     otherwise. In Panel B, fintech exposure measures are constructed using a subset of fintech patent
     applications: cybersecurity, mobile transactions, data analytics, blockchain, P2P, robo-advising,
     and IoT. AI percentile and software percentile are the percentile ranks of occupation-level AI
     exposure and software exposure scores, respectively, developed by Webb (2019). We also control
     for the cohort-level initial posting share in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) of Panel A and all columns
     of Panel B. All regressions are weighted by the number of job postings. Sample is constructed
     using BGT data in 2007 and 2010-2018. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks
     denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                                   49
                         Table 6: Changes in Skill and Education Requirements
Dep Var                                    Basis Point Change in Posting Shares that Require
                                  Different Skills               Years of Experience         Minimum Degree
                      Finance &    Finance       Software          0-4         4+           HS &        BA &
                       Software   No Software   No Finance        Years       Years         Below       Above
                          (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)        (5)            (6)         (7)
FT Quartile 4         29.584***    -16.819***    19.721***      13.548***   36.319***     -11.980***   50.567***
                       (18.78)       (-10.23)      (10.36)        (10.21)     (13.94)        (-5.81)    (21.41)
AI Percentile         0.338***      0.077***      0.338***       0.166***    0.732***      -0.860***   1.513***
                       (17.44)        (2.70)        (9.12)         (5.15)     (17.24)       (-15.20)    (25.81)
Software Percentile   -0.470***      0.076**     -0.082***      -0.084***   -0.286***       0.685***   -1.310***
                       (-21.93)       (2.09)       (-2.95)        (-3.01)     (-7.85)        (14.52)    (-27.88)
State × Year FE          Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
N                      277,075       277,075      277,075        277,075     277,075        277,075     277,075
R2                      0.156         0.056        0.209          0.106       0.213          0.143       0.222

          The table reports the regression results examining the effect of occupational fintech exposure on
          skill requirements of the postings at occupation × state × year level. The dependent variable
          is the year-over-year change in job posting shares that require skills specified in the column
          title in columns (1)-(3), require experiences specified in the column title in columns (4)-(5) and
          educational attainment specified in the column title in columns (6)-(7). The main explanatory
          variable, FT Quartile 4 dummy, equals one if the lagged occupation's fintech exposure percentile
          (SOC 6-digit) constructed using fintech patent applications in 5-year rolling window is in the
          top quartile, and zero otherwise. AI percentile and software percentile are the percentile ranks
          of occupation-level AI exposure and software exposure scores, respectively, developed by Webb
          (2019). We also control for the cohort-level initial posting shares and state × year fixed effects.
          All the regressions are weighted by the number of job postings. Sample is constructed using
          BGT data in 2007 and 2010-2018. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote
          significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                           50
                  Table 7: Effect of Labor Force Characteristics (State Level)
Dep Var                                                        Basis Point Change in
                                          Posting Shares                                Employment Shares
                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
FT Quartile 4              -6.698***   -6.827***   -6.135***   -4.947***    -0.474***   -0.499*** -0.415***   -0.401**
                             (-8.90)     (-9.15)     (-8.86)     (-4.96)      (-3.58)     (-3.77)   (-3.32)    (-2.22)
 × % BA+                      0.003                                         0.050***
                             (0.06)                                           (3.39)
 × % Business Degree                    0.649*                                          0.150**
                                        (1.72)                                           (2.01)
 × % IT Degree                                     1.095**                                        0.451***
                                                    (2.47)                                         (3.80)
 × % Union Membership                                             0.032                                        0.021*
                                                                 (0.40)                                        (1.72)
AI Percentile              -0.029***   -0.029***   -0.029***   -0.029***     0.004**    0.004**    0.004**    0.004**
                             (-4.04)     (-4.05)     (-4.05)     (-4.04)      (2.11)     (2.10)     (2.10)     (2.14)
Software Percentile         0.056***    0.056***    0.056***    0.055***      0.001      0.001      0.001      0.001
                             (8.09)      (8.10)      (8.08)      (7.95)       (0.79)     (0.79)     (0.79)     (0.81)
State × Year FE              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
N                           277,075    277,075     277,075     277,075       184,861    184,861    184,861    184,861
R2                           0.090      0.090       0.090       0.089         0.085      0.085      0.085      0.085

     The table reports the regression results examining the effect of state-level labor force charac-
     teristics on the labor market responses to fintech exposure at occupation × state × year level.
     The dependent variable is the year-over-year change in job posting shares in columns (1)-(4)
     and change in employment shares in columns (5)-(8). The main explanatory variables are the
     interaction of FT Quartile 4 dummy, which equals one if the lagged occupation's fintech exposure
     percentile (SOC 6-digit) constructed using fintech patent applications in 5-year rolling window
     is in the top quartile, and zero otherwise, and four state-level labor market variables in the prior
     year. The four state-level variables are the percentages of state labor force with a BA+ degree,
     with a business degree, and with an information technology degree, respectively, and the percent-
     age of union members in the non-agricultural sectors. The union membership data is provided
     and updated by Hirsch et al. (2001). AI percentile and software percentile are the percentile
     ranks of occupation-level AI exposure and software exposure scores, respectively, developed by
     Webb (2019). We also control for the cohort-level initial posting shares and state × year fixed
     effects. All the regressions are weighted by the number of job postings in columns (1)-(4) and
     employment in 2009-2018 in columns (5)-(8). Sample is constructed using BGT job posting
     data in 2007 and 2010-2018 in columns (1)-(4) and IPUMS employment data in 2009-2018 in
     columns (5)-(8). Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote significance levels
     (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                       51
                           Table 8: Occupational Concentration
                 Dep Var                       Log(Occupational HHI)
                                          Across State       Across Industry
                                      YoY       2007-2018     YoY       2007-2018
                                        (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)
                 FT Quartile 4       0.011***   0.067***       0.001    0.057***
                                      (3.69)      (6.46)       (0.75)    (3.10)
                 AI Percentile        -0.000    -0.001***     -0.000*   0.002***
                                      (-0.11)     (-3.39)     (-1.72)    (3.42)
                 Software Percentile  -0.000       0.000       0.000    -0.001**
                                      (-0.57)     (0.77)       (0.16)    (-1.98)
                 Year FE                Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
                 N                     6,911          767      6,867       761
                 R2                    0.086         0.064     0.004      0.030

The table reports the regressions that examine the change in concentration of occupations across
states and industries in response to occupational fintech exposure. We measure concentration
using the HHI. The dependent variable is the change in the natural logarithm of a given occu-
pations' HHI across states in columns (1)-(2) and industries in columns (3)-(4). The dependent
variable in columns (1) and (3) is year-to-year change while that in columns (2) and (4) is the log
difference between 2007 and 2018. The main explanatory variable is FT Quartile 4 dummy that
equals one if occupation's fintech exposure percentile (SOC 6 digit) constructed using fintech
patent applications in 5-year rolling window is in the top quartile, and zero otherwise in columns
(1) and (3). In columns (2) and (4), it is constructed based on all fintech patent applications in
2003-2017. AI percentile and software percentile are the percentile ranks of occupation-level AI
exposure and software exposure scores, respectively, developed by Webb (2019). We also control
for year fixed effects in all regressions. All the regressions are weighted by the number of job
postings of a given occupation and standard errors are clustered at occupation level. Asterisks
denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                52
          Table 9: Labor Market Response of Financial Sector vs. Others
        Dep Var                               Basis Point Change in Posting Shares
                                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)
        FT Quartile 4 - Most Disruptive     0.195      0.316    0.353     0.471*
                                           (0.768)    (1.179)  (1.335)    (1.693)
          × Financial Sector                        -1.233***           -1.317***
                                                     (-3.545)            (-3.721)
        FT Quartile 4 - Less Disruptive   -0.965*** -1.130*** -0.934*** -1.104***
                                           (-3.320)  (-3.618)  (-3.226)  (-3.543)
          × Financial Sector                         1.985***            1.842***
                                                      (4.855)             (4.630)
        Financial Sector                            -0.690***
                                                     (-6.478)
        AI Percentile                     -0.009*** -0.008*** -0.004*** -0.004***
                                           (-6.593)  (-6.409)  (-2.805)  (-3.000)
        Software Percentile                0.007*** 0.007*** 0.005*** 0.005***
                                            (6.650)   (6.215)  (4.537)    (4.597)
        State × Year FE                      Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
        Industry FE                          No          No         Yes         Yes
        N                                 1,010,853   1,010,853   1,010,853   1,010,853
        R2                                  0.048       0.048       0.052       0.052

The table reports the regressions that examine the heterogeneity in labor market adjustments by
the financial sector vs. others in response to fintech exposure at occupation × state × industry
(NAICS 2-digit) × year level. The dependent variable is the year-over-year change of job posting
share. The posting share is calculated as the share of job posting at cohort level relative to the
state totals in that year using the BGT data. The main explanatory variables are the two fintech
exposure measures--indicators for the most exposed occupations to the most and less disruptive
fintech innovations, respectively. Both fintech exposure measures are constructed at SOC 6-digit
level using the most and less disruptive fintech patent applications to the finance industry in
5-year rolling window, respectively. We interact the fintech exposure measures with the the
financial sector dummy (NAICS 52). AI percentile and software percentile are the percentile
ranks of occupation-level AI exposure and software exposure scores, respectively, developed by
Webb (2019). We control for the cohort-level initial posting shares and state by year fixed effects.
We additionally control for two-digit NAICS industry fixed effects in columns (3)-(4). All the
regressions are weighted by the number of job postings. Standard errors are clustered at state
level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                53
                      Table 10: Innovation Response of Financial Firms vs. Others
Dep Var                              Log(Invented Fintech Patents) × 100             Log(Acquired Fintech Patents) × 100
                                    All       Most         All        Most          All       Most         All        Most
                                  Patents   Disruptive   Patents    Disruptive    Patents   Disruptive   Patents    Disruptive
                                    (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)         (7)         (8)
FT Quartile 4 - Most Disruptive   -0.098      -0.045      -0.143     -0.064       -0.001      0.005        -0.035     -0.021
                                  (-1.21)     (-1.09)     (-1.54)    (-1.40)      (-0.04)     (0.29)      (-1.01)    (-1.23)
 × Financial Firm                                        0.484***   0.200***                             0.345***   0.272***
                                                          (3.85)     (2.87)                               (11.87)    (16.89)
FT Quartile 4 - Less Disruptive    0.095      0.045        0.099      0.047        0.035      0.019        0.022       0.011
                                   (1.61)     (1.25)      (1.58)     (1.16)        (0.76)     (0.94)       (0.54)     (0.91)
 × Financial Firm                                         -0.067     -0.034                              0.151***   0.091***
                                                          (-0.79)    (-0.56)                               (4.82)     (6.39)
Log(Annual Job Postings)          -0.002      0.005       -0.002      0.005        0.006     -0.004         0.007     -0.004
                                  (-0.21)     (1.09)      (-0.18)    (1.10)        (0.49)    (-1.18)       (0.53)    (-1.18)
Firm FE                             Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
Year FE                             Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes
N                                 107,959    107,959     107,959     107,959      107,959    107,959     107,959     107,959
R2                                 0.681      0.690       0.681       0.690        0.200      0.147       0.200       0.147

          The table reports the regressions that examine the change in innovation activities by financial
          firms vs. others in response to fintech exposure based on the firm × year sample that includes
          both public and private firms. The sample contains 26,031 unique firms in 2007 and 2010-2018
          covered by the BGT data. The dependent variable is the logarithm of the number of fintech
          patents invented (× 100) in columns (1) and (3), the logarithm of the number of most disruptive
          fintech patents invented (× 100) in columns (2) and (4), the logarithm of the number of fintech
          patents acquired (× 100) in columns (5) and (7), and the logarithm of the number of most disrup-
          tive fintech patents acquired (× 100) in columns (6) and (8). The main explanatory variables are
          the two fintech exposure measures--indicators for the most exposed occupations to the most and
          less disruptive fintech innovations, respectively. Both fintech exposure measures are constructed
          at SOC 6-digit level using the most and less disruptive fintech patent applications to the financial
          industry in 5-year rolling window, respectively. We interact the fintech exposure measures with
          the financial firm dummy (NAICS 52). We control for firm and year fixed effects. Standard
          errors are clustered at NAICS two-digit and year level. Patent application and assignment data
          are obtained from USPTO. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                          54
          Table 11: Differences between Innovator and Non-Innovator Firms
Dep Var                                         Basis Point Change in Posting Shares
                                                                               Different Skills
                                          All                    financial +     Finance           Software
                                                                   Software     No Software       No Finance
                              (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)             (6)
FT Quartile 4              -2.267***   -2.190***   -2.288***     28.727***       -9.545***        14.344***
                             (-7.26)     (-7.33)     (-7.32)      (15.99)          (-4.13)          (7.46)
 × Inventor                1.554***                 1.575***     19.766***         19.082           4.734
                             (4.71)                  (4.78)        (2.92)          (1.37)           (0.40)
 × Acquisition Innovator                2.321***    2.422***      -17.875       148.258***          -4.778
                                         (3.09)      (3.20)        (-0.79)         (3.99)          (-0.10)
AI Percentile              -0.043***   -0.043***   -0.043***     0.216***          -0.038         0.309***
                             (-9.72)     (-9.73)     (-9.72)      (10.24)          (-0.92)          (6.97)
Software Percentile         0.053***    0.053***    0.053***     -0.349***        0.184***         0.062*
                             (6.83)      (6.83)      (6.82)       (-19.26)         (3.22)           (1.99)
State × Year FE               Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
Innovator FE                  Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
N                           314,533     314,533     314,533        314,533        314,533          314,533
R2                           0.075       0.075       0.075          0.075          0.040            0.109

 The table reports the regressions that examine the heterogeneity in labor market adjustments
 by fintech innovator and non-innovator firms in response to occupational fintech exposure. We
 define three types of firms based on inventor and assignee names of fintech patents: inventors,
 acquisition innovators (assignee), and non-innovators (reference group). All the regressions are
 based on firm type × occupation × state × year-level data in 2007 and 2010-2018. The dependent
 variable is the year-over-year change of job posting share in columns (1)-(3) and the year-over-
 year change of job posting share that require skills specified in the column title in columns (4)-(6).
 The posting share is calculated as the share of job posting at cohort level relative to the state
 total in that year using the BGT data. The main explanatory variable, FT Quartile 4 dummy,
 equals one if the lagged occupation's fintech exposure percentile (SOC 6-digit) constructed using
 fintech patent applications in 5-year rolling window is in the top quartile, and zero otherwise.
 We include the interaction terms of the fintech exposure measure with two fintech innovators
 dummy variables, and also control for AI and software percentiles developed by Webb (2019),
 cohort-level initial posting shares, and state by year fixed effects. All the regressions are weighted
 by the number of job postings. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote
 significance levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                   55
                                        Table 12: Firm Outcomes
Dep Var                      Log(Employ) × 100        Log(Sales) × 100       Log(R&D) × 100               ROA × 100
                               (1)          (2)           (3)     (4)          (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)
FT Quartile 4                -0.010**     -0.010**    -0.005      -0.006     0.018      0.018       -0.034      -0.038
                              (-2.20)      (-2.30)    (-0.41)    (-0.44)     (1.61)     (1.62)      (-0.57)     (-0.64)
 × Inventor                               0.035**                0.056**                0.074*                  0.202*
                                            (1.99)                (2.21)                (1.87)                  (1.78)
 × Non-Inventor Innovator                   0.018                 -0.026                -0.189                   0.224
                                            (0.38)               (-0.46)               (-1.61)                  (1.29)
Inventor                                   -0.027*              -0.044**               -0.041*                -0.266***
                                           (-1.90)               (-2.42)               (-1.84)                  (-2.74)
Non-Inventor Innovator                      -0.030                0.013                 0.079                  -0.274**
                                           (-1.09)                (0.37)                (1.63)                  (-2.41)
Firm Attributes                Yes          Yes           Yes     Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
Industry FE                    Yes          Yes           Yes     Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
Year FE                        Yes          Yes           Yes     Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes
N                             16,746      16,746      17,007     17,007      14,157     14,157      14,836     14,836
R2                             0.054      0.054        0.055      0.055      0.047       0.047      0.143      0.144

     The table reports the regressions that examine the relation between firm outcomes and fintech
     exposure based on the firm × year sample in 2007 and 2010-2018. The sample contains 2,243
     firms. The dependent variable is the year-over-year change of firm outcomes: the number of
     employees in columns (1)-(2), annual sales in 2003 dollar in columns (3)-(4), R&D expenditure
     in columns (5)-(6) and ROA defined as annual net income over assets in columns (7)-(8) . Firm
     FT Quartile 4 is the lagged firm-level percentage of job postings that fall into the top quartile
     fintech-exposed occupations. We define two types of fintech innovators based on inventor and
     assignee names of the patent: inventor and non-inventor innovators (assignee). Control variables
     are lagged firm time varying attributes, including the natural logarithm of total assets in 2003
     dollar, R&D expenditure in 2003 dollar, firm age, capital expenditure scaled by assets and
     cash scaled by assets. Additional controls include the market-to-book ratio defined as market
     capitalization scaled by assets in columns (1)-(2) and the net working capital scaled by assets in
     columns (3)-(4). We also control for NAICS four-digit industry and year fixed effects. Standard
     errors are clustered at NAICS four-digit level. Asterisks denote significance levels (***=1%,
     **=5%, *=10%).




                                                     56
Appendix

             Figure A.1. Distribution of Occupational Fintech Exposure




  The figure displays the distribution across six-digit SOC occupations of fintech exposure scores
  based on all fintech patent applications in 2003-2017.




                                               A.1
              Figure A.2. Job Postings by Fintech Exposure Quartile
         A: No of Postings                                    B: Share of Postings




The figure plots the time trends of annual job postings in Panel A and posting shares in Panel
B by fintech exposure quartiles. The job posting variables is calculated using BGT data in 2007
and 2010-2018. The fintech exposure measures are constructed by the authors.




                                             A.2
Figure A.3. Cumulative Change in Posting Share by Industry
 A: Finance (52)                            B: PMA (54-56)




C: Information (51)                       D: Real Estate (53)




E: Health Care (62)              F: Wholesale and Retail Trades (42-45)




                           A.3
                                  G: Manufacturing (31-33)




The figure plots the relation between fintech exposure and cumulative change in job posting shares
at industry level. The y-axis is the cumulative change in job posting share in an industry from
2007 to 2018 and the x-axis is the time-invariant occupation-level fintech exposure percentile.
Panels A-G plot the relation for finance, PMA, information, real estate, health care, wholesale
and retail trades, and manufacturing, respectively. The selected industries are closely related to
financial sector based on the supply and use table. The change in job posting share is calculated
using BGT data in 2007 and 2010-2018. The fintech exposure measures are constructed by the
authors.




                                              A.4
                                     Table A.1: Additional Robustness Tests
Dep Var                                                      Basis Point Change in Shares of
                          Employment First Posting                                          Posting
                               (1)             (2)             (3)        (4)         (5)             (6)      (7)         (8)
FT Quartile 4                -0.168*        -1.796**       -0.673***
                             (-1.89)        (-2.607)        (-14.33)
FT Quartile 4 - Granted                                                -4.959***
                                                                         (-7.64)
FT Quartile 4 - EW                                                                 -4.676***
                                                                                     (-7.43)
FT Quartile 4 - Accum.                                                                          -4.551***
                                                                                                  (-7.79)
FT Raw Score                                                                                                -8.529***
                                                                                                              (-6.95)
FT Percentile                                                                                                           -0.965***
                                                                                                                          (-5.84)
AI Percentile                0.004**       -0.056***       -0.004***   -0.032***   -0.031***    -0.032***   -0.027***
                              (2.15)        (-5.240)         (-3.47)     (-4.54)     (-4.27)      (-4.51)     (-3.55)
Software Percentile           0.001         0.064***        0.003***    0.056***    0.052***    0.056***     0.051***
                              (0.82)         (2.738)         (3.74)      (7.93)      (7.62)       (7.97)      (7.95)
State × Year FE                Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes     Yes         Yes
Occupation FE                  Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes     Yes         Yes
N                            184,861        241,420         277,075     277,075     277,075      277,075    277,075     277,074
R2                            0.085          0.054           0.001       0.090       0.089        0.089      0.088       0.121

          The table reports the regression results of additional robustness check of the effect of fintech
          exposure on employment and job postings at occupation × state × year level. It aims to validate
          that the findings from Table 5 is not driven by the unsatisfied demand of labor and any possible
          measurement errors. The employment share is the fraction of a cell's employment to the state
          totals in a given year. The posting share is the fraction of a cell's job postings to the state totals
          in a given year. The dependent variable is the basis point change in employment and first posting
          shares, respectively, in columns (1) and (2) and the basis point change in all job posting shares in
          columns (3)-(8). The main explanatory variable, FT Quartile 4 dummy, equals one if the lagged
          occupational fintech exposure percentile is in the top quartile, and zero otherwise. Fintech
          exposure measure is constructed using patent applications in 5-year rolling window in columns
          (1)-(3), (5), (7) and (8), using patents granted in 5-year rolling window in column (4), and using
          all patent applications in 2003-2017 in column (6). Regression in column (3) is not weighted.
          FT Quartile 4 in column (5) equals one if the lagged occupational employment-weighted fintech
          exposure percentile is in the top quartile, and zero otherwise. We use the fintech exposure raw
          score instead of Quarter 4 dummy in column (7) and control for occupation fixed effects in
          column (8). AI percentile and software percentile are the percentile ranks of occupation-level AI
          exposure sores and software exposure scores, respectively, from Webb (2019). We also control
          for cohort-level initial employment share in column (1) and cohort-level initial job posting share
          in columns (2)-(8). Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote significance
          levels (***=1%, **=5%, *=10%).




                                                          A.5
                              Table A.2: Distribution of Fintech Patents
                                             Panel A: Top Innovator Firms
                           Inventor                                            Acquisition Innovator
         Firm                     # Patent    # Postings        Firm                       # Patent    # Postings
         Mastercard                   393           7,686       Paypal                       243            9,828
         Visa                         316         381,930       Liberty Peak Ventures        196                0
         American Express             313         121,462       III Holdings 1               121                0
         Bank of America              144          37,557       Intellectual Ventures II      60              172
         Ebay                         140         271,214       Capital One                   48          117,998
         IBM                          120          29,103       Xatra Fund MX                 44                0
         First Data Corporation       118          30,550       American Express              43          121,462
         Square                       88            6,028       Visa                          32          381,930
         Paypal                        87           9,828       Verifone                      31            3,104
         Capital One                   80         117,998       Western Union                 28            4,084
                                               Panel B: Industry Distribution
                                                       No of Fintech Patent                            % Fintech Patent
NAICS   Industry                              Filing   Publication     Grant    1 Year     Filing   Publication     Grant   1 Year
Code     Title                                 Date       Date         Date      After      Date       Date         Date     After
11      Agriculture                              0            0          0         0         0.00        0.00       0.00     0.00
21      Mining                                    7           7          4         4         0.11        0.11        0.13    0.13
22      Utilities                                 0           0          0         0         0.00        0.00        0.00    0.00
23      Construction                              1           1          1         1         0.02        0.02        0.03    0.03
31-33   Manufacturing                           254          260        144       144        3.90        3.99        4.65    4.84
42-45   Wholesale and Retail Trade               46           48         37        35        0.71        0.74        1.19    1.18
48-49   Transportation and Warehousing           11          11          5         5         0.17        0.17       0.16     0.17
51      Information                             807          840        468       463       12.39       12.90       15.11   15.56
52      Finance and Insurance                  2,091        2,091      1,014      950       32.11       32.11       32.73   31.92
53      Real Estate Rental and Leasing           2            2          2         2         0.03        0.03       0.06     0.07
54-56   PMA                                     270          260        121       113       4.15         3.99        3.91    3.80
61      Educational Services                     4            4          3         3         0.06        0.06       0.10     0.10
62      Health Care and Social Assistance        0            1          0         0        0.00         0.02        0.00    0.00
71      Arts, Entertainment and Recreation       4            2          2         1        0.06         0.03        0.06    0.03
72      Accommodation and Food Services          4            3          1         2        0.06         0.05        0.03    0.07
81      Other Services                           6            2          0         0        0.09        0.03        0.00     0.00
92      Public Administration                     0           0          0         0         0.00        0.00        0.00    0.00
Other                                          3,004        2,979      1,296     1,253      46.15       45.76       41.83   42.10
Total                                          6,511        6,511      3,098     2,976      100          100         100     100

        The table reports the industry and firm distributions of fintech patent applications. We identify
        the innovator firms based on inventor and assignee's name obtained from patent application and
        assignment databases available at USPTO. We match these firms to BGT data to obtain their
        industry information. Panel A reports top 10 innovators based on USPTO patent application
        and assignment datasets and BGT dataset, and Panel B reports the industry distribution of
        fintech patent applications in 2003-2017. There are two types of innovators: inventors are the
        inventors of fintech patents and acquisition innovators are the assignees (but not the inventors)
        of fintech patents.




                                                         A.6
