                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CIVIL SERVICE REFORM AND ORGANIZATIONAL PRACTICES:
                      EVIDENCE FROM THE PENDLETON ACT

                                        Diana Moreira
                                        Santiago Pérez

                                     Working Paper 28665
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28665


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Luiza Aires and Lisa Pacheco for outstanding research assistance, and Enrique Pérez
for help with data collection. We have benefited from the comments of Oriana Bandiera, Brian
Beach, Assaf Bernstein, Sandra Black, Nicolás Caramp, Katherine Eriksson, James Feigenbaum,
Fred Finan, Robert Gibbons, Michela Giorcelli, Walker Hanlon, Daniel Honig, Rick Hornbeck,
Chris Meissner, Andrea Pozas-Loyo, Sarah Quincy, Arman Rezaee, Monica Singhal, Michael
Ting, Martin Williams, Chenzi Xu and Noam Yutchmann, as well by seminar participants at
Corporación Andina de Fomento, CEPR STEG Workshop, Cornell University, University of
California - Riverside, NEUDC, NBER Organizational Economics Fall 2020 Conference,
Columbia University, University of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy and Stanford
CASBS. We also benefited from funding from the UC Davis Small Grant in Aid of Research and
from the Michael Dearing Fellowship in support of Economic History Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Diana Moreira and Santiago Pérez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Civil Service Reform and Organizational Practices: Evidence from the Pendleton Act
Diana Moreira and Santiago Pérez
NBER Working Paper No. 28665
April 2021
JEL No. H83,N41

                                         ABSTRACT

Competitive exams are a standard method for selecting civil servants. Yet, evidence on the
effectiveness of such approach is mixed, and lack of personnel data limits our understanding of
the mechanisms underlying this varying success. We digitize personnel and financial data to
study the impacts of the 1883 Pendleton Act, which mandated exams for some employees in the
largest US customs-collection districts. The reform improved targeted employees' professional
background and reduced turnover. However, it did not increase cost-effectiveness in revenue
collection. An unintended consequence of the reform was to induce hiring in exempted positions,
provoking distortions in districts' personnel structure. Our results illustrate the importance of
considering the incentives of all involved parties when designing reforms.


Diana Moreira
University of California, Davis
One shields avenue
1140 SSH building
Davis, CA 95616
USA
dsmoreira@ucdavis.edu

Santiago Pérez
Department of Economics
University of California at Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
seperez@ucdavis.edu
1       Introduction
A professionalized bureaucracy is increasingly seen as a key determinant of states' ability to suc-
cessfully implement public policies (Rauch et al. , 1995; Finan et al. , 2017). Historically, the standard
recipe for achieving such professionalization has been the enactment of civil service reforms intro-
ducing recruitment through competitive exams and employee protection from political dismissals.
The promise of these reforms is that reducing politicians' control over hiring and firing decisions
would allow governments to attract and retain more qualified employees, which would, in turn,
lead to improvements in bureaucratic performance.
    Although civil service reforms have improved performance in some contexts (Rauch et al. ,
1995; Ornaghi, 2016; Xu, 2018), they appear to be no silver bullet: In an assessment of 71 reforms
funded by the World Bank, only 42% were rated as successful by an independent agency (Webb,
2008).1 Moreover, there has been a recent push in some developed countries toward greater flex-
ibility for hiring and removing public employees, often fueled by concerns that traditional civil
service rules might result in a bureaucracy that is unresponsive to citizens' needs.2 Ultimately,
whether reducing political control over the civil service actually enables governments to hire and
retain more qualified employees is an empirical question, and one for which there is remarkably
limited direct evidence. Opening the black box of the bureaucracy is a necessary step to under-
stand the mechanisms underlying civil service reforms' varying degrees of success.3
    This paper studies the impacts of the 1883 Pendleton Civil Service Reform act. This act, which
introduced competitive exams for the selection of certain federal employees, is widely regarded as
the first step towards a professionalized civil service in the US (Van Riper, 1976). Our analysis fo-
cuses on the consequences of the act for the functioning of the Customs Service, a key government
agency that, by the time of the reform, collected more than half of federal revenue. Although we
find that the reform indeed improved targeted employees' professional background and reduced
turnover, we show that these changes did not translate into higher cost-effectiveness in customs
revenue collection.
    Our analysis is based on newly digitized data on the personnel and finances of US customs-
collection districts. First, we digitized districts' personnel records spanning 1871 to 1893. These
records include employees' names, place of employment, position, and salary. We gathered ad-
    1
       These assessments were based on a comparison of the administrative capacities of countries before and after a
World Bank- funded reform of their civil service. Based on this evidence, Webb (2008) writes that "despite the continued
efforts and some modification of the approach, civil service reform has been relatively unsuccessful." Similarly, Repucci
(2014) writes that "most analysts would say that, on the whole, civil service reform has been relatively unsuccessful,
especially as compared with public financial management."
     2
       In the US, the Trump administration issued an executive order exempting certain positions from compet-
itive recruitment (https://www.forbes.com/sites/tomspiggle/2020/10/28/trumps-executive-order-would-diminish-
civil-service-employment-protections/?sh=4b012c067b3a). Ujhelyi (2014) describes recent state legislation in the US
limiting traditional civil service protections. In the UK, the 2012 "Civil Service Reform" plan included provisions to
increase flexibility in hiring (Office, 2012).
     3
       For example, reforms could fail to improve performance because they are non-binding, because politicians enact
compensatory policies, or simply because they do not work as intended even when correctly implemented. Our analysis
will shed light on some of the sources explaining reform success.



                                                           2
ditional information on the professional background of these employees by linking these data to
population censuses, using name-based matching techniques (Abramitzky et al. , 2019). Second,
we digitized yearly data on districts' expenses and receipts. Overall, these data enable us to in-
vestigate if the reform led to changes in employees' characteristics, as well as to changes in the
cost-effectiveness with which districts performed their main function, the collection of customs
revenue.
    Identifying the effects of civil service reforms is challenging because their adoption is usually
endogenous. For instance, these reforms might be more likely to be adopted when bureaucratic
performance is deteriorating. Our empirical setup enables us to circumvent this challenge. Specif-
ically, we exploit the fact that the requirement to hire some employees through examinations ap-
plied only to districts that had 50 or more employees by 1883. We use this feature of the reform in
a difference-in-differences design, comparing districts that were subject to the reform to those that
were not, before and after 1883. Our identification assumption is that, in the absence of the reform,
the outcomes of districts that were above the 50 employees cutoff would have evolved similarly
to the outcomes of those that were below. Consistent with this assumption, we show that the out-
comes of these two groups of districts evolved similarly prior to the reform. Moreover, there are
no differential changes in outcomes post-1883 when we estimate the "effects" of placebo reforms
that use alternative employee cutoffs.
    In the first part of the paper, we show that the reform worked as expected by its proponents
along two main dimensions. First, it led to a sizable (25%) reduction in employee turnover. This
reduction was larger for workers in positions subject to exams, as well as in years in which control
of the Federal administration changed party hands. Second, it led to an improvement in targeted
employees' professional background: New hires in positions requiring exams were 11 percentage
points less likely to report working in an unskilled occupation prior to joining the Customs Service,
and 9 percentage points more likely to report working in a professional one. Since exams were
aimed at testing practical knowledge relevant to positions in the Customs Service (rather than
formal academic training), we interpret these changes in occupational background as reflecting a
likely improvement in targeted employees' actual qualifications for their job.4 Indeed, a shortage
of workers with a professional background might have been a binding constraint in achieving cost-
effectiveness: Prior to the reform, there was a strong positive correlation between changes in the
share of employees with a professional background and changes in districts' revenue.
    Ten years after the reform, nearly 60% of employees in reformed districts had been appointed
through an exam. We next ask if this change led to increased cost-effectiveness in customs revenue
collection. We expect improvements in this regard through three main channels. First, limiting the
room for patronage could have curtailed personnel expenses by reducing the number of employees
hired solely to reward political loyalty. Second, by creating a separation between bureaucrats
    4
     The focus on practical skills was in contrast to other civil service reforms. For instance, Grindle (2012) argues that in
the UK exams were designed such that their contents would only be accessible to those with "access to elite educations
at Oxford and Cambridge". In contrast, in the US the Civil Service Commission "maintained that a common school
education was sufficient to pass examination" (Hoogenboom, 1959).



                                                              3
and politicians, the reform could have reduced corruption thereby increasing revenue.5 Third,
to the extent that the reform increased bureaucratic expertise, workers might have been better
equipped to interpret and enforce the customs laws. Indeed, the conventional wisdom among both
practitioners at the time and modern scholars is that the reform improved the overall efficiency of
the federal bureaucracy (Hoogenboom, 1959; Commission, 1897; Ujhelyi, 2014).6
    Surprisingly, however, we find that the reform had limited impacts on cost-effectiveness. First,
the reform did not lead to a reduction in total expenses (nor in districts' total number of employ-
ees): Our point estimates are close to zero and are statistically insignificant. Similarly, we find no
statistically significant evidence that the reform led to increased customs revenue. Indeed, when
estimating event-study specifications we see little evidence that would suggest an increase in rev-
enue over time: the post-reform estimated effects are sometimes positive and sometimes negative,
lacking a clear pattern. Finally, as expected given the limited effects on expenses and revenue, we
also see no indication of an improvement in our main measure of cost-effectiveness, the "revenue
per dollar spent".
    In the last part of the paper, we investigate possible reasons why the changes in personnel
outcomes did not appear to have translated into higher cost-effectiveness in revenue collection.
We first discuss the potential role played by the reform's incomplete scope across the layers of
the bureaucracy. As typical in civil service reforms, the Pendleton Act targeted only a subset of
employees. Specifically, it targeted employees in mid-tier positions but exempted those below a
salary threshold as well as districts' top managers (the "collectors of customs").7 This incomplete
scope could have been important for two reasons. First, by exempting employees below a salary
threshold, the reform created incentives to hire additional workers in low-paid positions. Indeed,
we document that the reform led to a near doubling in the share of workers in such positions.
This shift was likely pernicious for reformed districts' performance, both because it distorted their
personnel structure but also because low-paid employees had weaker professional backgrounds.
Second, to the extent that collectors mattered for districts' outcomes (which we show to be the case
by estimating "collector fixed effects" and exploiting collectors' deaths while in office as in Jones
& Olken, 2005 and Besley et al. , 2011), not changing their selection method also likely limited the
reform's ability to improve cost-effectiveness.
    Finally, we discuss three additional potential explanations for the lack of effects on costs effec-
tiveness. First, we find limited evidence that the lack of detectable effects on cost-effectiveness was
due to the reform spilling over to the non-reformed districts: proximity to a reformed district does
not predict either increases or decreases in revenue in the post-reform period. Second, the effect
of the reform on cost-effectiveness was limited even over a 20-year horizon. This result is con-
   5
      Indeed, meritocratic appointments are empirically associated with lower corruption (Rauch & Evans, 2000;
Dahlström et al. , 2012; Meyer-Sahling et al. , 2018).
    6
      For instance, Hoogenboom (1959) argues that "service in post offices and customhouses was vastly improved". We
provide additional quotes and background information in Section 2.3.
    7
      Dahlström et al. (2012) refers to the coexistence of patronage and merit hires after civil service reforms as "for-
mal political discretion". Subsequent reforms that were enacted at the state and local levels in the US also led to the
coexistence of merit and non-merit employees (Ujhelyi, 2014; Ornaghi, 2016).



                                                           4
trary to the hypothesis that to fully capitalize on the benefits of the reform required changes (for
instance, fully replacing employees hired through the old regime) that took longer than ten years
to implement. Third, we consider the possibility that, although employees hired through exams
might have been of better "quality", they might have also exerted less effort (or otherwise be less
responsive) than patronage hires. Although we do find some suggestive evidence consistent with
this explanation, we note that, unlike some modern civil service protections, the Pendleton Act did
not provide tenure to employees. Hence, the disincentive effects of the reform might have been
less prominent than in other contexts.
    Our data do not enable us to establish if the reform led to improvements in performance along
margins other than revenue per dollar spent.8 For instance, reformed districts might have be-
come faster at clearing imports or may have improved on how closely they followed the tariff
laws (which would not necessarily lead to higher revenue).9 Although "revenue per dollar spent"
does not incorporate all dimensions of performance, it does capture an important aspect of it in
the context of an agency whose primary goal was revenue collection. Indeed, this measure was
regularly discussed both in government publications and by proponents of civil service reform,
who blamed patronage for the high cost to collect in the US.10 Moreover, similar measures have
been used by other scholars studying the performance of government units in charge of revenue
collection (Khan et al. , 2016; Xu, 2018; Naritomi, 2019).
    This paper makes two main contributions. First, we contribute to the growing literature on the
personnel economics of the state (summarized in Finan et al. , 2017 and Pepinsky et al. , 2017). A
core focus of this literature has been on understanding the link between how civil servants are se-
lected and their subsequent performance on the job.11 Our results provide evidence on the effects
of competitive civil service exams, a selection method that has been a defining characteristic of
modern bureaucracies.12 In addition, we show that, by changing the incentives of appointing offi-
cers, policies shaping how some bureaucrats are selected might have additional indirect impacts on
the hierarchical and occupational structure of government organizations. This result complements
the findings of Ujhelyi (2014), who documents that state politicians in the US deviated spending
toward local governments after civil service reforms were passed at the state level.
    Second, we contribute to the literature on civil service reforms. In the US, state and local re-
forms reduced incumbent parties' chances of reelection (Folke et al. , 2011), reduced political bud-
get cycles (Bostashvili & Ujhelyi, 2019), and improved bureaucratic performance (Ornaghi, 2016;
    8
      In this analysis, we take the goal of collecting customs revenue as given. However, increasing such revenue might
have been negative for the US economy to the extent that it reduced international trade and increased domestic prices.
    9
      Although errors leading to higher import duties would have been more likely to be challenged by importers.
   10
      The Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury (US Congress, 1874-1893) include such measure in several of
their editions. Claims that the "cost to collect" was unusually high in the US were at the core of reformists' arguments.
   11
      See for instance Ashraf et al. (2020), Dal Bó et al. (2013), Deserranno (2019), Estrada (2019), Muñoz & Prem (2020),
Dahis et al. (2020), Voth & Xu (2019) and Weaver (2020). Our results are also related to the literature on tax enforcement
and administration, see for instance Jensen (2019), Khan et al. (2019), Khan et al. (2016), Gordon & Li (2009) and Slemrod
& Yitzhaki (2002).
   12
      Nearly 80% of countries use formal examinations to select some of their public employees (Teorell et al. , 2011).




                                                            5
Rauch et al. , 1995).13 Remarkably, however, there is very limited evidence on the effects of these
reforms on the main objects that they are intended to change: namely, the turnover rate and quali-
fications of bureaucrats ­and the existing evidence casts doubts on whether these reforms actually
generate these intended changes (Ornaghi, 2016).14 Our data allow us to investigate how these
reforms affect both the personnel outcomes and the overall organization and performance of re-
formed units. Doing so enables us to better unpack the factors mediating a reform's overall suc-
cess: the reform was binding and it partially succeeded in improving personnel outcomes, yet it
led to distortions in personnel structure by incentivizing hiring in exempted positions. Finally, we
focus on an important historical and policy context: the Pendleton Act is a landmark reform in US
history, and the ability to collect revenue is a key determinant of state capacity.15


2        Historical Background
2.1      The US Customs Service and Customs Revenue Collection

Revenue collected by the Customs Service accounted for more than half of federal revenue by
the early 1880s (Schmeckebier, 1924). Most of this revenue was due to the "collection of duties"
on imported goods. Hence, to understand why changing the method for selecting employees
could have led to improvements in the cost-effectiveness of the Customs Service, it is important
to understand the procedure for the collection of these duties in the late 19th-century. The key
takeaway of this subsection is that this process was complex and prone to errors and corruption.
    13
       A growing literature focuses on patronage in developing countries (see for instance Colonnelli et al. , 2020, Brassi-
olo et al. , 2020 and Akhtari et al. , 2019). Xu (2018) studies the link between patronage and the performance of British
Empire's colonial governors. Xu (2018) finds that being connected with the Secretary of State worsens governor's per-
formance but that this effect disappears after a reform that limited patronage. We depart from Xu (2018) in three main
ways. First, we study how a reform affected bureaucrats' selection, whereas Xu (2018) focuses on patronage's incentive
effects. Second, our analysis focuses on the reform's consequences for the overall personnel structure and organization
of reformed units, whereas Xu (2018)'s analysis of personnel outcomes focuses on top bureaucrats (that is, colonial gov-
ernors). Third, the reform in Xu (2018) did not establish exam-based recruitment, but rather that appointments would
need to be overseen by an independent board.
    14
       Ornaghi (2016) investigates the effects of merit systems on the performance of local police departments. She doc-
uments that cities with police departments under a merit system had less property crime than those under a spoils
system, but finds no effects on officers' qualifications or turnover. In the absence of police departments' personnel
records, Ornaghi (2016) uses the census to identify officers based on their city of residence, occupation and industry.
She proxies for officers' qualifications using the share of officers with a high-school degree and for turnover using the
share who did not have the same job five years prior. The greater granularity in our data might rationalize why we find
an effect on personnel outcomes while Ornaghi (2016) does not. First, similar to Ornaghi (2016), we find a limited effect
on employees' qualifications when focusing on the employee stock. However, we document an improvement in the
qualifications of employees hired after the reform in positions subject to exam (who would not have been easily identi-
fiable in the census). Second, we show that the reduction in turnover was driven by declines in political turnover ­that
is, when the federal government changed party hands­ with more limited effects in years without a political transition.
By contrast, Ornaghi (2016) does not investigate if the reforms led to reduced political turnover since she does not have
data on the outcomes of local elections. Finally, identifying police officers using the census introduces measurement er-
ror when assigning officers to a specific police department­which would attenuate the measured impacts of the reform.
For instance, an officer might reside in a city with a merit mandate but work in a nearby city without such mandate.
    15
       Our study provides the first quantitative evaluation of the impacts of the Pendleton Act which, as discussed in
Johnson & Libecap (1994a), had not yet been possible due to lack of adequate data. The Pendleton Act has attracted the
attention of scholars in economics, political science, history and public administration (see for instance Hoogenboom
(1968); Theriault (2003); Johnson & Libecap (1994a,b); Libecap & Johnson (2007); Van Riper (1976)).


                                                             6
      Upon arrival to a US port of entry, importers had to present a manifest detailing the articles
included in their shipment. After receiving this manifest, officers of the Customs Service had to
verify its accuracy and establish the duties payable on the shipment. In essence, the role of customs
officers was to guarantee that anyone bringing goods into the US passed through an authorized
port and paid duties according to law (Parrillo, 2013).
      Import duties depended on the physical quantities of imported products (for goods subject
to specific duties), their total monetary value (for those subject to ad-valorem duties), and their
product category. In the case of some goods subject to specific duties (for instance, a bushel of
wheat), accurately computing the amount owed by the importer simply required weighing the
shipment and applying the corresponding rate.16 In other cases, a detailed examination of the
imported goods' physical properties was required. For instance, determining the correct tariff on
raw sugar required a chemical test to determine its saccharine content (Schmeckebier, 1924).
      Goods subject to ad-valorem tariffs required an "appraisal" ­based on the price of similar goods
being commercialized in the exporting country­ of their monetary value. Hence, it was essen-
tial for appraisers to be aware of current market values so as to detect cases in which importers
attempted to undervalue the contents of a shipment. According to Parrillo (2013), however, em-
ployees hired through patronage "were typically ignorant, sometimes unable to read the foreign
languages in which invoices were written", leaving them poorly equipped to assess the accuracy
of importers' invoices.
      Finally, after being appraised, goods had to be "classified" in order to determine the rate of
duty to be levied on them. Since some articles were not explicitly enumerated in the law, the law
established that in those cases the rate would correspond to that of the "closest" listed article. This,
in turn, implied that importers had incentives to have their goods included in the classification
entailing the lowest duties. Schmeckebier (1924) provides several examples of the ambiguities in
classifying some goods, and of how importers could exploit such ambiguities.17


2.2     US Customs Service Before the Pendleton Act

Prior to the reform, hiring decisions in the Customs Service were ruled by the "spoils system." Un-
der this system, appointment to office was primarily based on political and personal connections
rather than on "fitness for office" (Ziparo, 2017). Political bosses used these positions to reward
supporters as well as to fuel political machines, often requiring a fraction of employees' salaries in
the form of "political assessments" (Hoogenboom, 1968).
      Proponents of civil service reform targeted the Customs Service as a prime example of the
dangers of patronage appointments.18 In 1877, Congress appointed a number of commissions to
   16
       Yet, Schmeckebier (1924) describes a scandal involving a sugar importer who had tampered with the scales so that
they would show less weight.
    17
       For instance, he describes the case of the importation of "pickle forks" which could plausibly have been assigned
to three different classes (each with a different duty payable).
    18
       Reformers blamed patronage for revenue losses: "How far are the losses of revenue due to the existing system of
appointment at the request of political leaders and associations throughout the country?" (Sparks et al. , 1878).



                                                           7
investigate the functioning of the major collection ports in the country. As part of its investiga-
tions, the Jay Commission (in charge of investigating the port of New York) compared the costs and
functioning of the US Customs Service to those in other countries (Treasury Department, 1877).
The Commission concluded that the "cost to collect one dollar" was much higher in the US than in
Germany, England or France, where customs' employees were appointed through civil service ex-
aminations. The Commission attributed this higher cost to overstaffing (which inflated operating
expenses), as well as to "errors and fraud" of patronage employees (which led to revenue losses of
up to 40%).19
      The Jay Commission report includes several examples that suggest high levels of inefficiency and
corruption in the New York collection district prior to the reform (Treasury Department, 1877). The
district was overstaffed, so that "many of the weighers and foremen rendered little, if any, service
to the government" and "some of the clerks performed no duties at all". Moreover, corruption led
to lower revenue since "the law against the acceptance of bribes was a dead letter." Employees'
carelessness further contributed to reduced revenue, as "some of the employees didn't have brains
enough to do the work, some were incapacitated by ignorance and some by carelessness and in-
difference."20 Similar examples can be found in the reports corresponding to the Philadelphia and
New Orleans districts, as well as in earlier investigations about New York.21


2.3     Civil Service Reform Movement and the Pendleton Act of 1883

While pressure for the adoption of a merit reform had been mounting since the 1860s (Hoogen-
boom, 1968), the exact timing of the passing of the Pendleton act is related to two events. First, in
July of 1881, President James A. Garfield was shot by a disappointed office-seeker (Garfield would
die by September). This assassination put civil service reform at the center of the political stage,
and provided reformists with a powerful example of the evils of the "spoils system." Only three
months after Garfield's death, Democratic senator George H. Pendleton reintroduced a civil ser-
vice reform bill. Second, Democrats took control of the House in 1882. Fearing that they would
lose the 1884 presidential election, Republicans supported the bill with the aim of protecting Re-
   19
       According to Rogers (1921), "the investigating commission appointed by President Grant in 1871 reported that the
loss was probably twenty-five percent. The New York Chamber of Commerce assured Sherman's commission that it had
risen to forty percent in 1877." Similarly, the 1866 "Report of the Special Commissioner of the Revenue" claimed that
$12 to $25 million in revenue were annually lost just in the New York district due to "frauds, waste and incompetency".
These losses were mostly driven by the "undervaluation of invoices" (Wells, 1866). For reference, the entire Customs
Service collected around 130 US$ million in 1866.
    20
       For instance, they described how "In fact, much of the weighable merchandise was not weighed at all. The Custom-
House employees either took their figures from the city weighers or copied off the foreign marks of weight found on
the packages." (Rogers, 1921)
    21
       The Philadelphia commission asserted that its workforce could "be somewhat reduced without injury to the ser-
vice." It also listed examples of corruption leading to lower cost-effectiveness "as practices of taking the time of the
Government for private business; of receiving presents of wines from the officers or agents of steamship lines; also
the practices of delegating the appointing power and of making appointments, on political grounds, without sufficient
assurance of the character and capacity of the appointee". The New Orleans commission similarly concluded, "the cus-
toms revenues at this port can be collected with a reduction of nearly 25 percent in the force employed". Finally, Wells
(1866) argued that a majority of customs employees in New York "have no special qualifications for their places, and
little knowledge of the law under which they discharge their duties."


                                                           8
publican officeholders from politically motivated dismissals. In January of 1883, President Chester
A. Arthur signed Pendleton's bill into law.22
    The act's main provision was to establish that employees in certain "classified" positions within
the federal administration would need to be selected through "open, competitive examinations"
(United States Civil Service Commission, 1883). Hence, after the passing of the act, applicants
to these classified positions were required to complete an exam, and only those who obtained a
passing grade were deemed eligible for appointment. On the opening of a vacancy, the "Examining
Board" in each collection district produced a list of the top four candidates (based on the exam
results) from which the appointing officer would need to choose.23
    Exams were aimed at testing practical knowledge relevant to an applicant's future position
rather than formal academic training. In addition, the act included a number of provisions in-
tended to ensure political neutrality in the appointment process. First, exam administration was
overseen by a bipartisan "Civil Service Commission". Second, the exams were to be graded anony-
mously.24 Third, exams could not include questions aimed at eliciting an applicant's political orien-
tation. Figure A2 shows an example question of the arithmetic exam for applicants to the position
of clerk.
    The "classified" (that is, subject to exams) Customs Service was initially restricted to collection
districts with at least 50 employees, and to positions earning $900 or more within these districts:
By 1883, 11 districts met this threshold.25 Despite some of these districts included both a "port
of entry" and "ports of delivery", the reform only applied to employees in the main port (that is,
the "port of entry") within each district.26 Figure 1 shows the location of districts' ports of entry,
distinguishing between those that correspond to a district that would become part of the classified
service by 1883 and those that would not.27 From 1883 to 1893, nearly 22,000 applicants completed
an exam to join the Customs Service, out of which about 2,800 had been appointed by 1893 (United
States Civil Service Commission, 1893, p.240). By 1893, nearly 60% of the workforce in classified
   22
      The law established that its main provision ­the requirement to appoint certain employees through competitive
exams­would start being enforced six months after the passage of the act.
   23
      This number was further reduced to three in March of 1888 (Commission, 1886, p.128).
   24
      In the Customs Service, these "examining boards" were appointed locally within each classified district.
   25
      These were New York, NY; Boston, MA; Philadelphia, PA; San Francisco, CA; Baltimore, MD; New Orleans, LA;
Chicago, IL; Burlington, VT; Portland, ME; Detroit, MI and Port Huron, MI. Districts that fell below 50 employees
after the reform was implemented had to nevertheless remain within the classified service. The law further divided
the classified civil service into the "Classified Departmental Service" for federal employees in DC, and the "Classified
Postal Service" for postal workers.
   26
      As described in Commission (1886), the classified Customs Service included the offices of the "Collectors of cus-
toms, naval officers, surveyors, and appraisers at the ports of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, New Orleans,
and San Francisco; collector of customs and appraiser at Chicago, and collector of customs at Portland, Me., Burlington,
Detroit, and Port Huron." Ports of delivery in which the surveyor acted as a collector ­which were allowed to collect
revenue­ functioned in practical terms as a separate district. In our baseline specification, these "ports of delivery" are
potentially included in the control group. In practice, however, all of them except Cincinnati and Saint Louis (that be-
long to the New Orleans' collection district) are dropped once we restrict the sample to ports with at least 10 employees.
All of our results are similar if we: (1) exclude these ports of delivery from the control group (Table B8), or (2) treat them
as part of the classified Customs Service (Table B7). This is not surprising because ports of delivery accounted for only
3% of total employment and 2% of total annual receipts.
   27
      Figure A1 shows a detailed map of these districts, together with a list of their associated ports of entry.



                                                              9
collection districts had been appointed through examinations.28
    Although it changed the method of appointment for some federal employees, it is important to
emphasize that the act did not grant tenure to these employees: classified workers remained open to
the possibility of removal as administrations changed (Johnson & Libecap, 1994a).29 Later reforms
(in particular, the 1912 Lloyd-La Follette Act) further increased the stability of federal government
employment by introducing the notion that employees could only be removed for "just causes"
(Johnson & Libecap, 1994a).30
    The conventional wisdom is that, although initially covering only a limited number of federal
civil service positions, the reform improved the efficiency of the federal bureaucracy in general
and of the Customs Service in particular.31 For instance, Hoogenboom (1959) argues that "service
in post offices and customhouses was vastly improved". Similarly, Johnson & Libecap (1994b) de-
scribe how the reform "improved the performance of federal workers in the positions that were
covered by the law" (although they acknowledge that these claims are based on limited quanti-
tative data). The annual reports of the Civil Service Commission (arguably, an interested party)
contain a number of accounts of customs collectors describing improvements in the functioning
of their agencies after the reform (see pages 32-39 in Commission (1884) and page 38 in Commis-
sion (1885)). Indeed, in its 15th report, the Commission claimed that the reform had led to a 25%
decline in the cost of collecting customs revenue, although the basis of this calculation is unclear
(Commission, 1897).32
   28
      Initially the act covered around 60% of all positions in the Customs Service: 75% of Customs Service employees
worked in a "classified" district, and within these districts 80% of employees worked in a non-exempted position. As
we explain in footnote 31 , the reform was initially much less comprehensive for the federal government as a whole.
   29
      "The power to remove for even the most partisan and selfish reasons remains unchanged" (United States Civil
Service Commission, 1883). The only exception is that employees could no longer be removed for refusing to perform a
political service or paying a political assessment, although this provision of the law applied to all positions, not just the
classified ones).
   30
      The reform did not regulate how promotion to a higher-paying occupation within the classified Customs Service
would be determined. However, it established that employees could not be promoted from a position outside the
classified service into a position subject to exams (see "Customs Rule V" in United States Civil Service Commission
(1893)). Similarly, the reform did not allow for transferring employees across districts unless the transfer occurred from
one classified district to another.
   31
      The limited initial coverage of the Pendleton Act is highlighted in the historical literature (see, for instance, Hoogen-
boom (1959)). Initially, the act covered approximately 10% of all federal civil service positions (although a higher share
within the Customs Service as described in footnote 28 ). A large share of the exempted positions corresponded to em-
ployees in the Postal Service. The act also authorized the President to extend the coverage of the classified service
through executive order.
   32
      The quote is as follows: "Officials in charge of collecting the customs duties of the Government have emphatically
stated that there has been a saving of about one-fourth in the cost of gathering this part of the public revenue." (Com-
mission, 1897). First, as we show below, there is no evidence of a reduction in expenses in our difference-in-differences
analysis. Moreover, a simple comparison of total expenses in 1897 and 1883 yields an actual nominal increase of 8%,
which corresponds to a higher increase in real terms since the US price level actually declined in this period. Indeed,
Fish (1905)'s analysis of the Pendleton Act states (regarding the savings claimed by the Civil Service Commission) that
"such definite statements, however, lack a firm basis."




                                                              10
3    Data
Our analysis combines newly digitized customs-collection districts' personnel and financial data.
In this section, we describe how we collected the data and provide summary statistics.
    Personnel Records. We digitized Customs Service personnel records using the Official Registers
of the United States (Department of the Interior, 1871-1893). This biennial publication contains the
name of every federal employee, their job title, state or country of birth, US state of appointment,
the location of their post, and their compensation. Our data include information on approximately
50,000 Customs Service employee-years, and span 1871 to 1893. Figure A3 shows an example page
listing employees of the New York collectors' office in 1883.
    We gathered additional information on the professional background of these employees by
linking the Registers to US population censuses. Specifically, we used name-based matching tech-
niques (Abramitzky et al. , 2019) to link each of the 1871-1893 Registers to the 1850, 1860, 1870 and
1880 censuses.33 Through this procedure, we obtained information on employees' occupations
prior to their employment in the federal government.34 While we provide further details on the
linking strategy and sensitivity checks in Online Appendix Section A.1, we note here that: (1) the
reform does not affect the likelihood of finding an individual in the census (Table A1), and (2) the
results that do not require the linked data are very similar when estimated in this linked sample
(Table A2).
    Financial Records. We collected yearly data on the annual receipts and expenses of each col-
lection district from 1874 to 1893.35 These data come from the Annual Report of the Secretary of the
Treasury on the State of the Finances (US Congress, 1874-1893). This report was published annually
and includes detailed information on the revenues and expenditures of the different branches of
the federal government, including the Customs Service.
    Our measure of expenses corresponds to the amount reported as "expenses for collecting the
revenue from customs" (US Congress, 1874-1893). Our baseline measure of total receipts corre-
sponds to the sum of receipts from "customs", "fines, penalties and forfeitures", "emolument
fees", "services of United States officers", "labor, drayage and storage" and "weighing fees".36
Finally, our baseline measure of cost-effectiveness is the ratio between total receipts and expenses.
    Summary Statistics. Table B1 shows some basic information on the personnel structure and
finances of collection districts. Panel (a) focuses on statistics computed at the collection-district
level (spanning 1874-1894), whereas Panel (b) focuses on the employee-level records (spanning
1871-1893). Revenue and expenses have a skewed distribution, with a few districts (in particular
   33
      The census of 1850 is the first to list persons individually, and there are no surviving individual-level records for
1890.
   34
      A challenge when linking US historical data is that women have historically changed their last name upon mar-
riage, making it hard to track them across different sources. This issue is less problematic in our context since very few
married women worked in 19th century US. Moreover, unlike the "Departmental Service" in DC (Ziparo, 2017), the
Customs Service employed extremely few women (United States Civil Service Commission, 1883).
   35
      In most cases, these data are reported at the collection-district level. The one exception is that we have separate
information on the receipts and expenses for those "ports of delivery" in which the surveyor acted as a collector.
   36
      Receipts from customs accounted for more than 95% of total receipts in our baseline sample of districts.


                                                            11
New York) accounting for most revenue and expenses.37 Similarly, the distribution of the number
of employees is skewed; the median non-classified district had about 10 employees, whereas the
median classified district had close to 200.


4        Empirical Strategy
In our main analysis, we estimate a difference-in-differences model comparing the outcomes of
classified and non-classified collection districts, before and after 1883. We estimate:


                            yct = c + t + Classif iedc × Af terct + Xct +                 ct                         (1)

     where yct is an outcome of district c in year t, c are district fixed effects, and t are year fixed
effects. When we focus on personnel outcomes, we estimate an analogous equation but using
employees as the unit of analysis.38 Our interaction of interest is Classif iedc × Af terct , which
takes a value of one in the post-reform period (that is, after 1883) for districts employing at least 50
employees by 1883.39 For some specifications, Xct includes census region-year fixed effects as well
as interactions between districts' number of employees in 1883 and year dummies. Throughout
the paper, we cluster standard errors at the district level.
     In addition to this baseline model, we estimate event-study specifications in which we allow
the difference between the control and treatment groups to vary over time. We estimate:

                                                1893
                           yct = c + t +                t Classif iedc × t + Xct +         ct                        (2)
                                               t=1874

where the t coefficients capture the differential evolution in outcomes in the classified and non-
classified districts during our sample period.
     A first concern with our strategy is that the 50 employees cutoff might have been chosen so as
to include or exclude certain districts. Similarly, districts might have manipulated their number
of employees in anticipation of the reform. There are three pieces of evidence that suggest that
this possibility is unlikely. First, there are no districts that, based on their number of employees
in 1879 (prior to the introduction of the bill), would have been part of the classified service but
which downsized their workforce in order to remain within the unclassified service. Moreover,
there is no evidence of districts manipulating the growth in their number of employees so as to
remain below 50 employees: there are no districts that would have been above this cutoff had their
employee numbers continued growing at the same rate after 1879 as they did from 1871 to 1879,
    37
      In a robustness check, we exclude the New York district from the analysis.
    38
      Our personnel results are nevertheless similar if we use data collapsed at the district-year level (Table B6).
   39
      The list of "classified" districts remained the same throughout our baseline analysis period (up to 1894). In 1894,
the classification was extended to include ports having as many as 20 employees. However, the cutoff was further
reduced in May of 1896 to districts having as many as five employees (Commission, 1897). After this extension, only
63 employees in the entire Customs Service remained outside of the classified service. Hence, these later expansions
are not useful to study the effects of the reform since by 1896 nearly all Customs Service's employees were within the
classified civil service.


                                                           12
but that ended up below 50 by 1883 (Panel (a) of Figure 2). Finally, Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows no
evidence of districts bunching right below the 50 employees cutoff in 1883.
      A second concern is that the outcomes in smaller districts could have been on a different trend
relative to those in the larger districts. We present a number of tests for the common trends as-
sumption. First, Table 1 reports the F-test p-values corresponding to the hypothesis that all of the
pre-1883 event-study coefficients from equation 2 are equal to zero. Each row corresponds to one
of our main outcomes, and each column corresponds to a different comparison group (based on a
district's number of employees in 1883). Starting from districts with ten employees or more (col-
umn 3), we do not reject the hypothesis that all pre-reform coefficients are zero for all outcomes.
With this in mind, we use districts with ten employees or more by 1883 as the main comparison
group in our analysis (but we note our results are similar when using alternative control groups
with fewer or more employees, see Table B2). In Section 5, we also present event-study figures for
each of the outcomes, providing graphical support for the common trends assumption.
      Finally, to further validate our empirical strategy, we estimate our baseline difference-in-differences
specification using alternative "placebo" cutoffs to determine whether a district would have been
classified, and find no effects of these placebo reforms (see Table B3). We discuss a number of
additional specifications and robustness checks at the end of Section 5.1.


5      Results
5.1     Personnel Outcomes

A standard argument in favor of limiting political influence over the bureaucracy is that doing so
will lead to improvements along three main dimensions: (1) reducing employee turnover, thus
facilitating the accumulation of bureaucratic expertise; (2) improving employee qualifications by
prioritizing skills over political connections; and (3) reducing patronage-related "excess" hiring,
thus deflating expenses. In this subsection, we investigate whether reformed districts improved
along the first two dimensions. We discuss if the reform reduced "excess hiring" in Section 6.
      Turnover. As discussed in Section 2, the reform did not provide tenure to civil servants but
rather just changed the appointment method in certain classified positions. Yet, limiting politi-
cians' discretion to hire might have removed an important incentive to remove employees in the
first place, thus potentially leading to lower turnover.40 To assess whether this was the case, we
estimate:


                     T urnoverict = c + t + Classif iedc × Af terct + Xict +                  ict                 (3)

where T urnoverict is an indicator that takes a value of one if employee i in district c who was listed
   40
      Indeed, the reports of the Civil Service Commission anticipated this possibility: "when a removal cannot be fol-
lowed by the appointment of a favorite pressing for the vacancy to be made, most of the temptations to make unjustifi-
able removals are themselves removed."




                                                         13
in year's t - 2 Register was no longer listed in year's t (Registers were collected every two years).41
    Table 2 shows that the average employee was less likely to leave (either through removal or
resignation) after the reform. The reduction in turnover is sizable: employees in reformed districts
were 12.6 percentage points less likely to be out of their job by the next Register, relative to a control
group mean of 47%.42 This finding implies that employees in reformed districts had a longer time
horizon over which to accumulate bureaucratic expertise.
    If the reduced turnover that we document was due to the reform, we should observe the
strongest responses among employees in positions not exempted from exams. Column 2 presents
evidence consistent with this prediction. In this column, we report the triple interaction between
working in a position subject to exams and working in a classified district in the post-reform pe-
riod. This interaction is negative and statistically significant: there is an additional 7 percentage
points decline in turnover among individuals in these positions. Interestingly, however, there is
also evidence of a decline in turnover even among workers in exempted positions.43
    Similarly, we should also see the largest declines in turnover in years in which there was a party
transition at the federal level. To test this hypothesis, we interact the Classif iedc indicator with
a variable that takes a value of one in 1887 (the first Register year after the presidency went from
Chester Arthur (R) to Grover Cleveland (D)) and in 1891 (the first after it went from Cleveland
(D) to Benjamin Harrison (R)). Column 3 of Table 2 shows that the declines in turnover are indeed
more pronounced in these years: the interaction term is negative and close to 18 percentage points.
In contrast, the main effect is close to zero and statistically insignificant, suggesting that the reform
did not significantly affect turnover in years with no party transitions. Figures 3 and 4 show a
similar pattern (that is, a large negative gap between the treatment and the control groups in 1887
and 1891) both in the raw data or when we implement an event-study regression.
    Employees' Professional Background. Classified districts had to hire some of their employ-
ees through open and competitive exams. We expect this change to lead to an improvement in
employees' professional background if, in the pre-reform period, districts traded-off expertise for
political loyalty when screening employees.44 Alternatively, if hiring individuals with inadequate
qualifications was costly for appointing officers, they might have placed a heavy emphasis on ex-
pertise even when hiring was discretionary (Brierley, 2019). Finally, the reform ­by potentially
increasing bureaucrats' job stability­might have increased the appeal of a career in government,
thus leading to an improvement in the applicant pool.
    To test if the reform led to improvements in employees' professional background, we use the
   41
      Since our personnel data starts in 1871, 1873 is the first year in which we observe if employees had left their job.
   42
      For comparison, the annual turnover rate in the US federal government was 16% in 2019
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.t16.htm.
   43
      The Civil Service Commission reports mention that some collectors avoided removing workers even if they worked
in positions exempted from exams, presumably due to concerns about employee morale: "The only exception to this
rule is that afforded by Collector Saltonstall, at Boston, who apparently refused to make removals in the excepted and
unclassified places of his office for reasons which would not warrant the removal of men from the classified places."
(United States Civil Service Commission, 1890)
   44
      For instance, Colonnelli et al. (2020) and Oliveros & Schuster (2018) find that politically-connected bureaucrats
tend to be less qualified.



                                                           14
data linking Customs Service personnel records to population censuses. Note that, since we only
observe previous occupations for those employees that we can successfully link to an adult obser-
vation in the census, the sample size is smaller than in the previous exercise. We estimate:


                           yict = c + t + Classif ied × Af terct + Xict +                ict                       (4)

where yict is a characteristic of employee i who worked in district c in year t. In cases in which we
link an employee to more than one census, we focus on the most recent census year (among those
prior to Register year t).
       In Panel (a) of Table 3, we focus on the probability that an employee was listed in the cen-
sus as having a professional occupation. Professional occupations are those with a value of less
than 100 in the 1950 Census Bureau occupational classification system. Examples of such occu-
pations include accountants, lawyers and teachers.45 Column 1 focuses on the stock of employees,
which reflects a combination of employees hired before and after the reform, in exempted and non-
exempted positions. In this case, we observe a small increase in the likelihood that an employee
would have previously held a professional occupation, which is not significant at the conventional
levels.
       In Column 2, we instead focus on the flow of newly hired employees. Here, we see a larger
increase of 6.4 percentage points in the likelihood of previously holding a professional occupa-
tion, which is significant at the 5% level. In Columns 3 and 4, we continue to focus on new hires
but further distinguish employees based on whether or not they were hired in positions that re-
quired an exam. Consistent with the exams helping select more qualified employees, we find the
strongest effects among newly hired employees in positions that were subject to exams (Column
4). Specifically, newly-appointed employees in non-exempted positions were 9 percentage points
more likely to have held a professional occupation. In contrast, we find a small and statistically
insignificant effect among those hired in exempted positions (Column 3).
       Panel (b) shows that the increase in the likelihood of hiring employees with a previous pro-
fessional occupation was driven by a decline in the likelihood of appointing employees who in
the census listed either none or an unskilled occupation.46 Similar to the pattern in Panel (a), we
find a relatively small decline in the share of such workers when focusing on the employee stock
(Column 1), but a larger decline when focusing on new hires in non-exempted positions (Column
4).
       Although we find improvements in the observed occupational background of workers, screen-
ing applicants through exams may have shaped recruits' occupational profile without necessarily
improving their actual qualifications for the job. For instance, exams might have favored younger
workers who were more familiar with test-taking. However, Columns 1 to 4 in Table B4 show
      45
      Unfortunately, US censuses prior to 1940 do not include information on individual income or years of schooling.
Hence, we cannot directly assess if the reform brought workers who were more highly educated or who earned more
prior to joining the Customs Service.
   46
      Unskilled occupations are those with a value of 700 or more in the 1950 Census Bureau occupational classification
system (for instance, laborers and janitors).



                                                          15
that the increases in the likelihood that employees would previously have held a professional oc-
cupation were not driven by changes in the age composition of the workforce, nor by changes in
workers' geographic origins or their racial mix. In this table, we estimate our baseline difference-
in-differences specification while including age, birthplace (state for natives and country for for-
eigners), or race fixed effects. Similarly, Columns 5 to 8 in this table show that the decline in the
likelihood of holding an unskilled or no occupation is similar regardless of whether or not we add
these fixed effects.
      Overall, these results suggest that the reform led to a professionalization of classified districts'
workforces; employees had stronger professional backgrounds to begin with, as well as a longer
time horizon over which to accumulate bureaucratic expertise.
      Robustness of Personnel Results. Online Appendix Section B.1 shows that our results on per-
sonnel outcomes are similar when we: (1) implement a randomization inference approach (Figure
B1), (2) exclude one classified district at a time (Figure B2), (3) use alternative control groups with
fewer or more than ten employees (Table B2), (4) control for census region-year fixed effects and/or
the interaction between districts' number of employees in 1883 and year dummies (Table B5), or (5)
estimate the effects of the reform using the district rather than the employee as the unit of analysis
(Table B6). Finally, we also show that there are no effects on personnel outcomes when we use
placebo cutoffs for the minimum number of employees (Table B3).


5.2     Cost-Effectiveness in Revenue Collection

As discussed in Section 2, proponents of civil service reform argued that the higher "cost to collect"
in the US relative to other countries was to a large extent explained by its lack of a workforce hired
on the basis of merit. In this subsection, we use the data on districts' receipts and expenses to
ask if the changes in personnel outcomes that we documented above translated into higher cost-
effectiveness in customs revenue collection.
      Figure 5 provides preliminary evidence suggesting that the reform did not lead to higher cost-
effectiveness. The figure shows average log expenses (Panel (a)), log receipts (Panel (b)) and log
receipts over expenses (Panel (c)) in classified and non-classified districts, from 1874 to 1893. Prior
to the reform, both expenses and receipts evolved in a parallel fashion in both groups of districts.
Moreover, the figure shows no clear trend break after 1883 neither with respect to expenses nor to
receipts.
      Table 4 confirms the pattern of limited effects of the reform on expenses and receipts. This table
shows the results of estimating equation 1 using the same outcome variables as in Figure 5. In the
even columns, we add region-year fixed effects to account for potential differential trends in eco-
nomic activity across broad US regions (which would have influenced revenue levels). Columns
1 and 2 show no statistically significant effect of the reform on expenses: the effect size is very
close to zero and statistically insignificant when we do not include region-time fixed effects, and
negative but also statistically insignificant when we include them. These estimates allow us to rule
out a reduction in expenses that was larger than 17%.


                                                    16
      In Columns 3 and 4, we show that the reform did not lead to a statistically significant increase
in total revenue. Specifically, the effect on revenue is small (0.025) and insignificant when not
including region-time fixed effects, and actually negative (but also statistically insignificant) when
including them. These point estimates enable us to rule out an increase in total revenue that was
higher than 21%.
      Moreover, not surprisingly given the lack of effects on expenses and receipts, we also see no ef-
fects of the reform on our main measure of cost-effectiveness, log receipts over expenses (Columns
5 and 6). Specifically, we find a small and positive point estimate (that is statistically insignificant)
when not including region-time fixed effects, and again a negative point estimate when we include
them.
      Figure 6 shows event-study estimates of the effect of the reform on each of these outcomes.
The event-study results confirm the pattern of limited effects documented above: regardless of
the outcome we consider, we find that none of the pre- or post-reform event-study coefficients are
statistically different from zero. Indeed, the event-study coefficients do not show a pattern that
would be consistent with a systematic improvement (nor with a deterioration) over time: they are
sometimes positive and sometimes negative, both in the pre- and post-reform periods. Consistent
with this result, Table B9 shows that we find similar effects if we estimate our baseline difference-
in-differences model while excluding the first five years of post-reform data (to allow for a longer
time horizon over which the reformed districts could have implemented changes).


6        Mechanisms
Employees in classified districts stayed longer in their jobs and had stronger professional back-
grounds. Yet, this professionalization did not translate into measurable improvements in customs
revenue collection cost-effectiveness. This is despite the fact that, prior to the reform, there was
a strong positive correlation between changes in districts' share of employees with a professional
occupation and receipts collected (Table B10).47 In this section, we discuss possible reasons for this
lack of improvement. While we find evidence that non-merit hires played a role, the support for
other explanations is more limited.


6.1      Fixed Middle, Broken Tails? The Role of Non-Merit Hires

Distortions in Districts' Personnel Structure. In classified districts, employees paid at a rate of
less than $900 a year were exempted from examinations and could be hired through traditional
patronage methods. To the extent that appointing officers wanted to retain hiring discretion, we
should observe an increase after the reform in the proportion of workers below this salary cut-
off. Indeed, the reports of the Civil Service Commission warned that using a salary-based rule to
    47
     In this table, we use the pre-reform data to estimate a regression in which the dependent variables are districts'
expenses, receipts and receipts over expenses, and the main independent variable of interest is the share of workers
with a professional occupation. The regressions further include district and year fixed effects.



                                                          17
determine which employees were subject to exams opened the room for this kind of distortion.48
    Figure 7 shows evidence consistent with this prediction. The figure shows the proportion of
employees making below $900 a year in classified and non-classified districts, before and after the
reform. Panel (a) focuses on the stock of employees, whereas Panel (b) focuses on new hires. From
this figure, it is evident that there was a sharp increase in the proportion of the employees below
the $900 threshold after 1883, and that this increase was particularly pronounced among new hires.
    Table 5 confirms that the reform led to a sharp increase in the share of workers in exempted
positions. Specifically, employees in reformed districts were 18 percentage points more likely to
work in an exempted position (26 percentage points among new hires). For comparison, in the pre-
reform period less than 15% of the employees in classified districts worked in positions that would
continue not requiring exams after 1883.49 Columns 3 to 6 further split exempted positions into
those reserved for political appointees (such as the collector) and their direct assistants, and those
exempted due to the $900 salary cutoff. The reform permitted only a limited number of political
appointees, but did not limit the number of employees that could earn less than $900.50 Indeed,
the increase in the overall share of employees in exempted positions came exclusively from an
increase in the proportion of employees below the $900 cutoff, with no change in the proportion of
those in other exempted positions. Figure 8 presents event-study estimates confirming the finding
of an increased proportion of the employee stock earning below the $900 cutoff after 1883.51
    Two pieces of evidence suggest that this distortion might have led to a worsening in the cost-
effectiveness of reformed districts' . First, Table B11 shows that the reform led to an actual reduction
in the number of employees in non-exempted positions. Column 1 focuses on the total number of
employees in a district, whereas Columns 2 and 3 distinguish between those in exempted and non-
exempted positions. Column 2 shows that classified districts ended up with fewer employees in
the more technical positions -such as clerks, examiners or inspectors- that were subject to exams,
a 20% reduction (p-value: 0.11). At the same time, classified districts experienced a large increase
in the number of workers in exempted positions, a 62% increase (p-value: 0.000) (Column 3). The
fact that the reform did not lead to an overall reduction in the number of employees is not entirely
surprising: districts' budget depended on an appropriation of Congress and the reform did not
   48
      "Turning to the custom-houses, the Commission is able to present much less satisfactory tables. The classification
of the Customs Service has always been very imperfect. It has been classified by salary rather than by employment,
and has been possible to take the employees out of the classified grades by lowering their salaries or by changing their
designations. Thus, at Burlington, Vt., at the beginning of the administration of the head of the office appointed by
President Cleveland there were twenty-one classified places subject to examination. At the time the rule concerning
excepted plans was changed in March, 1888, there were only three."(United States Civil Service Commission, 1890).
   49
      Since the reform reduced turnover of employees in non-exempted positions, the increase in the proportion of new
hires in exempted positions could be a mechanical consequence of this reduction. However, note that we also observe
an increase in the stock of employees in exempted positions. Similarly, the fact that there is an increase in the proportion
of workers making less than $900 among new hires suggests that the effects do not simply capture a reduction in the
salaries of existing employees.
   50
      Besides the collector, the following positions were filled by political appointees and their staff: deputy collectors;
cashier of the collector; assistant cashier of the collector; auditor of the collector; chief acting disbursing officer; deputy
naval officers; deputy surveyors; one private secretary or one confidential clerk.
   51
      Online Appendix Section B.1 shows the robustness of this result to a number of alternative specifications similar to
those described at the end of Section 5.1.



                                                              18
change this amount (Schmeckebier, 1924).52 Hence, districts could reallocate any savings stem-
ming from a reduction in patronage appointments in positions subject to exams toward patronage
appointments in exempted positions (rather than toward non-personnel expenses).53
    Second, the professional backgrounds of employees hired in positions paying less than $900
were, unsurprisingly, inferior to the backgrounds of those hired for higher-paying positions. Table
B12 shows the association between an indicator that takes a value of one if an employee earned less
than $900 and measures of professional background. Relative to other Customs Service employees,
workers in these positions were less likely to have been employed in a professional occupation,
more likely to have been employed in an unskilled one, and less likely to be literate.
    Finally, Table B13 provides direct evidence showing that this distortion dampened the effects of
the reform on personnel outcomes. In this table, we focus on the effects of the reform on turnover
(Columns 1 and 2) and on the likelihood that an employee would have held a professional occu-
pation (Columns 3 and 4). In the even columns, we add position fixed effects, where a position
is defined as the combination of an occupation and a salary (for instance, a $1200 clerk). When
we add position fixed effects (thus fixing the composition of workers across positions), we find a
larger reduction in turnover as well as a larger increase in the likelihood that an employee would
have held a professional occupation. These findings suggest that the improvements in personnel
outcomes would have been stronger had districts maintained the same occupational structure as
in the pre-reform period.
    The Role of Collectors. Each collection district was administered by a "collector of customs".
Collectors had significant prerogatives, including the ability to appoint and remove employees.54
However, the reform did not introduce any changes with respect to how collectors would be se-
lected and appointed: until the abolition of this position in 1965, collectors continued to be political
appointees, nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
    This continuity could be important in explaining the lack of improvements in cost-effectiveness.
First, the fact that collectors continued to be political appointees likely facilitated the distortions in
personnel structure documented above. Second, if a district's performance depended on the char-
acteristics of the person at the top of its hierarchy (as argued in the historical literature, see Parrillo,
2013; Rao, 2016), then the lack of change in how this person was selected might have limited the
reform's ability to improve cost-effectiveness. Indeed, civil service reforms in US states and cities
that maintained political discretion to select hierarchical positions of the bureaucracy have been
associated with more limited improvements than those which also reduced discretion at the top
(Ornaghi, 2016; Ujhelyi, 2014).
   52
      This appropriation was set in $5,500,000 in 1871. Districts were also allowed to keep the receipts that they collected
as "fines, penalties and forfeitures" and "labor, drayage and storage" for their operating expenses (Schmeckebier, 1924).
   53
      Due to the higher average wage of merit hires (as compared to patronage appointments), each merit hire could
be replaced by more than one low-paid non-merit hire without increasing total personnel expenses. Indeed, Column
1 in Table B11 shows that the point estimate on the total number of employees is positive (although statistically not
significant).
   54
      Collectors' functions included employing " proper persons as weighers, gaugers, measurers and inspectors at the
several ports within his district".



                                                            19
    Although we cannot directly test if the lack of improvement in cost-effectiveness can be partly
attributed to the lack of change in how collectors were selected, we can test a necessary condi-
tion for this hypothesis to be true: Namely, that the identity of collectors mattered for districts'
outcomes. We implement two empirical tests to assess whether this was the case.
    First, we follow Besley et al. (2011) and estimate "collector fixed-effects" from the following
regression:


                                              ylct = l + c + t +          lct                                          (5)

    where ylct is an outcome of district c in year t under the leadership of collector l. Testing the
hypothesis that collectors do not matter is equivalent to testing whether the collector fixed effects
l are all equal to zero.55 Note that identification of l is possible since the data include collectors
who served only for a subset of our sample years. Indeed, Panel (a) of Table 6 shows that the
collector-fixed effects are highly jointly significant, regardless of the outcome (receipts, expenses
or receipts over expenses) we consider. This finding suggests that collectors mattered for districts'
financial outcomes.56
    A concern with this test is that collectors' transitions might have been endogenous to districts'
outcomes. For instance, collectors might have been more likely to be replaced in districts in which
cost effectiveness was already deteriorating. To assess this possibility, we collected data from the
Journal of the Executive Proceedings of the United States Senate (Senate, 1875) on each nomination to
the position of collector of customs, and the reason why a new collector had to be nominated
(death, removal or suspension, resignation or end of term of the previous collector). Table B14
categorizes all transitions into each of these groups, whereas Figure B5 shows the number of each
such transitions per year. The single most common reason for transitions (38% of cases) is term
expiration. In particular, it was very likely that the terms of collectors would not be renewed
if their term expired after the presidency had changed party hands. The second most common
motive (32%) are cases in which the collector was removed or suspended. Similar to the case
of term expirations, most removals also occurred in years in which the presidency changed party
hands. This pattern suggests that both non-renewals and removals were mostly driven by political
considerations and party affinity rather than by district performance.
    To more formally evaluate the relationship between collectors' turnover and districts' financial
outcomes, we estimate:


                                      T ransitionct = l + c + yct-1 +              ct                                  (6)
   55
      In this analysis, we exclude year-districts in which the collector changed and hence there were multiple collectors
in a year; the "collector fixed effects" are not well defined in that case.
   56
      These results are related to the literature estimating "leader effects" in other contexts such as CEOs in the private
(Bertrand & Schoar, 2003) and public (Janke et al. , 2019) sectors, or sports coaches (Berry & Fowler, 2021). An important
difference between our findings and those in this literature is that we do not observe a given collector in multiple
districts. Hence, we are closer to Besley et al. (2011) who also identify leaders fixed effects out of leaders who stay in
power for a subset of all the years in a given country.




                                                            20
    where T ransitionct takes a value of one if there was a change in the identity of the collector
heading district c in year t, and yct-1 are the total receipts, total expenses or receipts over expenses
of district c in year t - 1. Consistent with the hypothesis that collectors' transitions were mostly
driven by political consideration rather than by districts' performance, Table B15 shows that there
is no correlation between past performance in revenue collection (or expenses) and the likelihood
that a collector would leave or be removed in the following year.
    Nonetheless, to further deal with the concern of endogenous collectors' transitions, we imple-
ment a second test in which we use deaths of collectors while in office as an exogenous shock to
leadership, the same strategy as in Jones & Olken (2005).57 This method compares average dis-
tricts' outcomes in the T years before and after a collector's death. The subindex z represents a
particular death:

                                                                   T
                                                              1
                                                  P REz =
                                                              T     yzt
                                                                     P RE
                                                                   t

                                                                   T
                                                              1
                                                P OSTz =
                                                              T     yzt
                                                                     P OST
                                                                   t

    Under the null hypothesis that the identity of collectors does not matter, there should not be
any systematic difference in districts' outcomes around a collector's death, hence:

                                                                            2 2i
                                            P OSTz - P REz  N (0,                )
                                                                             T
    where the variance  2i is district specific. To implement this test, we estimate:


                                    yct = c + t + z P REz + z P OSTz +                  ct                                 (7)

    where z indexes collectors' deaths. For each collector's death z , there is a separate set of P REz
and P OSTz dummies: P REz is a dummy equal to one in the T years prior to collector z 's death in
that collector's district, whereas P OSTz is a dummy equal to one in the T years after.58 We follow
Jones & Olken (2005) with respect to two choices. First, we do not include the year of the death itself
in neither the P RE nor the P OST dummies (so as to exclude any immediate effect of the potential
disruption caused by collectors' deaths). Second, we include all districts in the sample (even those
without collectors' deaths), as doing so helps estimate the other parameters in the regression (for
instance, the year fixed effects). Finally, since the death of collectors in office is a relatively rare
   57
      Figure A4 shows an example case in which a new collector ("T. Jefferson Jarrett") is nominated to replace a deceased
collector ("Peter F. Cogbill") in the Petersburgh, VA district.
   58
      In our baseline analysis, we use T = 3. We use a shorter time window before and after deaths than in Jones &
Olken (2005) because our sample spans a shorter time period. We also include deaths that are close to the limits of the
time window we study for which we observe less than three years before and after the death. In this case, the P RE
and P OST dummies are equal to one only for the minimum number of periods that we observe before and after. For
example, if a death occurred in 1875, each dummy takes a value of one for only one observation before and after. There
are only two deaths that fall under that category and the J-statistic continues to be statistically significant at the 5% level
for expenses if we exclude those observations.



                                                              21
event, we include all districts (regardless of their number of employees in 1883) and consider a
longer time period than in our baseline analysis (1874-1903 rather than 1874-1893).59 Our sample
includes a total of 33 deaths over a 30-year period.60
      This specification estimates separate coefficients z and z for each collector's death. We use
these estimates to construct a test of the equality of the mean of the outcome variables before and
after all collectors' deaths. Specifically, we use the Wald statistic:

                                                      1    Nz
                                                                  (^z - ^z )2
                                                J=
                                                      Nz             2 2i
                                                                                                    (8)
                                                           z =1       T

      where Nz is the total number of deaths that we include in our analysis. Under the null hypoth-
esis, Nz × J follows a 2
                       Nz .
      Panel (b) of Table 6 presents the Wald tests for each of our measures of expenses and receipts.
We reject the null hypothesis that collectors do not matter for expenses (p-value: 0.006). The
J-statistic is 1.76, implying that the variance of expenses is 76 percent higher around collectors'
deaths than what it would normally be. Similarly, the variance of receipts is also higher around
collectors' deaths, although the evidence that the identity of collectors matter in this case is weaker
statistically (p-value: 0.14). Finally, our main measure of performance (receipts over expenses) also
exhibits excess variability around collectors' deaths (p-value: 0.085).
      Overall, these findings suggest that the identity of collectors mattered for districts' outcomes.
Hence, the lack of change in collectors' selection method might have constituted a missed oppor-
tunity to improve districts' cost-effectiveness.


6.2     Was There a Trade-off Between "Expertise" and "Responsiveness"?

A standard argument in favor of traditional civil service protections is that, by increasing bu-
reaucrats' job stability, these protections can facilitate the accumulation of bureaucratic expertise.
However, reducing politicians' ability to remove public employees might also result in lower in-
centives, thus worsening performance. Moreover, bureaucrats selected through exams might be
less likely to be politically aligned, also leading to a lowering of effort. Depending on which of
these two forces prevail (increased expertise or lower responsiveness), the reform has ambiguous
implications for employees' performance.
      In practice, however, we expect the responsiveness channel to be less relevant in this context
than in other civil service reforms. As discussed in Section 2, the reform did not eliminate the possi-
bility that employees would be removed when administrations changed (or at any time). Indeed,
employees remained to be employed "at-will", implying that they could be removed without hav-
ing to establish just cause. Hence, the reform did not eliminate the incentive to perform to avoid
being terminated.
  59
       In Section 6.4, we use these data to investigate longer-term consequences of the reform.
  60
       As a comparison Jones & Olken (2005) had 57 deaths in a 40-year period.




                                                             22
      However, it is possible that merit hires might have exercised less effort as a result of a potential
misalignment between their preferences and politicians' goals (despite there being some residual
discretion for selecting the most aligned employee among the top three or four highest-scoring
candidates).61 Empirically testing if this was the case is challenging since we cannot directly ob-
serve an individual's effort on the job. Nonetheless, assuming there were reduced incentives to
perform, reduced effort should be most noticeable where employees enjoyed greater discretion.
Moreover, we should also observe the strongest responses where the misalignment between the
preferences of bureaucrats and politicians was potentially more costly for politicians.
      With this in mind, we investigate whether the reform led to changes in the total revenue col-
lected from "fines, penalties and forfeitures" and "labor, drayage and storage".62 There are two
reasons why focusing on such revenue is a useful test of this hypothesis. First, the collection of
fines was likely more discretionary than the collection of other sources of customs revenue. For
instance, Parrillo (2013) describes how, during the 1860s, a change in the monetary incentives for
imposing fines led to a nearly seven-fold increase in revenue from fines. Second, districts were
allowed to keep the revenue that they collected from both of these sources to finance their operat-
ing expenses (Schmeckebier, 1924). Hence, politically aligned bureaucrats would have likely put
higher effort in collecting such revenue.
      Table B16 shows that the reform did not lead to statistically significant decreases in the amount
of revenue collected from these sources. Moreover, although the point estimates are in all cases
negative (which would be consistent with the hypothesis of reduced bureaucratic responsiveness),
there is limited graphical evidence that would suggest a more pronounced relative decline in clas-
sified districts after 1883 (Figures B3 and B4). Overall, we find limited evidence in favor of the
hypothesis that the reform led to reduced bureaucratic effort.


6.3     Spillovers to Non-Classified Districts

One channel through which the reform might have affected districts' outcomes is by causing a di-
version of trade away (or into) the classified districts. On the one hand, if the reform reduced "col-
lusive" corruption, merchants willing to engage in corrupt behavior so as to reduce their tariff costs
might have avoided the classified districts. On the other hand, if the reform led to reduced "co-
ercive" corruption (or greater efficiency and speed in processing imports), then merchants might
have diverted their business into the classified districts (Sequeira & Djankov, 2014).63 By a simi-
lar logic, the reform might also have affected personnel outcomes in non-classified districts. For
   61
      Existing evidence from the British empire actually suggests the opposite effect: favored bureaucrats exhibited lower
performance when socially connected with their boss (Xu, 2018).
   62
      "Drayage" fees were collected by customs officers as charges for the transfers of packages from a wharf to apprais-
ers' stores. "Storage" fees were collected in compensation for goods for which no import or export duties had been paid
and which had to be stored prior to entering the country.
   63
      Sequeira & Djankov (2014) define "collusive" corruption as that which "occurs when public officials and private
agents collude to share rents generated by the illicit transaction, thus reducing firm-level trade costs" and "coercive"
corruption as that which "takes place when a public bureaucrat coerces a private agent into paying an additional fee
above the official price of the clearing service, which increases firm-level trade costs."



                                                           23
instance, if workers who could not be hired for patronage jobs in classified districts were instead
hired by the non-classified ones.
      To test this possibility, we analyze whether proximity to a classified district's port of entry
led to different outcomes in the pre- and post-reform periods. Intuitively, if the reform led to
a diversion of merchants away from classified districts, we should observe that being close to
a classified district leads to higher receipts in the post-reform period. Alternatively, if the reform
made classified districts more attractive for merchants, then proximity to a classified district should
lead to lower receipts after 1883.
      Figure B6 shows little evidence that the reform led to any diversion away or into the classified
districts. The figure (which uses the sample of non-classified districts) shows the association be-
tween a district's distance to the closest classified district and its total revenue, before and after the
reform. The figure shows that there is little correlation between proximity to a classified district
and receipts in the pre-reform period and, more importantly, that this correlation does not seem to
change after the reform. To more formally test for the presence of spillovers, we estimate:


                 yct = c + t +  log(Distance to N earest Classif ied)c × Af terct +                   ct              (9)

      where yct is an outcome of district c in year t, and Distance to N earest Classif iedc is the phys-
ical distance of district c to the closest classified district's port of entry.
      Table B17 shows no evidence that would suggest spillovers of the reform toward non-classified
districts: proximity to a classified district does not predict either decreases or increases in receipts
after the reform. Similarly, Table B18 shows no spillover effects with respect to our main personnel
outcomes.
      Finally, as an alternative approach to assess the role of spillovers, we estimate our baseline
difference-in-differences model while excluding from the sample those non-classified districts that
were in close proximity to a classified district (and hence were more likely to be affected by such
spillovers) from the sample. Table B19 shows that excluding districts within a radius of 50, 100
or 200 miles from a classified district does not affect our conclusion of the reform having limited
effects on cost-effectiveness.


6.4     Adjustment Costs

A final possibility is that the reform did not lead to improvements in cost-effectiveness in its first
ten years because reaping its benefits required changes that took longer to implement (for instance,
fully replacing the employees who had been hired prior to the reform). To test this possibility,
we use data on receipts and expenses that span a longer time period (from 1874 to 1903 rather
than from 1874 to 1893).64 Yet, using this extended sample we continue to find no evidence of an
   64
     We do not use this longer time period in our main analysis because, as discussed in Section 2, in 1896 the classified
Customs Service was further expanded to include districts with five employees or more, after which only 63 employees
in the entire US Customs Service remained outside of the classified service. Hence, when using this expanded sample
we lack a clearly defined "control group" post-1896.



                                                           24
improvement in cost-effectiveness; if anything, the point estimates become smaller (Table B20).


7    Conclusions
Despite several attempts at reform, a well-functioning civil service remains an elusive goal for
many developing countries (Schuster, 2017).65 The historical experience of the US in its transition
toward a professionalized bureaucracy offers a window into some of the challenges involved in
these reforms. The US experience is particularly relevant from a development perspective, as it
illustrates these challenges in a context where party patronage was "fully embedded in political
reality" (Grindle, 2012).
    This paper focused on the Pendleton Act, a milestone legislation that marked the emergence
of a modern US civil service. Specifically, our analysis studied the consequences of the act for the
functioning of the Customs Service, a key government agency in charge of the collection of cus-
toms revenue ­the main source of federal revenue in late 19th century US. Our empirical strategy
exploited the fact that the reform mandated exam-based hiring only in collection districts with 50
or more employees, enabling us to compare districts above and below such threshold before and
after the reform. We find that the reform worked as its proponents expected in improving targeted
employees' professional background and reducing turnover. However, there is limited evidence
that it increased cost-effectiveness in customs revenue collection. Moreover, the reform had the
unintended consequence of inducing districts to distort their personnel structure so as to retain
discretion in hiring.
    What are the broader implications of these findings? As governments attempt to improve state
capabilities, the ability to select and retain qualified candidates remains a central concern. To that
end, several governments around the world have passed reforms mandating employee recruit-
ment through competitive exams. Our results show that even a parsimonious reform that just
changed employees' selection method without granting them tenure improved workers' observed
qualifications and reduced turnover. However, our findings also provide a "cautionary tale" on
the effectiveness and design of these reforms. First, even if it improves bureaucrats' professional
background and reduces turnover, selecting employees through competitive exams might not by
itself lead to rapid improvements in government effectiveness. Second, our results illustrate the
importance of considering the incentives of all involved parties when designing reforms. Although
the distortions in personnel structure induced by the reform were perhaps not intended, they were
within the "rules of the game". Hence, actors who lost with the reform or disagreed with its ob-
jectives were able to take actions against the "spirit" of the reform without actually disobeying
its stated rules. Either reformists should internalize the (unintended) organizational changes that
    65
       Schuster (2017) shows that there is little association between the existence of a law mandating merit-based hiring in
the public sector and survey responses regarding whether hiring in the public sector is actually meritocratic. Moreover,
despite substantial heterogeneity in bureaucratic performance across countries, "meritocratic" civil services are, at least
in theory, the norm: out of 117 countries with available data, 94 had laws establishing merit-based hiring in the public
sector by 2015.



                                                            25
the reform might promote ­parallel to how "gaming-the-system" can become an integral part of
organizations that implement pay-for-performance contracts (Kerr, 1975; Holmstrom & Milgrom,
1991)­ or, to the extent possible, limiting the room for such actions should be built-in into reform
design.




                                                26
References
A BRAMITZKY, R AN , B OUSTAN , L EAH P LATT, E RIKSSON , K ATHERINE , F EIGENBAUM , J AMES J., &
  P ÉREZ , S ANTIAGO. 2019. Automated Linking of Historical Data. Tech. rept. NBER WP 25825.

A KHTARI , M ITRA , M OREIRA , D IANA , & T RUCCO , L AURA. 2019. Political Turnover, Bureaucratic
  Turnover and The Quality of Public Services.

A SHRAF, N AVA , B ANDIERA , O RIANA , D AVENPORT, E DWARD , & L EE , S COTT S. 2020. Losing
  prosociality in the quest for talent? Sorting, selection, and productivity in the delivery of public
  services. American Economic Review, 110(5), 1355­94.

B ERRY, C HRISTOPHER R, & F OWLER , A NTHONY. 2021. Leadership or luck? Randomization infer-
  ence for leader effects in politics, business, and sports. Science advances, 7(4), eabe3404.

B ERTRAND , M ARIANNE , & S CHOAR , A NTOINETTE. 2003. Managing with style: The effect of
  managers on firm policies. The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4), 1169­1208.

B ESLEY, T IMOTHY, M ONTALVO , J OSE G, & R EYNAL -Q UEROL , M ARTA. 2011. Do educated leaders
  matter? The Economic Journal, 121(554), F205­227.

B OSTASHVILI , D., & U JHELYI , G ERGELY. 2019. Political Budget Cycles and the Civil Service: Evi-
  dence from Highway Spending in US States. Journal of Public Economics, 175(C), 17­28.

B RASSIOLO , PABLO , E STRADA , R ICARDO , & FAJARDO , G USTAVO. 2020. My (Running) Mate, the
  Mayor: Political Ties and Access to Public Jobs in Ecuador.

B RIERLEY, S ARAH. 2019. Combining patronage and merit in public sector recruitment. Journal of
  Politics.

C OLONNELLI , E MANUELE , T ESO , E DOARDO , & P REM , M OUNU. 2020. Patronage and Selection in
  Public Sector Organizations. American Economic Review, 110(10), 3071­99.

C OMMISSION , U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE. 1884. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

C OMMISSION , U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE. 1885. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

C OMMISSION , U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE. 1886. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

C OMMISSION , U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE. 1897. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

D AHIS , R ICARDO , S CHIAVON , L AURA , & S COT, T HIAGO. 2020. Selecting Top Bureaucrats: Ad-
  mission Exams and Performance in Brazil.

                                                  27
D AHLSTRÖM , C ARL , L APUENTE , V ICTOR , & T EORELL , J AN. 2012. The merit of meritocratization:
  Politics, bureaucracy, and the institutional deterrents of corruption. Political Research Quarterly,
  65(3), 656­668.

D AL B Ó , E RNESTO , F INAN , F REDERICO , & R OSSI , M ARTÍN A. 2013. Strengthening state capa-
  bilities: The role of financial incentives in the call to public service. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 128(3), 1169­1218.

D EPARTMENT    OF THE I NTERIOR .   1871-1893. Official Register of the United States. US Government
  Printing Office.

D ESERRANNO , E RIKA. 2019. Financial incentives as signals: experimental evidence from the re-
  cruitment of village promoters in Uganda. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(1),
  277­317.

E STRADA , R ICARDO. 2019. Rules versus discretion in public service: Teacher hiring in Mexico.
  Journal of Labor Economics, 37(2), 545­579.

F INAN , F REDERICO , O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A, & PANDE , R OHINI. 2017. The personnel economics of
  the developing state. Pages 467­514 of: Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, vol. 2. Elsevier.

F ISH , C ARL R USSELL. 1905. The civil service and the patronage. Vol. 11. Longmans, Green, and
  Company.

F OLKE , O LLE , H IRANO , S HIGEO , & S NYDER , J AMES M. 2011. Patronage and elections in US states.
  American Political Science Review, 105(3), 567­585.

G ORDON , R OGER , & L I , W EI. 2009. Tax Structures in Developing Countries: Many Puzzles and a
  Possible Explanation. Journal of Public Economics, 93(7-8), 855­66.

G RINDLE , M ERILEE S. 2012. Jobs for the Boys. Harvard University Press.

H OLMSTROM , B ENGT, & M ILGROM , PAUL. 1991. Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive
  contracts, asset ownership, and job design. JL Econ. & Org., 7, 24.

H OOGENBOOM , A RI. 1959. The Pendleton Act and the civil service. The American Historical Review,
  64(2), 301­318.

H OOGENBOOM , A RI A RTHUR. 1968. Outlawing the spoils: a history of the civil service reform movement,
  1865-1883. Vol. 50. University of Illinois Press.

J ANKE , K ATHARINA , P ROPPER , C AROL , & S ADUN , R AFFAELLA. 2019. The impact of ceos in the
  public sector: Evidence from the english nhs. Tech. rept. National Bureau of Economic Research.

J ENSEN , A NDERS. 2019. Employment structure and the rise of the modern tax system. Tech. rept.
  National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                                  28
J OHNSON , R ONALD N, & L IBECAP, G ARY D. 1994a. Patronage to merit and control of the federal
  government labor force. Explorations in Economic History, 31(1), 91­119.

J OHNSON , R ONALD N, & L IBECAP, G ARY D. 1994b. The" Problem of Bureaucracy". Pages 1­11 of:
  The federal civil service system and the problem of bureaucracy. University of Chicago Press.

J ONES , B ENJAMIN F, & O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A. 2005. Do leaders matter? National leadership and
  growth since World War II. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 835­864.

K ERR , S TEVEN. 1975. On the folly of rewarding A, while hoping for B. Academy of Management
  journal, 18(4), 769­783.

K HAN , A DNAN Q, K HWAJA , A SIM I, & O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A. 2016. Tax farming redux: Experi-
  mental evidence on performance pay for tax collectors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(1),
  219­271.

K HAN , A DNAN Q., K HWAJA , A SIM I JAZ , & O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A. 2019. Making Moves Mat-
  ter: Experimental Evidence on Incentivizing Bureaucrats through Performance-Based Postings.
  American Economic Review, 109, 237­270.

L IBECAP, G ARY D, & J OHNSON , R ONALD N. 2007. The Federal Civil Service System and the Problem
  of Bureaucracy: The Economics and Politics of Institutional Change. University of Chicago Press.

M EYER -S AHLING , J AN -H INRIK , M IKKELSEN , K IM S ASS , & S CHUSTER , C HRISTIAN. 2018. Civil
  service management and corruption: What we know and what we don't. Public Administration,
  96(2), 276­285.

M UÑOZ , PABLO , & P REM , M OUNU. 2020. Managers' Productivity and Labor Market: Evidence
  from School Principals. Documentos de Trabajo.

N ARITOMI , J OANA. 2019. Consumers as tax auditors. American Economic Review, 109(9), 3031­72.

O FFICE , C ABINET. 2012. Civil service reform plan.

O LIVEROS , V IRGINIA , & S CHUSTER , C HRISTIAN. 2018. Merit, tenure, and bureaucratic behavior:
  Evidence from a conjoint experiment in the Dominican Republic. Comparative Political Studies,
  51(6), 759­792.

O RNAGHI , A RIANNA. 2016. Civil service reforms: Evidence from US police departments. Job
  Market Paper.

PARRILLO , N ICHOLAS R. 2013. Against the Profit Motive: The Salary Revolution in American Govern-
  ment, 1780-1940. Yale University Press.

P EPINSKY, T HOMAS B., P IERSKALLA , J AN H., & S ACKS , A UDREY. 2017. Bureaucracy and Service
  Delivery. Annual Review of Political Science, 20(1), 249­268.


                                                  29
R AO , G AUTHAM. 2016. National duties: custom houses and the making of the American state. University
  of Chicago Press.

R AUCH , J AMES E, & E VANS , P ETER B. 2000. Bureaucratic structure and bureaucratic performance
  in less developed countries. Journal of public economics, 75(1), 49­71.

R AUCH , J AMES E, et al. . 1995. Bureaucracy, Infrastructure, and Economic Growth: Evidence from
  US Cities during the Progressive Era. American Economic Review, 85(4), 968­979.

R EPUCCI , S ARAH. 2014. Designing effective civil service reform lessons from past experience.
  Public Administration and Development, 34(3), 207­218.

R OGERS , E MMA. 1921. Chester A. Arthur: Man and President. University of Wisconsin­Madison.

S CHMECKEBIER , L AURENCE F REDERICK. 1924. The Customs Service: Its History, Activities and Orga-
  nization. Johns Hopkins Press.

S CHUSTER , C HRISTIAN. 2017. Legal reform need not come first: Merit-based civil service manage-
  ment in law and practice. Public Administration, 95(3), 571­588.

S ENATE , U NITED S TATES . 1875. Journal of the Executive Proceedings of the Senate of the United States
  of America. Green.

S EQUEIRA , S ANDRA , & D JANKOV, S IMEON. 2014. Corruption and firm behavior: Evidence from
  African ports. Journal of International Economics, 94(2), 277­294.

S LEMROD , J OEL , & Y ITZHAKI , S HLOMO. 2002. Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration. Pages
  1423­70 of: Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 3. Elsevier.

S PARKS , J., E VERETT, E., L OWELL , J.R., & L ODGE , H.C. 1878. The North American Review. Ameri-
  can periodical series, 1800-1850, no. v. 127. O. Everett.

T EORELL , J AN , D AHLSTRÖM , C ARL , & D AHLBERG , S TEFAN. 2011. The QoG expert survey dataset.
  Available at SSRN 3569575.

T HERIAULT, S EAN M. 2003. Patronage, the Pendleton Act, and the Power of the People. The Journal
  of Politics, 65(1), 50­68.

T REASURY D EPARTMENT. 1877. Commissions to Examine Certain Custom-houses of the United States.
  Letter from the Secretary of the Treasury, Transmitting, the Report of Certain Commissioners Appointed to
  Examine Custom-houses, and Recommending Appropriations for Their Pay. October 25, 1877. ­ Referred
  to the Committee of Ways and Means and Ordered to be Printed. Ex. doc.

U JHELYI , G ERGELY. 2014. Civil service rules and policy choices: evidence from US state govern-
  ments. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2), 338­80.



                                                    30
U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE C OMMISSION. 1883. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE C OMMISSION. 1890. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

U NITED S TATES C IVIL S ERVICE C OMMISSION. 1893. Report of the United States Civil-Service Com-
  mission. US Government Printing Office.

US C ONGRESS. 1874-1893. Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the
  Finances.

VAN R IPER , PAUL P. 1976. History of the United States civil service. Greenwood Press.

V OTH , H ANS -J OACHIM , & X U , G UO. 2019. Patronage for Productivity: Selection and Performance
  in the Age of Sail.

W EAVER , J EFFREY. 2020. Jobs for sale: Corruption and misallocation in hiring. Available at SSRN
  3590721.

W EBB , S TEVEN B ENJAMIN. 2008. Public sector reform: What works and why? An IEG evaluation of
  World Bank support. The World Bank.

W ELLS , D AVID A MES. 1866. Report of the Special Commissioner of the Revenue. Making of America.

X U , G UO. 2018. The costs of patronage: Evidence from the british empire. American Economic
  Review, 108(11), 3170­98.

Z IPARO , J ESSICA. 2017. This Grand Experiment: When Women Entered the Federal Workforce in Civil
  War­Era Washington. UNC Press Books.




                                                 31
Figures

                              F IGURE 1: L OCATION OF US P ORTS OF E NTRY




Notes: This map shows the location of customs collection districts "ports of entry", distinguishing between those that
correspond to districts that were required to hire though examinations after 1883 ("classified") and those that were not
("non-classified").




                                                          32
         F IGURE 2: N O E VIDENCE OF M ANIPULATION OF 1883 N UMBER OF E MPLOYEES

                      ( A ) P REDICTED VERSUS ACTUAL NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN 1883


               Predicted 100
                            90
                            80
                            70
                            60
                            50
                            40
                            30
                            20
                            10
                              0
                                  0       10     20     30     40    50    60     70      80      90   100
                                                                    Actual

                                                Non-classified District     Classified District


                         ( B ) D ISTRIBUTION OF THE NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN 1883




               Frequency 55
                         50
                         45
                         40
                         35
                         30
                         25
                         20
                         15
                         10
                          5
                          0
                                      0    10     20    30   40    50    60     70        80      90   100
                                                       Number of employees in 1883



Notes: Panel (a) shows the actual (x-axis) and predicted (y-axis) number of employees of each US customs collection
district in 1883. The predicted number of employees is computed by extrapolating a district's number of employees in
1879 based on its observed growth rate from 1871-1879. The figure shows that there are no districts that were predicted
to be above the 50 employees threshold by 1883, but that ended up below it. Panel (b) shows the empirical distribution of
the number of employees across districts in 1883. The vertical dashed line corresponds to the 50 employees cutoff above
which districts were required to hire using exams. The histogram is restricted to districts with at most 100 employees in
1883 so as to more easily visualize the distribution around the cutoff. Districts are grouped in bins of 5 employees (1-5,
6-10, etc.).

                                                             33
                                  F IGURE 3: P ROBABILITY OF T URNOVER




          .8




          .6                                                                             Harrison (R)
                                                                        Cleveland (D)
                                                  Pendleton Act


          .4




          .2
                   1873 1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                            Year

                                    Non-classified District            Classified District



Notes: The y-axis shows the proportion of employees listed in the "Official Register" of year t - 2 as working in district
c who were no longer listed in year's t. The dashed vertical lines correspond to years in which the Presidency went
from a Republican to a Democrat or vice versa. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883.




                                                           34
                         F IGURE 4: P ROBABILITY OF T URNOVER , E VENT-S TUDY




                       .2


                        0


                      -.2


                      -.4


                      -.6
                         1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                                Year




Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if employee i in district c who is listed in the
"Official Register" of year t - 2 as working in district c is no longer listed in year t (the Registers were published every
two years). The figure shows the estimated coefficients corresponding to an interaction between a "Classified" indicator
and year dummies. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors clustered at
the district level.




                                                            35
                         F IGURE 5: AVERAGE E XPENSES AND R ECEIPTS , 1874-1893


                   (A)   LOG (E XPENSES )                                                      ( B ) LOG (R ECEIPTS )

   13
                                                                             15



   12                                                                        14



   11                                                                        13



                                                                             12
   10



                                                                             11
    9
    1874 1876 1878 1880 1882 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892 1894                    1874 1876 1878 1880 1882 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892 1894

                     Non-classified         Classified                                          Non-classified   Classified

                                                   (C)   LOG (R ECEIPTS /E XPENSES )

                                       3



                                      2.5



                                       2



                                      1.5



                                       1


                                        1874 1876 1878 1880 1882 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892 1894

                                                            Non-classified        Classified



Notes: This figure uses the data on receipts and expenses from the "Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury"
(US Congress, 1874-1893). The figure shows yearly average log receipts (Panel (a)), log expenses (Panel (b)) and log
of receipts over expenses (Panel (c)), separately for classified and non-classified districts. The sample is restricted to
districts with at least 10 employees by 1883.




                                                                     36
        F IGURE 6: E FFECTS OF THE R EFORM ON R ECEIPTS AND E XPENSES , E VENT-S TUDY


                  (A)   LOG (E XPENSES )                                       ( B ) LOG (R ECEIPTS )
  .4




                                                                1
  .2




                                                                .5
  0




                                                                0
  -.2




                                                                -.5
  -.4




                                                                -1




    1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893             1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                           Year                                                          Year


                                           (C)   LOG (R ECEIPTS /E XPENSES )
                                1
                                .5
                                0
                                -.5
                                -1




                                  1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                                         Year




Notes: This figure uses the data on receipts and expenses from the Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury (US
Congress, 1874-1893). The figure shows the estimated coefficients corresponding to an interaction between a "Classi-
fied" indicator and year dummies. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard
errors clustered at the district level.




                                                           37
                       F IGURE 7: S HARE OF E MPLOYEES B ELOW THE E XAM C UTOFF

                                            ( A ) S TOCK OF EMPLOYEES



                  .4




                  .3




                  .2




                  .1


                       1873   1875   1877   1879   1881    1883    1885    1887    1889   1891   1893
                                                           Year

                                       Non-Classified District      Classified District




                                     ( B ) F LOW OF N EWLY- HIRED EMPLOYEES



                  .5



                  .4



                  .3



                  .2



                  .1
                       1873   1875   1877   1879   1881    1883    1885    1887    1889   1891   1893
                                                           Year

                                       Non-Classified District      Classified District



Notes: The y-axis shows the proportion of employees listed in the Official Register of year t who made less than $900
a year (the cutoff above which employees were subject to exams in classified districts). Panel (a) focuses on the stock
of employees in year t, whereas panel (b) focuses on the flow of newly hired employees. The sample is restricted to
districts with at least 10 employees by 1883.
                                                          38
          F IGURE 8: S HARE OF E MPLOYEES B ELOW THE E XAM C UTOFF , E VENT-S TUDY




                   .4

                   .3

                   .2

                   .1

                    0

                  -.1

                     1873 1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                              Year



Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if an employee worked in a position that pays a
salary below $900. The figure shows the estimated coefficients corresponding to an interaction between a "Classified"
indicator and year dummies. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors
clustered at the district level.




                                                          39
                 TABLE 1: F- TESTS FOR P RE -R EFORM E VENT-S TUDY C OEFFICIENTS


                                    (1)           (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)       (7)           (8)
                                   Mean      p-value      Mean      p-value      Mean       p-value      Mean      p-value
 A. Expenses and Receipts
 log(Expenses)                     0.028         0.112    0.039         0.111     0.002      0.550       -0.072      0.230
 log(Receipts)                     0.079         0.110    0.078         0.112    -0.040      0.370       -0.069      0.248
 log(Receipts/Expenses)            0.051         0.030    0.040         0.023    -0.042      0.399       0.003       0.056
 N                                         1740                   1580                    940                     640

 B. Personnel Outcomes
 Turnover                         0.009          0.170     0.006        0.323     0.019      0.469       0.015       0.575
 Professional Occ.                -0.020         0.641    -0.020        0.762    -0.037      0.296       -0.033      0.138
 Below cutoff                     0.034          0.180     0.011        0.267    -0.003      0.433       0.012       0.111
 N (Turnover)                             44450                   43194                  41267                   37968
 N (Professional)                          6433                    6223                   5938                    5469
 N (Below cutoff)                         48293                   46904                  44922                   41459

  Comparison group                         All                     5+                     10+                     20+

Notes: Each row corresponds to a different outcome variable. Each group of columns corresponds to a different estima-
tion sample based on the minimum number of employees (0, 5, 10 or 20) of the districts in the control group. Columns
1, 3, 5 and 7 report the mean value of the pre-reform event-study coefficients based on estimating equation 2. Columns
2, 4, 6 and 8 report p-values for the hypothesis that all the pre-1883 event-study coefficients are equal to zero. Panel (a)
focuses on outcomes measured at the district level using data on receipts and expenses from the "Annual Reports of
Secretary of the Treasury". Panel (b) focuses on employee-level outcomes using data from the "Official Registers of the
United States". Standard errors clustered at the district level.




                                                            40
                                   TABLE 2: P ROBABILITY OF T URNOVER

                                                                     (1)           (2)          (3)
                  Classified X After                             -0.126        -0.0834       -0.0528
                                                                  (0.0271)     (0.0473)      (0.0355)
                  Classified X After X Exam                                    -0.0681
                                                                               (0.0393)
                  Classified X After X Party Turnover                                       -0.188
                                                                                             (0.0701)
                  District FE                                        Yes          Yes           Yes
                  Year FE                                            Yes          Yes           Yes
                  Observations                                     41267         41267        41267
                  Mean of dep. var.                                0.467         0.467        0.467
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. The dependent variable is an indicator that takes a value of one if
employee i who is listed in the "Official Register" of year t - 2 as working in district c is no longer listed in year's t
(the Registers were published every two years). Classif ied × Af ter takes a value of one for districts that were part
of the classified Customs Service after 1883. Classif ied × Af ter × Exam adds an interaction term that takes a value
of one for employees working in non-exempted positions. Classif ied × Af ter × P arty T urnover adds an interaction
terms for years in which the Presidency went from a Republican to a Democrat or vice versa. The sample is restricted
to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors clustered at the district level.




                                                           41
                          TABLE 3: E MPLOYEES ' P ROFESSIONAL B ACKGROUND
                                  ( A ) P ROFESSIONAL O CCUPATION IN C ENSUS

                                     (1)            (2)                   (3)                        (4)
        Classified X After         0.0278       0.0642                  0.0368                   0.0915
                                  (0.0176)      (0.0270)               (0.0448)                   (0.0317)
        District FE                  Yes           Yes                    Yes                       Yes
        Year FE                      Yes           Yes                    Yes                       Yes
        Observations                7652         2766                   911                      1855
        Sample                       All       New hires         New hires, no exam         New hires, exam
                                ( B ) U NSKILLED OR NO O CCUPATION IN C ENSUS

                                      (1)           (2)                    (3)                       (4)
         Classified X After       -0.0434       -0.0917                 -0.0726                   -0.109
                                  (0.0313)       (0.0439)              (0.0741)                   (0.0478)
         District FE                 Yes            Yes                   Yes                        Yes
         Year FE                     Yes            Yes                   Yes                        Yes
         Observations               7652         2766                   911                      1855
         Sample                      All       New hires         New hires, no exam         New hires, exam

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table uses the data linking the "Official Registers" to earlier population
censuses. An observation corresponds to an employee-year. Classif ied × Af ter takes a value of one for employees in.
districts that were part of the classified Customs Service after 1883. The sample in column 1 of each of the panels includes
the stock of Customs Service employees in year t. The sample in column 2 focuses on newly hired employees. Columns
3 and 4 further split new hires based on whether they work in a position exempted (column 3) or non-exempted from
examinations (column 4). Panel (a) focuses on the likelihood that an employee is listed as holding a professional oc-
cupation in the census. Professional occupations are those with a value of less than 100 in the 1950 Census Bureau
occupational classification system. Examples of such occupations include accountants, lawyers and teachers. Panel (b)
focuses on the likelihood than an employee is listed as having an unskilled or no occupation in the census. Unskilled
occupations are those with a value of 700 or more in the 1950 Census Bureau occupational classification system. Exam-
ples of such occupations include laborers and janitors. The sample in both panels is restricted to employees in districts
with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                            42
TABLE 4: E FFECTS            OF THE         R EFORM      ON    R ECEIPTS      AND        E XPENSES , D IFFERENCE - IN -
D IFFERENCES


                                     log(Expenses)             log(Receipts)            log(Receipts/Expenses)
                                      (1)          (2)             (3)      (4)           (5)              (6)
         Classified X After       -0.0108      -0.0827        0.0250      -0.137        0.0358           -0.0543
                                  (0.0799)     (0.0600)       (0.185)     (0.174)       (0.137)          (0.138)
         District FE                 Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes
         Year FE                     Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes
         Region X Time FE            No           Yes          No          Yes           No                Yes
         Observations                940          940          940         940           940               940

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the log of total expenses, in
columns 3 and 4 it is the log of total receipts, and in column 5 and 6 it is the log of the ratio between total receipts and
expenses. Classif ied × Af ter takes a value of one for districts that were part of the classified Customs Service after
1883. Odd columns include year and district fixed effects. Even columns also include Region × T ime fixed effects. The
sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




             TABLE 5: S HARE OF E MPLOYEES IN P OSITIONS E XEMPTED FROM E XAMS

                                         No Exam              Political Appointees                  Below cutoff
                                   (1)            (2)               (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
      Classified X After        0.188          0.259           0.0101         -0.0220           0.178        0.281
                                (0.0290)       (0.0314)       (0.0157)       (0.0169)           (0.0294)     (0.0305)
      District FE                  Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Year FE                      Yes           Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
      Observations               44922        15257            44922        15257                44922      15257
      Sample                      All        New hires          All        New hires              All      New hires
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. An observation corresponds to an employee-year. Classif ied × Af ter
takes a value of one for employees in districts that were part of the classified Customs Service after 1883. The odd
columns focus on the stock of employees, whereas the even columns focus on the flow of newly hired employees. The
dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is an indicator that takes a value of one if an employee works in a position
that was exempted from exams. Columns (3) to (6) further split exempted positions into those that correspond to
leadership positions and their appointees (columns (3) and (4)), and those that are exempted because they are below the
$900 classification cutoff (columns (5) and (6)). The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883.
Standard errors clustered at the district level.




                                                              43
                         TABLE 6: C OLLECTORS AND D ISTRICT P ERFORMANCE


                                           ( A ) C OLLECTOR F IXED E FFECTS

                                                   (1)        (2)            (3)                 (4)
                                                  F-stat    p-value      Observations         R-squared
                log(Expenses)                     6.088       0.000             626               0.986
                log(Receipts)                     8.154       0.000             626               0.979
                log(Receipts/Expenses)            6.310       0.000             626               0.944

                                       ( B ) C OLLECTOR ' S D EATH WALD T EST

                                                              (1)         (2)             (3)
                                                               J      p-value(chi)        Nz J
                           log(Expenses)                    1.716         0.006          56.634
                           log(Receipts)                    1.263         0.143          41.669
                           log(Receipts/Expenses)           1.353         0.085          44.656

Notes: Panel (a) estimates the specification in equation 5 and presents results of a F-test testing the null hypothesis that
all collector fixed effects are jointly equal to zero. The sample is restricted to district-years in which there is only one
collector­so as to be able to associate a performance metric to a single collector. Therefore, it excludes district-years
where multiple collectors were in charge of the district for different months of the year (295 out of a total of 960 district
years). Panel (b) presents the Wald test estimate defined in equation 7, testing whether there is excess variability of
districts' financial outcomes around the collector's death. We use 33 deaths of collectors that occurred between 1875-
1904.




                                                             44
Online Appendix- Not for Publication

A         Data Appendix
A.1        Linking the Official Registers to the Census

Linking algorithm. Our linking algorithm has the following steps:

    1. Clean names in the Registers and the Census to remove any non-alphabetic characters and
          account for common misspellings and nicknames (e.g. so that Ben and Benjamin would be
          considered the same name).

    2. For each individual in the Register, search for a potential match in the Census. Potential
          matches are individuals who:

            (a) Report the same place of birth (states for the US born, country for foreigners). We ex-
                 clude observations in the Official Registers which lack information on birthplace (about
                 1.5% of all observations).66
            (b) Have a reported age in the census such that they would have been between 18 and
                 65 years old at the time they are observed in the Official Registers (for instance, when
                 linking the 1881 Register to the 1850 Census we only look for individuals aged 0 to 35
                 in 1850).
            (c) Have a first name and a last name within a Jaro-Winkler distance of c1 , where c1 
                 [0, 1]. The Jaro-Winkler distance is a string distance measure such that a value of zero
                 corresponds to two identical strings and a value of one corresponds to two strings with
                 no common characters. We allow for non-identical strings to be considered a match
                 to deal with transcription errors in the censuses and for OCR errors in our digitization
                 of the Official Registers. Intuitively, the lower the value of c1 the more conservative
                 our linking approach (i.e. the lower the number of cases we will match someone to an
                 incorrect individual).
            (d) There is no other potential link with a first name and a last name within a Jaro-Winkler
                 distance of c2 , where c2  [c1 , 1]. That is, we impose that, if the closest individual is
                 within a Jaro-Winkler distance of c1 , the second closest potential match needs to be at a
                 distance of at least c2 with c2  c1 . For a given value of c1 , a higher value of c2 represents
                 a more conservative choice.

     In our baseline analysis, we chose c1 = 0.07 and c2 = 0.07. In other words, we deem an
observation as a match provided that it is the unique observation within a Jaro-Winkler distance
of 0.07 with respect to both first and last names. For reference, the Jaro-Winkler distance between
"Smith" and "Smiht" is 0.046. However, Figure A7 shows that our results on the likelihood that an
    66
         Importantly, there is no correlation between the likelihood of a missing birthplace and the reform.


                                                              45
employee would have had a professional occupation prior to joining the customs service (our only
result that relies on the linked data) are very similar when we implement alternative cutoffs for c1
(including just using exact matches, i.e. c1 = 0).
   Figure A5 shows the proportion of individuals that we match to at least one working-age (i.e.
when the individual was 18 to 65) observation in the census (and to at least two, three and four,
respectively) by Register year when using our baseline choice of parameters. In this figure, we
focus on matches to censuses conducted prior to each register year (that is, when we focus on the
1871 Register we ask whether we are able link an individual to the 1850, 1860 or 1870 censuses).
On average, we are able to find at least one match for about 20% of Customs Service employees.
We expect a lower proportion of individuals in later years to be matched to at least one adult
observation, as the latest census we include is 1880 and some employees would have been less
than 18 years old by this year (particularly those employed in later years). Overall, these matching
rates are similar to those in other studies using historical data (Abramitzky et al. , 2019).
   Representativeness of Linked Data. In our analysis using linked data, we assess how the
professional background of Customs Service employees changed with the passing of the Pendle-
ton Act. Our sample in this analysis includes only employees of the Customs Service who were
successfully linked to at least one observation in the census. Specifically, we compare the charac-
teristics of bureaucrats in classified districts to those in non-classified districts, before and after the
implementation of the reforms. Hence, for our analysis to be biased by selection it would need
to be the case that selection into linkage changed differently for individuals in classified districts
after the reform. This is unlikely because our linking procedure is exactly the same throughout all
sample years and across districts.
   To further alleviate this concern, we estimate our main difference-in-differences specification
using as outcome variables: (1) the total number of censuses to which we link an employee, or
(2) and indicator that takes a value of one if the employee is linked to at least one census. Figure
A6 shows that, while employees in non-classified districts are overall more likely to be matched
throughout the period of analysis, there is no evidence that such difference became larger or
smaller after the reform. Indeed, Table A1 in the Online Appendix shows that there is no cor-
relation between the reform and the likelihood of matching an individual to a census. Hence, it is
very unlikely that the change in the professional background of employees that we document is
due to biases in linking.
   Finally, Table A2 shows that our main results on employee turnover and the likelihood that
an employee would work in an exempted position (which do not require the linked data) are very
similar when we estimate them on the smaller linked sample.




                                                     46
           TABLE A1: N O E FFECTS OF THE R EFORM ON P ROBABILITY OF M ATCHING

                                                        (1)                  (2)
                                                 At least 1 match      N. of matches
                          Classified X After           -0.0106            -0.00342
                                                      (0.0204)            (0.0286)
                          District FE                     Yes                   Yes
                          Year FE                         Yes                   Yes
                          Observations                   45344              45344
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. The dependent variable in column 1 is an indicator that takes a value of
one if a Customs Service employee is successfully matched to at least one observation in the census. The dependent
variables in column 2 is instead the total number of censuses to which a Customs Service employee is matched to.
Standard errors are clustered at the district level.


                     TABLE A2: A LL P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , L INKED S AMPLE

                                                   Turnover              Below Cutoff
                                                (1)             (2)       (3)           (4)
                     Classified X After      -0.126       -0.122       0.178          0.169
                                              (0.0271)     (0.0405)    (0.0294)       (0.0354)
                     District FE                Yes             Yes      Yes            Yes
                     Year FE                    Yes             Yes      Yes            Yes
                     Observations             41267            7598     44922          8215
                     Sample                    All            Linked     All          Linked
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table shows the robustness of our personnel results that do not rely
on linked register-to-census data to using the linked sample that we use when focusing on employees' occupational
background. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                         47
F IGURE A1: C USTOMS COLLECTION DISTRICTS IN 1883


                ( A ) N EW E NGLAND




               ( B ) M IDDLE ATLANTIC




                        48
                                                 ( C ) R EST OF THE C OUNTRY




        258              REPORT or run CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION.




                                                                                                                      SERVICE.
         SECOND BRANCH OP CLASSIFIED SERVICE CUSTOMS
                                          CLERK EXAMINATION                  (Series 2).

                                                                                                                     Relative
                                                       Subjects.                                                     weights


                 Flrst: 0rtlicgraphy.....-..-..."...-......        ................................             _.          2
                 Second : Penmanship ............. ..
                                                                                                                 _          4
                                                                                                                            3
                 Third: Copying.. I"...                                                                                     3
                 Fourth:      Letter-writing
                 Fifth: Arithmetic ........ ..     .                                                                        5
                  Sixth: Elements of book-kee  ng and of accounts .............. ..           .                             2
                                                                            of the U. S .... ..                             1
                  Seventh: Elements of geography, history, and government
                        Total of weights ..................................        ..   .   .................   ..         20




             For explanation of the            relative weights,          and of the method of determining
         the general average, see clerk examination, p. 201.
            The time allowed for the examination is limited to seven consecutive hours.
Notes: This figure
            The shows    a map of
                   rst, second, third,
                                  customsand            subjects
                                               fourth districts
                                            collection          in of
                                                                   1883.  the  clerkUS
                                                                             Source:  examination,   'custOms
                                                                                       Congress (1874-1893).
         service, are substantially    the  same   as  the  corresponding        subjects in the clerk  exam~

         ination, departmental     service,   and   the  seventh    subject     is substantially the  same   as
                        F IGURE
         the eighth subject    of A2:
                                  that  E
                                        examination,
                                           XAMPLE        p. 201,
                                                      QUESTION    et. ,  ARITHMETICS
                                                                        seq.               EXAM

                                               FIFTH SUBJEcr. Arlihmetlo.

             Question    1.    Add the following, placing the total at the bottom:
                                                         5, 673, 911,987      87
                                                        44,376,013, 705      so
                                                        32, 673, 231, 695    25
                                                         7,736, 910, 286      16




                                                                      l
                                                         6, 444,642, 155      14
                                                        44,297,763,429        30
                                                        26,105,321,266        57
                                                         9,708,132,873        63
                                                         8,856,764,397        40
                                                        42,231,001,161        86
                                                        63, 497,476, 084      03
                                                       123, 435, 602, 002     90




              Express in gures the following numbers:
Notes: This figure shows
              Question     One
                       2. an   hundred
                             example   and one
                                     question for million
                                                  individuals thousand
                                                          one who         for ten.
                                                                        and
                                                                  applied      the position of clerk in the classified
              Question 3. Three hundred and forty-three million ten thousand and one, and one
Customs Service.
           ten-thousandth.
             Express in words the following   gures;
             Question 4. 3,000,600.                  49
             Question 5. 200,002,00200095.
             Question 6. A grocer having a capital of $10,000 invested i} of it in tea, at
                                                                                                                                195




                                                                                           of
                                                                                                                                            a




           dollar per pound; it; of the remainder in c'o 'ee, at of dollar per pound, and
                                                                                                                                      ,8,




                                                                                              of
                                                                                             a
                                                                            i
             F IGURE A3: E XAMPLE PAGE , O FFICIAL R EGISTERS OF THE U NITED S TATES


                                                               TREASURY DEPARTMENT.                                                                201


                                                                      Customs    Service.

                                                                                                        Whence                                  Compen-
                         liTame.                          Office.               "Whore born.                            Where employed
                                                                                                       appointed.                                sation.

                Joseph Jewett                   Clerk                          Massachusetts . . New York                New York .               ,600 00
                George H. Keim                      do                         New York          ....do                 ...do ..:...              , 600 00
                Berrien Keyser                      do                         .. do             ...do                   ....do                   , 600 00
                Louis Oppenheini . ...              do                       .-..do               ...do                  ....do                   , 600 00
                SamnelP. Putnam ...                 do                         New Hampshire, ....do                     ... do                   , 600 00
               James H. Tliayer                     do                         Massachusetts .   ...do                   ....do                   , 600 00
                Theodore D. Wilson .                do                         Pennsylvania. .. .. do                    ....do                   ,600 00
                Edward E.Worl ....                  do                         ...do             .. do                   ....do                   , 600 00
                Georjre W. Marston . .              do                         New Hampshire.    ...do                    ...do                   , 5,5000
                M ichael Carey                      do                         Ireland          ...do                    ....do                     400 00
               Herman G. Carter     ...             do                         New York         ....do                   ....do                   ,400 00
               Calvin C. Chnrch                     do                        ...do             ...do                    ....do                   , 400 00
               William B. Crawford .                do                       .--.do             ...do                    ....do                   , 400 00
               Alfred Eaton                         do                        ...do             ...do               .... ...do                    ,400 00
               Stephen B. Gregory . .               do                        -- do             ...do                     ...do                   ,400 00
               Charles B. Jenney* ..                do                        ..do              ...do                    -- do                    ,400 00
               Oliver W. Marvin                     do                       ...do              ...do                    ...do                    , 400 00
               John H. Walsh                        do                       ....do             ...do                    ...do                    ,400 00
               John Welch, jr                       do                        Massachusetts . . ...do                    ...do . .. .             , 400 00
               Thomas S. Woodcock                   do                        New York          ...do                    --do                     , 400 00
               George P. Babcock            ,       do                        Connecticut . ..  ...do                    .. do                    , 200 00
               Theodore Babcock, jr.                do                        New York          ...do -....-             ...do                    , 200 00
               John J. Baruicle                     do                       ...do              ...do                    ...do                    , 200 00
               Thomas H. Bryden             ......do                          ...do             ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               Ogden D. Budd           ,            do                        ...do             ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               Samuel G. Burns*                     do                        ..do              ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               Frederick S Cooke*. .                do                        ...do             ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               George W. Cooney* . .                do                        ...do             ...do                      .do                    ,200 00
               Anthony Gross                        do                        Austria           ...do                      .do                    ,200 00
               Edward H. Jones              .....do                           England           ...do                      ,do                    ,200 00
               George Kleine                        do                        New York          ...do                      .do                    ,200 00
               James B. Martine*                    do                        North Carolina. . ...do                       do                    , 200 00
               JohnO'Shea                           do                        New York          ...do                      .do .                  , 200 00
               Charles E. Parsons                   do                        ...do             ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               James M. Smith          ,            do                        ...do             ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               Lewis A. Stiahan* ...        .....do                           ...do             ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               William P. Thomson .              do                           ...do             New Jersey                 .do                    , 200 00
               Benson Van Voast* . . .           do                           ...do             New York                   .do                    ,200 00
               Leonard Wightman . . .            do                               do            ...do                      .do                    , 200 00
               Stephen B. Goszler           Clerk and messenger                Dist. Columbia..    New Jersey . . .        .do                    , 000 00
               Horatio N. Ferris            Messenger                          New York            New York                .do                      840 00
               Edward Fimicane                   do                            Ireland             ...do                   .do                      840 00
               Varick DeW. Beaton . .            do                            New York            ...do                   .do                      840 00
               Leander L. Simmonds .             do
Notes: This figure shows an example page of the "Official Registers ofNew      Connecticut
                                                                            United
                                                                       theYork
                                                                      Massachusetts . States" corresponding to employees   .do                      840 00
               George W. Truex                   do                            New York                                    -do                      840 00
               Albert Wilkens
of New York's collector's office in 1883.        do     ...do         ...do                                                 do                      840 00
               William L. Ward                   do     ...do                                      ...do                   .do.                     500 00
                    Surveyor's Office.
               James L. Benedict           Surveyor                           New York          , New York . -           New York .              8,000 00
               Samuel M. Blatchford        Clerk and auditor                   ...do
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                           5,000 00
               George C. Kibbe             Special deputy surveyor.          ...do                ...do
                                                                                           2, 500 00
                                                                              Connecticut . . .
               Edward C. De Zeng         I Clerk                             .. do
                                                                              New York     1, 800 00
                                                                                                  ...do
               Charles W. Musgrave . ..l         do                          ...do                ...do
                                                                                           1,800 00
                                                                              Pennsylvania . .
               Thomas L. (Uilver                 do                           New York
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                           1, 600 00
                  F
               Rinaldo H. French
                    IGURE
               James L. Hastie
                                    A4: E!       do
                                   XAMPLE OF A COLLECTOR WHO DIED WHILE
                                         '       do
                                                                             ...do
                                                                              Massachusetts . . ...do
                                                                             .. do
                                                                                     IN
                                                                              Scotland
                                                                                           1,600 00
                                                                                        OFFICE    ...do
                                                                                           1,600 00
               Edgar T. Humphrey . .             do        :                 ...do
                                                                              Massachusetts . . ...do
                                                                                           1,600 00
               William Masten                    do                           New York
                                                                             ...do         1,600 00
                                                                                                  ...do
               Theodorus McLeod                  do                            ...do
                                                                             ...do                ..do
                                                                                           1,600 00
               John H. Millspaugh                do                            ...do
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                           1,600 00
               William H. Morris                 do                            ...do
                                                                             ...do         1, 600 00
                                                                                                  New Jersey -
               Eugene Van Valkenbur^             do                            ...do
                                                                             ...do         1,600 00
                                                                                                  New York . .
                                                                               ...do
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                           1,400 00
                                   19,




               Carey S. Cimnelly                 do
                    Dec.
               Edgar A. Porter
               Jeremiah N. Sewall
                                     1889.       do
                                                 do
                                                              EXECUTIVE JOURNAL.
                                                                             ...do
                                                                              Maine
                                                                               ...do
                                                                             ...do
                                                                                           245    ...do
                                                                                           1,400 00
                                                                                                  ...do
                                                                                           1,400 00
               Charles H. Smith                  do                           New York
                                                                            ...do                 ...do
                                                                                           1,400 00
               Andrew M. Stanbury
                    To     the Senate
               John K. Murphy              Unitedof
                                                 do
                                                 do the               States:
                                                                               ...do
                                                                             ...do
                                                                               ...do
                                                                             ...do
                                                                                                  ...do
                                                                                           1, 400 00
                                                                                                  ...do
                                                                                           1, 200 00
               Joseph M. Wild:                   do                            -..do
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                           1,200 00
                                      Jefferson Jarrett,   Virginia,
                                                                                                                be
                                                 T.




                                                                                         cus
                                                                                  of




                                                                                                                                        to of




               James J. Smith                                              collector
                                                                                                           to




                             nominate Messenger                             , Ireland
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                              840 00
                     I




                                                                            , New York
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                              840 00
               Peter T. Van Boskerck..           do
                                              Petersburgh,                Virginia,                                                             suc
                                                                                                             of




                         for      district
                                                              of




                                                                                       in




               James toms
                       Casey         the         do                          -..do
                                                                              Ireland    the State...do
                                                                                              720 00
                                                                             ...do
                                   Cogbill,
               Van Dycke E. Charlier. .
                         Peter
                                                 do                           New York        720 00
                                                                                                  ...do
                                           F.




               Georgeceed
                        S. Moeser                do          deceased. ...do ...do            720 00
                                                                                                  ...do
               Wandell J. See            temporarily               during the ...do
                                                                             ...do                ...do
                                                                                              720 00
                        Mr.Jarrett               do
                                                                                                                                         of




               Thomas Whalen                  wasdo               -              recess
                                                                           commissioned
                                                                             ...do
                                                                              Maine        the    ...do
                                                                                              720 00
               Harry  Senate,June
                       D. Van Horn
               Edwin Pitts
                                             13, do
                                                   1889.                     ...do
                                                                              New Jersey
                                           Inspector for measmt. of vessels. New York
                                                                             ...do
                                                                                              500 00
                                                                                                  New Jersey.
                                                                                          P d. 4 00
                                                                                                  New York . .
                                                                        BENJ.    HARRISON.
                                                                             ...do        p.d.    New Jersey.
                                                          -




               Henry Gaines                      do                           Maine
                Archibald C. Longstroet          do                          ...do
                                                                              New York    p.d.    New York . .
                      ExECUTIVE
               Jesse P. Madden                MANSION,
                                                 do            December        ..do
                                                                             ...do 19, 1889. ...do
                                                                                          p.d.
               Henry L. Reed                     do .                       , Pennsylvania . . . ..do
                                                                             --.do       p.d.
               Benjamin P. Eexford               do                          ...do
                                                                              New York    p.d.    ...do
               Edward W. Tuthill
                    To
               Anthony Wilkins                   of
                                                 do
                                            United
                            the Senate.... do the                     States:
                                                                             ...do
                                                                              New Jersey
                                                                             ...do
                                                                              New York
                                                                                         p.d.
                                                                                         p.d.
                                                                                                  ...do
                                                                                                  .. do
Notes: This figure   shows an example page ofHenry     the Journal of the Executive Proceedings   of the United States Senate (Senate,
                          nominate Engineer                          Slayton,      New York,
                                                                          O.




                                                                                                                           to
                                                                                                                                   be
                                                                                               of of




                General Appraiser's
                                                                                                             second
                      I




                                                                                                                                   a




1875). This page lists Office.
                        the nomination     of  a new   collector  who   would replace  a collector  who died while in office.
                      J. Perry engineer                              Service           United     States,       suc
                                                         in




                                                                                                                                        to




                   assistant
              Andrew                               the Revenue New
                                     General appraiser                   York     theYork
                                                                                 New      .     New   York .     3,000 00
                                                                                                .. do            2, 500 00
                   ceed Second Asst. Engineer Frederick                       Owen,             promoted.
                                                                                         E.




              Benjamin Tuzo          Chief clerk                    Bermuda         do
                                                                                                            to




                                                               * Temporary.                 be
                       Mr.
                       75 CONG Slayton
                                    VOL, was
                                          1      temporarily
                                                  26                commissioned      May    20,   1889,     during
                   the recess of the Senate.
                                                                      #




                                                                                                                BENJ. HARRISON.
                        ExECUTIVE                 MANSION,          December
                                                                                50
                                                                                 19,    1889.

                      To the Senate              of the   United States:
                                                John       Groenevelt,                 Louisiana,                                               sur
                                                         F.




                                                                                 of




                                                                                                           to




                            nominate                                                                            be an assistant
                     I
                             F IGURE A5: M ATCH R ATE BY R EGISTER Y EAR



                  30


                  25


                  20
              %




                  15


                  10


                   5


                   0
                       1871 1873 1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                               Register Year

                                             At least 1 match        2+ matches
                                             3+ matches              4 matches



Notes: This figure shows the percent of Customs Service employees that are matched to at least one, two, three or four
working-age (aged 18 to 65) observations in the census, by register year.




                                                         51
          F IGURE A6: M ATCH R ATE BY R EGISTER Y EAR AND C LASSIFICATION S TATUS


                                           ( A ) AT LEAST ONE MATCH


                   30


                   25


                   20
               %




                   15


                   10


                    5


                    0
                        1871 1873 1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                                Register Year

                                       Non-Classified District       Classified District



                                           ( B ) N UMBER OF MATCHES


                   .6


                   .5


                   .4
               %




                   .3


                   .2


                   .1


                   0
                        1871 1873 1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                                 Register Year

                                       Non-Classified District      Classified District




Notes: Panel (a) shows the percent of Customs Service employees that are matched to at least one observation in the
census, by register year and depending on whether the individual worker in a classified or a non-classified district.
Panel (b) shows instead the average number of censuses to which an observation is linked.

                                                         52
              F IGURE A7: R OBUSTNESS TO ALTERNATIVE J ARO -W INKLER CUTOFFS
              .2
              .15
              .1




                                                                             Baseline
              .05
              0
                    0

                          1

                                 2

                                         3

                                                  4

                                                          5

                                                                  6

                                                                          7

                                                                                  8

                                                                                          9

                                                                                                  .1
                        .0

                               .0

                                       .0

                                                .0

                                                        .0

                                                                .0

                                                                        .0

                                                                                .0

                                                                                        .0


                                     Maximum Jaro-Winkler Distance

Notes: This figure shows the estimated effect of the reform on the likelihood that a Customs Service employee would
have held a professional occupation (y-axis), as a function of the minimum Jaro-Winkler string distance above which
an observation would no longer be considered a match (x-axis). Lower values of the Jaro-Winkler distance represent
more conservative matches: A Jaro-Winkler distance of zero correspond to two identical strings, whereas a distance of
one correspond to two strings with no common characters. The red vertical bar corresponds to the cutoff used in the
baseline approach.




                                                         53
B     Additional Results
B.1   Robustness of personnel results

Table B3 shows that the effects of the "reform" on personnel outcomes are all small and statisti-
cally insignificant when we use placebo cutoffs of 20, 30 or 40 employees (instead of 50) for the
minimum number of employees above which a district would have been subject to the reform. In
this table, we focus on districts with less than 50 employees and estimate our main difference-in-
differences specification using these placebo cutoffs. We restrict the sample to districts with fewer
than 50 employees because otherwise the "placebo" treatment group would mechanically include
the actual set of reformed districts (i.e. those with 50 or more employees).
    In Figure B1, we implement a randomization inference approach for computing p-values. Specif-
ically, we estimate the effects of 1,000 placebo "reforms" in which we randomly choose 11 districts
as being "classified". We then compare the estimated effects of these placebo reforms to the effects
that we obtain when using the actual set of reformed districts in the estimation. Our estimated
effects are always significantly larger in absolute value than the ones corresponding to the placebo
reforms.
    Since we have a relatively small number of classified districts, a concern is that the effects of the
reform might have been driven by changes taking place in one specific classified district. In Figure
B2, however, we show that the results are similar when we estimate our baseline difference-in-
differences specification while excluding one classified district at a time. The x-axis in this figure
indicates the district that we exclude from the regression, and the y-axis shows the estimated effect
of the reform on each personnel outcome. The figure shows that the results are very stable regard-
less of which district we exclude. Hence, our findings are unlikely to be driven by concurrent
changes unrelated to the reform that took place in a specific district.
    In our baseline specification, our control group is comprised of districts with 10 or more em-
ployees by 1883. We use this control group since it has similar pre-trends than the classified dis-
tricts with respect to all of our main personnel and financial outcomes. However, Table B2 shows
that we continue to find very similar results if we use alternative control groups with fewer (where
we do not impose any restrictions on the minimum number of 1883 employees), or more (where
we use a cutoff of 20+ employees) employees by 1883.
    In Table B6, we show that our main results on personnel outcomes are similar when we esti-
mate regressions at the district level (rather than at the employee level). In this table, the data are
collapsed at the district-year level.
    Finally, Table B5 shows that our personnel results are also robust to controlling for: (1) census
region-year fixed effects, (2) interactions between a district number of employees in 1883 and year
fixed effects, or (3) both at the same time. These results make it unlikely that our findings would
be driven by pre-existing differential trends between districts of different size, or by differential
trends across broad US regions.




                                                   54
                F IGURE B1: P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , R ANDOMIZATION I NFERENCE

                                                          ( A ) T URNOVER



                                                           p=0




                                   -.3        -.2           -.1        0             .1         .2




                                          ( B ) P ROFESSIONAL O CCUPATION




                                                                       p=.011




                                   -.2              -.1           0             .1              .2




                                         ( C ) B ELOW C LASSIFICATION C UTOFF




                                                                                          p=0




                                   -.3        -.2           -.1        0             .1         .2




Notes: These figures show the empirical distribution of estimated effects when we implement a randomization inference
approach. In this exercise, we randomly select eleven districts as being classified and estimate the "effects" of the
reform using our baseline differences-in-differences model. We repeat this exercise 1,000 times and plot the empirical
distribution of estimated effects. The vertical red line corresponds to our estimated effect when we use the actual set
of classified districts. The specification and outcome in panel (a) correspond to those in column 1 of Table 2. The
specification and outcome in panel (b) correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification and
outcome in Panel (c) correspond to those in column 5 of Table 5.
                                                                  55
           F IGURE B2: P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , E XCLUDING ONE D ISTRICT AT A T IME

                                                       ( A ) T URNOVER




                                        -.05
                                        -.1
                                        -.15
                                        -.2
                                              Bo e

                                             rli n
                                            C on

                                               D o

                                       N t Hu t
                                                        n
                                          N ans

                                          ila ork

                                      Sa o ia

                                             an d

                                                        o
                                                        i
                                         Po tro
                                                    or

                                         Bu to



                                                     g



                                                    ro




                                                      n
                                                    sc
                                                     h
                                                    t
                                                  ca




                                        n rtla
                                       Ph w Y

                                                  lp
                                                   s
                                                ng
                                                 m




                                                 ci
                                               rle
                                                 e




                                              de
                                               hi
                                     lti




                                             O

                                             e
                                   Ba




                                            P
                                            r




                                          Fr
                                        ew     ( B ) P ROFESSIONAL O CCUPATION
                                        .2
                                        .15
                                        .1
                                        .05
                                        0
                                               e

                                                          rli n
                                                         C on

                                                            D o

                                                    N t Hu t
                                                                     n
                                                       N ans

                                                       ila ork

                                                   Sa o ia

                                                          an d

                                                                     o
                                                                     i
                                                      Po tro
                                         or

                                                      Bu sto



                                                                  g



                                                                 ro




                                                                   n
                                                                 sc
                                                                  h
                                                                 t
                                                               ca




                                                     n rtla
                                                    Ph w Y

                                                               lp
                                                             ng
                                      m




                                                              ci
                                                            rle
                                                              e
                                               Bo




                                                           de
                                                            hi
                                     lti




                                                          O

                                                          e
                                   Ba




                                                         P
                                                         r




                                                       Fr
                                                     ew




                                         ( C ) B ELOW C LASSIFICATION C UTOFF
                                        .3
                                        .25
                                        .2
                                        .15
                                        .1
                                               e

                                                          rli n
                                                         C on

                                                            D o

                                                    N t Hu t
                                                                     n
                                                       N ans

                                                       ila ork

                                                   Sa o ia

                                                          an d

                                                                     o
                                                                     i
                                                      Po tro
                                         or

                                                      Bu sto



                                                                  g



                                                                 ro




                                                                   n
                                                                 sc
                                                                  h
                                                                 t
                                                               ca




                                                     n rtla
                                                    Ph w Y

                                                               lp
                                                             ng
                                         m




                                                              ci
                                                            rle
                                                              e
                                               Bo




                                                           de
                                                            hi
                                     lti




                                                          O

                                                          e
                                   Ba




                                                         P
                                                         r




                                                       Fr
                                                     ew




Notes: These figures show the sensitivity of the personnel results to excluding one classified district at a time. The y-
axis shows our baseline difference-in-difference estimates around a 95% confidence interval when estimated excluding
each of the classified districts indicated in the x-axis. The specification and outcome in panel (a) correspond to those in
column 1 of Table 2. The specification and outcome in panel (b) correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3.
The specification and outcome in panel (c) correspond to those in column 1 of Table 5.
                                                             56
                  F IGURE B3: AVERAGE R EVENUE FROM F INES AND L ABOR , 1874-1893


                      ( A ) LOG (F INES +L ABOR )                               ( B ) LOG (F INES +L ABOR +1)
             10




                                                                         10
             9




                                                                         9
             8




                                                                         8
             7




                                                                         7
             6




                                                                         6
             5




                                                                         5
              1874 1876 1878 1880 1882 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892           1874 1876 1878 1880 1882 1884 1886 1888 1890 1892
                                          Year                                                        Year

                               Non-classified    Classified                                Non-classified    Classified




Notes: This figure uses data on the amount of revenue collected from "fines, penalties and forfeitures" and "labor,
drayage and storage" from the Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury (US Congress, 1874-1893). The figure
shows yearly average log fines, separately for classified and non-classified districts from 1874 to 1893. The outcome in
Panel (a) is the log of fines, whereas in Panel (b) it is the log of fines plus one.




F IGURE B4: E FFECTS         OF    R EFORM             ON     R EVENUE   FROM     F INES    AND         L ABOR , E VENT-S TUDY R E -
GRESSIONS


                      ( A ) LOG (F INES +L ABOR )                               ( B ) LOG (F INES +L ABOR +1)
             1




                                                                         1
             0




                                                                         0
             -1




                                                                         -1
             -2




                                                                         -2
             -3




                                                                         -3




              1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893           1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                     Year                                                        Year




Notes: This figure uses data on the amount of revenue collected from "fines, penalties and forfeitures" and "labor,
drayage and storage" from the Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury (US Congress, 1874-1893). The figure
shows event-study coefficients corresponding to estimating equation 2 in the main body of the paper. The outcome in
Panel (a) is the log of fines, whereas in Panel (b) it is the log of fines plus one.




                                                                    57
                   F IGURE B5: M OTIVES FOR C OLLECTOR T URNOVER , 1871-1893



                40



                30                                                                Harrison (R)

                                                                     Cleveland (D)

                20                                Pendleton Act



                10



                  0
                        1873 1875 1877 1879 1881 1883 1885 1887 1889 1891 1893
                                                 Year

                                       Removed or Suspended             Resigned
                                       Deceased                         Term Expired



Notes: The y-axis shows the yearly number of nominations for the position of collector of customs, separately based on
the motive for which a new collector had to be nominated. The dashed vertical lines correspond to years in which the
Presidency went from a Republican to a Democrat or vice versa.




                                                         58
                 F IGURE B6: P ROXIMITY TO C LASSIFIED D ISTRICTS AND R EVENUE
            13
            12
            11
            10
            9
            8




                 3                      4                  5                    6                          7
                                        log(Distance to closest classified district)

                                               Pre-Reform           Post-Reform



Notes: This figure shows the correlation between the distance to the nearest classified district (based on a district port's
of entry) and total receipts, before and after 1883. The sample is restricted to non-classified districts.




                                                            59
                                                                  TABLE B1: S UMMARY S TATISTICS


                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)
                                                      All Non-Classified              Non-Classified (10+ emp.)                       Classified
                                                    Mean Median        SD             Mean Median         SD               Mean        Median          SD
                  A. District-level statistics
                  Total Expenses (000s)             14.66       8.55       15.16      22.94       18.52      16.68        458.58       239.60        718.29
                  Receipts (000s)                   115.08      23.79      231.35     193.56      63.71      292.53      16172.67      2800.06      36472.89
                  Employees                          14.10      10.00       14.96      21.04      18.00       17.61       331.21        194.00       468.05
                  # Observations                     1520         .           .         800         .           .          220            .             .
                  # Districts                         76          .           .          40         .           .           11            .             .

                  B. Employee-level statistics
                  Turnover                           0.47        0.00       0.50       0.47        0.00        0.50         0.34         0.00         0.47
                  Professional Occ.                  0.05        0.00       0.21       0.04        0.00        0.21         0.04         0.00         0.19
                  Below cutoff                       0.31        0.00       0.46       0.26        0.00        0.44         0.16         0.00         0.37
60




                  # Observations                    12344          .          .        8661          .           .         36683           .            .

     Notes: Panel (a) presents district-level summary statistics based on data from the "Annual report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the state of the finances" (US
     Congress, 1874-1893). An observation in this panel corresponds to a district-year. These data cover the 1874-1893 period and are annual. Panel (b) is based on
     Customs Service personnel records collected from the "Official Registers of the United States" (Department of the Interior, 1871-1893). An observation in this panel
     corresponds to an employee-year. These data cover the 1871-1893 period and are biennial. Columns 1 to 3 show statistics corresponding to the full set of non-classified
     districts (i.e. those that were not required to hire through competitive exams after 1883) . Columns 4 to 6 show statistics for non-classified districts that had 10 or
     more employees by 1883. Columns 7 to 9 show statistics for the 11 classified districts.
                               TABLE B2: P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , R OBUSTNESS TO A LTERNATIVE C ONTROL G ROUPS

                                                         Turnover                              Professional Occ.                         Below Cutoff
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
                Classified X After         -0.106        -0.126        -0.132        0.0857        0.0915         0.0937       0.174        0.178        0.174
                                            (0.0252)      (0.0271)      (0.0288)      (0.0306)      (0.0317)      (0.0368)     (0.0269)     (0.0294)     (0.0358)
                District FE                   Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
61




                Year FE                       Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
                Observations                 44683         41267         37968          1960          1855          1702        48286        44922        41459
                Comparison group              0+            10+           20+            0+           10+           20+          0+           10+          20+
     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table shows the robustness of our personnel results to using alternative control groups. In columns 1, 4 and 7, the
     control group is comprised of all non-reformed districts (regardless of their number of employees in 1883). Columns 2, 5 and 8 correspond to our baseline sample
     (using districts with 10+ employees in 1883 as the control group). In columns 3, 6 and 9, the control group is restricted to districts with 20+ employees by 1883. The
     specification and outcome in columns 1 to 3 correspond to those in column 1 of Table 2. The specification and outcome in columns 4 to 6 correspond to those in panel
     (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification and outcome in columns 7 to 9 correspond to those in column 5 of Table 5. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
                               TABLE B3: P LACEBO , P ERSONNEL P RACTICES

                                                  ( A ) 20+ EMPLOYEES

                                                       (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                                    Turnover       Professional Occ.        Below Cutoff
               Placebo Classified X After             0.0127              0.0129                0.0162
                                                     (0.0354)            (0.0731)              (0.0453)
               District FE                             Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Year FE                                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Observations                            8470                 477                  8979
                                                  ( B ) 30+ EMPLOYEES

                                                       (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                                    Turnover       Professional Occ.        Below Cutoff
               Placebo Classified X After            -0.0195              -0.0666              0.00774
                                                     (0.0296)            (0.0604)              (0.0504)
               District FE                             Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Year FE                                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Observations                            8470                 477                  8979
                                                  ( C ) 40+ EMPLOYEES

                                                       (1)                (2)                   (3)
                                                    Turnover       Professional Occ.        Below Cutoff
               Placebo Classified X After            -0.0135              0.0233                0.0106
                                                     (0.0237)            (0.0835)              (0.0551)
               District FE                             Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Year FE                                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes
               Observations                            8470                 477                  8979
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table show the results of estimating our baseline difference-in-
differences model using placebo cutoffs for the number of employees above which a district would have been classified.
Panel (a) uses a placebo cutoff of 20 employees, panel (b) a cutoff of 30 and panel (c) a cutoff of 40. The specification and
outcome in column 2 correspond to those in column 1 of Table 2. The specification and outcome in column 2 correspond
to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification and outcome in column 3 correspond to those in column 5
of Table 5. The sample is restricted to employees who worked in districts with less than 50 employees (so as to exclude
the actual set of "treated" districts from the sample). Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                              62
     TABLE B4: E FFECTS ON O CCUPATIONAL B ACKGROUND , A DJUSTING                               FOR     A GE , B IRTHPLACE
     AND R ACE F IXED EFFECTS


                                        Professional Occ.                                              Unskilled
                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)            (8)
Classified X After     0.0915         0.0845        0.0912        0.0894         -0.109      -0.0984        -0.0984       -0.0957
                        (0.0317)       (0.0299)      (0.0306)        (0.0316)    (0.0478)     (0.0440)      (0.0434)       (0.0463)
District FE                Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Year FE                    Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes
Age FE                     No            Yes            No             No           No           Yes           No            No
Birthplace FE              No            No             Yes            No           No           No            Yes           No
Race FE                    No            No             No             Yes          No           No            No            Yes
Observations              1855           1855          1855           1855         1855         1855          1855          1855
     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. In this table, we estimate our baseline effects of the reform on employees'
     professional background while adjusting for age, birthplace and race fixed effects. The specification and outcome in
     columns 1 to 4 correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification and outcome in columns 5 to 8
     correspond to those in panel (b), column 4 of Table 3. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by
     1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                                63
                                 TABLE B5: E FFECTS ON P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , A DDITIONAL C ONTROL VARIABLES

                                                            Turnover                            Professional Occ.                        Below Cutoff
                                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)
               Classified X After              -0.120       -0.120        -0.117       0.111        0.0869        0.112        0.208        0.182        0.212
                                               (0.0480)      (0.0294)     (0.0509)     (0.0348)      (0.0302)     (0.0352)     (0.0376)     (0.0278)     (0.0335)
               District FE                        Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
64




               Year FE                            Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
               1883 Employees X Year              Yes           No           Yes          Yes          No            Yes          Yes          No           Yes
               Region X Year                      No            Yes          Yes          No           Yes           Yes          No           Yes          Yes
               Observations                      41267        41267        41267         1855          1855         1855        44922        44922        44922
     Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table shows the robustness of our personnel results to controlling for: (1) interactions between a district number of
     employees in 1883 and year dummies, and (2) interactions between census region and year dummies. The specification and outcome in columns 1 to 3 correspond to
     those in column 1 of Table 2. The specification and outcome in columns 4 to 6 correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification and outcome in
     columns 7 to 9 correspond to those in column 5 of Table 5. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883.The sample is restricted to districts
     with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
     TABLE B6: E FFECTS ON P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES E STIMATED AT THE D ISTRICT L EVEL

                                      Turnover                   Professional Occ.             Below Cutoff
                                   (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)
     Classified X After        -0.126          -0.0884        0.0915         0.0797         0.178         0.141
                                (0.0271)        (0.0424)       (0.0317)      (0.0409)       (0.0294)      (0.0426)
     District FE                   Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes
     Year FE                       Yes            Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes
     Observations               41267           539             1855          324           44922          588
     Unit of analysis         Individual       District      Individual      District     Individual      District
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. In this table, we aggregate the employee-level data at the district-year
level. The specification and outcome in columns 1 and 2 correspond to those in column 1 of Table 2. The specification
and outcome in columns 3 and 4 correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification and outcome
in columns 5 and 6 correspond to those in column 5 of Table 5. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10
employees by 1883. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered
at the district level.




TABLE B7: E FFECTS ON P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , I NCLUDING P ORTS OF D ELIVERY IN C LASSI -
FIED D ISTRICTS IN THE T REATMENT G ROUP


                                         Turnover                Professional Occ.          Below Cutoff
                                      (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)
         Classified X After       -0.126        -0.127        0.0915        0.0758       0.194         0.177
                                   (0.0271)      (0.0270)        (0.0317)   (0.0325)     (0.0293)      (0.0288)
         District FE                 Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
         Year FE                     Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
         Observations               41267         41702           1855        1860         44922        45356
         Ports of delivery           No            Yes             No          Yes          No           Yes
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. In this table, "Ports of Delivery" within classified districts are included in
the treatment group. The specification and outcome in columns 1 and 2 correspond to those in column 1 of Table 2. The
specification and outcome in columns 3 and 4 correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of Table 3. The specification
and outcome in columns 5 and 6 correspond to those in column 5 of Table 5. The sample is restricted to districts with at
least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                            65
      TABLE B8: E FFECTS ON P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES , E XCLUDING P ORTS OF D ELIVERY

                                           Turnover              Professional Occ.                Below Cutoff
                                      (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)
         Classified X After       -0.126        -0.106        0.0915              0.0806        0.178       0.181
                                   (0.0271)      (0.0314)      (0.0317)           (0.0326)      (0.0294)    (0.0304)
         District FE                  Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
         Year FE                      Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
         Observations               41267         40518           1855             1809          44922       44111
         Ports of delivery           Yes           No              Yes              No            Yes         No
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. In this table, we exclude from the sample those observations that correspond
to employees who worked in "ports of delivery". The specification and outcome in columns 1 and 2 correspond to those
in column 1 of Table 2. The specification and outcome in columns 3 and 4 correspond to those in panel (a), column 4 of
Table 3. The specification and outcome in columns 5 and 6 correspond to those in column 5 of Table 5. The sample is
restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




     TABLE B9: E XPENSES AND R EVENUE , E XCLUDING F IRST F IVE P OST-R EFORM Y EARS


                                     log(Expenses)           log(Receipts)            log(Receipts/Expenses)
                                     (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)           (5)              (6)
         Classified X After        -0.0150      -0.115      0.0231         -0.187     0.0381             -0.0715
                                   (0.111)     (0.0866)     (0.244)       (0.229)     (0.171)            (0.173)
         Customhouse FE              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
         Year FE                     Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes              Yes
         Region X Time FE            No          Yes          No           Yes            No               Yes
         Observations                705         705          705          705            705              705

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. In this table, we exclude the first five post-reform years from the sample.
The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the log of total expenses, in columns 3 and 4 it is the log of total receipts,
and in column 5 and 6 it is the natural log of the ratio between the total receipts and expenses. Classif ied × Af ter
takes a value of one for districts that were part of the classified Customs Service after 1883. Odd columns include year
and district fixed effects. Even columns also include Region × T ime fixed effects. The sample is restricted to districts
with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




                                                            66
TABLE B10: A SSOCIATION BETWEEN THE S HARE OF W ORKERS WITH A P ROFESSIONAL B ACK -
GROUND AND    D ISTRICTS ' F INANCIAL O UTCOMES

                                             log(Expenses)          log(Receipts)     log(Receipts/Expenses)
                                                     (1)                 (2)                          (3)
      Share with Professional Occ.                 -0.232             0.553                         0.785
                                                  (0.291)              (0.179)                      (0.400)
      District FE                                   Yes                 Yes                          Yes
      Year FE                                       Yes                 Yes                          Yes
      Observations                                  140                 140                          140
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. An observation corresponds to district-year. The dependent variable
in column 1 is the log of expenses in district c in year t. The dependent variable in column 2 is the log receipts. The
dependent variable in column 3 is the log of receipts over expenses. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.


              TABLE B11: E FFECTS OF THE R EFORM ON THE N UMBER OF E MPLOYEES

                                                   Total          Non-Exempted        Exempted
                                                     (1)               (2)                 (3)
                        Classified X After         0.0908            -0.203              0.619
                                                  (0.0883)           (0.126)              (0.148)
                        District FE                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
                        Year FE                     Yes                Yes                 Yes
                        Observations                588                588                 588
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. An observation corresponds to a district-year. The dependent variable
in column 1 is the log number of employees in district c in year t. The dependent variable in column 2 is the log
number of employees in non-exempted positions and in column 3 is the log number of employees in exempted positions.
Classif ied × Af ter takes a value of one for districts that were made part of the classified system after 1883. The sample
is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.


TABLE B12: E MPLOYEES PAID B ELOW                     THE    E XAM C UTOFF        HAD      W EAKER P ROFESSIONAL
B ACKGROUNDS

                                                         (1)                   (2)            (3)
                                                  Professional Occ.          Unskilled     Literate
                      Below Exam Cutoff                -0.0277               0.0946        -0.0218
                                                        (0.0109)              (0.0189)     (0.0125)
                      District FE                           Yes                Yes            Yes
                      Year FE                               Yes                Yes            Yes
                      Observations                         2731                2731          2731
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table uses the data linking the Official Registers to earlier population
censuses. An observation corresponds to an employee-year. "Below Exam Cutoff" is an indicator that takes a value of
one if an employee made less than $900 a year. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883.
Standard errors are clustered at the district level.


                                                             67
                     TABLE B13: A CCOUNTING FOR C OMPOSITIONAL C HANGES

                                                      Turnover                 Professional Occ.
                                                   (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)
                       Classified X After       -0.126       -0.151             0.0278       0.0364
                                                 (0.0271)     (0.0267)         (0.0176)      (0.0191)
                       District FE                 Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
                       Year FE                     Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
                       Position FE                 No             Yes            No            Yes
                       Observations              41267           41267          7652          7652
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table shows how the estimated effects of the reform on employee
turnover and the likelihood than an employee would have held a professional occupation change as we add position
fixed effects. A position is defined as a combination between an occupation (for instance, "clerk") and a compensation.
Adding position fixed effects shuts down the effects of the reform that stem from compositional changes in a district's
workforce. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.




                   TABLE B14: M OTIVES FOR C OLLECTOR T URNOVER , 1871-1893


                                                                     (1)               (2)
                                                                   Number              %
                                  Deceased                                47        8.4
                                  Removed or Suspended                   183       32.6
                                  Resigned                               116       20.7
                                  Term Expired                           215       38.3
                                  Total                                  561       100

Notes: This table shows the motives why a new collector had to be nominated based on data from the "Journals of
Executive Proceedings of the Senate" (Senate, 1875).




                                                            68
       TABLE B15: C OLLECTORS T RANSITION AND (L AGGED ) D ISTRICT P ERFORMANCE



                                                                            Transition
                                               (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)        (6)
   log(Receipts) at t-1                     -0.00323                                    -0.0120
                                            (0.0195)                                   (0.0208)
   log(Expenses) at t-1                                     0.0148                                    0.00594
                                                           (0.0319)                                   (0.0328)
   log(Receipts/Expenses) at t-1                                         -0.00873                                 -0.0140
                                                                         (0.0198)                                (0.0205)
   District FE                                 Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
   Year FE                                     Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes        Yes
   Region X Time FE                            No            No            No            Yes            Yes        Yes
   Observations                                939           935           935           939            935        935

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. We estimate specification 6. The outcome variable Transition measures
whether there is a new collector at time t. The regressors are measures of district performance assessed at time t - 1.
The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.




TABLE B16: E FFECTS          OF THE     R EFORM      ON    R EVENUE      FROM      F INES   AND      L ABOR , D IFFERENCE -
IN -D IFFERENCES



                                                  log(Fines+Labor)          log(Fines+Labor+1)
                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                        Classified X After        -0.00539       -0.129      -0.173          -0.311
                                                   (0.256)      (0.199)     (0.262)         (0.211)
                        District FE                  Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes
                        Year FE                      Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes
                        Region X Time FE             No            Yes        No               Yes
                        Observations                 895           895        940              940

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This figure uses data on the amount of revenue collected from "fines,
penalties and forfeitures" and "labor, drayage and storage" from the Annual Reports of the Secretary of the Treasury
(US Congress, 1874-1893) . Classif ied × Af ter takes a value of one for districts that were part of the classified Customs
Service after 1883. All columns include year and district fixed effects. Even columns also include Region × T ime fixed
effects. The sample is restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors are clustered at the
district level.




                                                             69
                TABLE B17: S PILLOVERS TO N ON - CLASSIFIED D ISTRICTS , R ECEIPTS

                                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)
               Distance Closest Classified X After             -0.0413     -0.0511       0.152       -0.00241
                                                               (0.126)     (0.137)      (0.143)       (0.215)
               District FE                                        Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
               Year FE                                            Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
               Observations                                       1500       1340          720           420
               Comparison group                                    0+         5+           10+           20+
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. An observation corresponds to a district-year. This table shows the
correlation between distance to the closest classified district and a district's total receipts. The sample is restricted to
non-classified districts.



      TABLE B18: S PILLOVERS TO N ON - CLASSIFIED D ISTRICTS , P ERSONNEL O UTCOMES

                                                              (1)                 (2)                    (3)
                                                           Turnover        Professional Occ.         Below Cutoff
        Distance to Closest Classified X After              -0.0180               0.0108                    0.0330
                                                            (0.0193)             (0.0343)                  (0.0224)
        District FE                                            Yes                   Yes                     Yes
        Year FE                                                Yes                   Yes                     Yes
        Observations                                          7753                   449                     8238
Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. An observation corresponds to an employee-year. This table shows
the correlation between distance to the closest classified district and personnel outcomes. The sample is restricted to
non-classified districts.



TABLE B19: S PILLOVERS TO N ON - CLASSIFIED D ISTRICTS , E XCLUDING N ON -C LASSIFIED D IS -
TRICTS IN C LOSE P ROXIMITY TO A C LASSIFIED D ISTRICT



                                                  (1)          (2)             (3)                 (4)
                   Classified X After          0.0251       0.00703         -0.00443             0.0283
                                               (0.185)      (0.194)          (0.206)             (0.208)
                   District FE                   Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes
                   Year FE                       Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes
                   Observations                  940          880            820               700
                   Comparison group              All       50+ miles      100+ miles        200+ miles

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. This table shows the estimated effects of the reform on log receipts when we
restrict the control group to districts whose port of entry was at least 50, 100 or 200 miles away from the closest classified
district's port of entry.



                                                             70
TABLE B20: E FFECTS OF THE R EFORM ON R ECEIPTS AND E XPENSES OVER THE L ONGER - TERM


                                                        1874-1893               1874-1904
                                                       (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)
                         Classified X After         0.0358        -0.0543   0.00656     -0.0665
                                                    (0.137)       (0.138)   (0.161)     (0.168)
                         Region X Time FE              No          Yes         No          Yes
                         Customhouse FE               Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
                         Year FE                      Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes
                         Comparison group             10+          10+        10+         10+
                         Observations                 940          940        1457        1457

Notes:   p < 0.01,   p < 0.05, p < 0.1. The dependent variable is the natural log of the ratio between total receipts
and expenses. Classif ied × Af ter takes a value of one for districts that were part of the classified Customs Service
starting in 1883. Odd columns include year and district fixed effects. Even columns also include Region × T ime fixed
effects. Columns (1) and (2) report the results for the dependent variable in the first 10 years of the reform (up to 1893),
while columns (3) and (4) report the results for the dependent variable in the first 20 years (up to 1904). The sample is
restricted to districts with at least 10 employees by 1883. Standard errors clustered at the district level.




                                                             71
