                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

    DO WORKFARE PROGRAMS LIVE UP TO THEIR PROMISES? EXPERIMENTAL
                    EVIDENCE FROM COTE D'IVOIRE
                                       Marianne Bertrand
                                         Bruno Crépon
                                       Alicia Marguerie
                                        Patrick Premand

                                      Working Paper 28664
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28664
                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021

This paper is the result of a collaboration with the government of Côte d'Ivoire. The public works
intervention we study is part of an Emergency Youth Employment and Skills Development
Project (PEJEDEC), funded by the World Bank and managed by BCPE, the Coordination Office
for Employment Programs ("Bureau de Coordination des Programmes Emploi"), under the
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs of Côte d'Ivoire. Data collection for the study was financed
by PEJEDEC. Additional funding for the study came from the MESF and DIME i2i Trust Funds
at the World Bank. Crépon consulted for the World Bank during study implementation. Premand
worked for the World Bank during study implementation. Marguerie consulted for BCPE during
study implementation and currently works for the World Bank. We are very thankful to Adama
Bamba, Hermann Toualy, Ismahel Abdoul Barry and Fabrice Konan at BCPE; Marius Pokou,
Martin Kouakou, Yves N'Cho and Kassi Ernest Bohoussou at AGEROUTE; as well as
Hamoud Wedoud Abdel Kamil at the World Bank. We thank Sondo Eloi Somtinda for
outstanding field coordination throughout the study; Hugues Kouadio, Rosine Addy
Mosso, Marie Judith Soro and Nathaniel Gbenro at ENSEA for leading baseline and
midline data collection; as well as Jean Awe and Ismahel Abdoul Barry at BCPE for
leading endline data collection. Horacio Vera Cossio, Morgane Hoffmann and Bertille
Picard provided excellent research assistance and contributions, in particular on machine
learning applications. Morgane Hoffmann drafted the machine learning appendix. We are
deeply indebted to Susan Athey, Stefan Wager, Jonathan Davis and Jann Spiess for their
suggestions on machine learning implementation. We thank Lori Beaman, Christopher
Blattman, Stefanie Brodmann, Deon Filmer, Emanuela Galasso, Jessica Goldberg, Rema Hanna,
Clement Imbert, Michael Knaus, Michael Lerner, William Parienté, Anthony Strittmatter,
Dominique Van de Walle and seminar participants at CREST, UChicago, CSAE, ILO, IZA, St-
Gallen and the World Bank for useful comments and suggestions. Computational reproducibility
has been verified by DIME analytics. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions of the paper
are those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank and its
affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.
© 2021 by Marianne Bertrand, Bruno Crépon, Alicia Marguerie, and Patrick Premand.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Workfare Programs Live Up to Their Promises? Experimental Evidence from Cote D'Ivoire
Marianne Bertrand, Bruno Crépon, Alicia Marguerie, and Patrick Premand
NBER Working Paper No. 28664
April 2021
JEL No. C93,H53,I38,J24,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

Workfare programs are one of the most popular social protection and employment policy
instruments in the developing world. They evoke the promise of efficient targeting, as well as
immediate and lasting impacts on participants' employment, earnings, skills and behaviors. This
paper evaluates contemporaneous and post-program impacts of a public works intervention in
Côte d'Ivoire. The program was randomized among urban youths who self-selected to participate
and provided seven months of employment at the formal minimum wage. Randomized subsets of
beneficiaries also received complementary training on basic entrepreneurship or job search skills.
During the program, results show limited impacts on the likelihood of employment, but a shift
toward wage jobs, higher earnings and savings, as well as changes in work habits and behaviors.
Fifteen months after the program ended, savings stock remain higher, but there are no lasting
impacts on employment or behaviors, and only limited impacts on earnings. Machine learning
techniques are applied to assess whether program targeting can improve. Significant
heterogeneity in impacts on earnings is found during the program but not post-program.
Departing from self-targeting improves performance: a range of practical targeting mechanisms
achieve impacts close to a machine learning benchmark by maximizing contemporaneous impacts
without reducing post-program impacts. Impacts on earnings remain substantially below program
costs even under improved targeting.

Marianne Bertrand                               Alicia Marguerie
Booth School of Business                        The World Bank
University of Chicago                           1818 H St. NW, MSN MC7-634
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                      Washington, DC 20433
Chicago, IL 60637                               amarguerie@worldbank.org
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu              Patrick Premand
                                                The World Bank
Bruno Crépon                                    1818 H Street, N.W.
CREST                                           Washington, DC 20433
15, boulevard Gabriel Peri                      ppremand@worldbank.org
92245 Malakoff Cedex
France
crepon@ensae.fr
1    Introduction

Public works programs are an important instrument in the portfolio of policy makers trying
to address the social challenges of unemployment, underemployment and poverty. They offer
temporary employment, typically remunerated at the minimum wage or below, for the creation of
public goods, such as roads or infrastructure. In Sub-Saharan Africa, our context in this paper,
labor-intensive public works programs have been adopted in response to transient negative shocks
such as those induced by economic downturns, climatic shocks or episodes of violent conflicts, and
often aim to offer public employment as a stabilization instrument.

While traditional welfare programs, such as cash transfers, could also be used to support the
poor and vulnerable, workfare programs have some theoretical advantages that could make them
superior poverty alleviation tools than welfare programs, both in the short- and medium-run.
A first stated advantage of workfare programs, as highlighted by Besley and Coate (1992) or
Ravallion (1991), is that they can in principle solve the difficult problem of targeting. The
targeting of social protection programs is particularly complex in low-income countries because
of a lack of robust data, challenges in identifying beneficiaries at the bottom of the welfare
distribution, as well as weak systems and institutions, leading to potential errors of inclusion or
exclusion. Public works programs very often rely on self-targeting to select transfer beneficiaries,
based on the idea that only the more disadvantaged would be willing to supply labor. How well
self-targeting works in reaching the most vulnerable will, however, depend on how broadly (or
narrowly) appealing the public works option is (accounting for earnings and disutility of work)
compared to the alternative. In environments such as those in many developing countries where
a large fraction of the population is under-employed in informal work paying below the legal
minimum wage, workfare programs could appeal to a broad cross-section of the population and
thus could fail to appropriately target transfers towards the most vulnerable.

A second stated advantage of workfare programs is that they may have longer-lasting positive
impacts on individual beneficiaries than standard welfare programs. Regular work, even if un-
pleasant, may improve skills, behaviors, work habits, or well-being (such as self-esteem or mental
health). Particularly relevant to post-conflict environments, engaging beneficiaries in cash-for-
work rather than providing cash transfers may also operate as a social stabilization tool through
an incapacitation effect: time spent working may displace risky behaviors or socially disrup-
tive activities. All of this may translate into lasting behavioral changes that may increase labor

                                                 2
productivity, such as by building regular work habits that might be especially difficult to learn
outside of regular formal employment. Furthermore, through skill development or the signaling
value of prior work experience, public works may increase the future employability or productiv-
ity of the beneficiaries. Such longer-term benefits can potentially be further enhanced by adding
complementary productive interventions, such as savings facilitation or training, to the workfare
experience. Whether post-program benefits of participation in public works on employment, be-
haviors or skills exist, however, largely remains an empirical question. And if such post-program
benefits exist, it is unclear whether these benefits are tied to the distinctive "work" part of work-
fare programs (such as changes in work habits or behaviors), or whether they derive from more
generic income support (such as by enabling saving and investing in productive activities), a chan-
nel that would also extend to traditional welfare programs. In addition, and of central interest to
this paper, if such post-program benefits exist, it is unknown whether there is a trade-off between
the shorter-term objectives of public work programs (better targeting cash transfers towards the
most vulnerable) and any such longer-term benefits.1

This paper assesses the extent to which these two main promises of public works programs hold
in practice, namely that self-targeting is efficient and that the programs induce immediate and
lasting impacts. As such, the paper makes two main contributions. First, we analyze both the
contemporaneous and post-program impacts of a randomized public work program on participants'
employment, earnings and behaviors. Second, we leverage machine learning techniques to study
the heterogeneity of program impacts, which is key to assess whether departing from self-targeting
would improve program effectiveness. Using machine learning as a benchmark, we analyze how
program performance would change under alternative self-targeting and targeting approaches.

The public works program we study was implemented by the C^
                                                          ote d'Ivoire government in the
aftermath of a post-electoral crisis in 2010/2011, and was funded by an emergency loan from the
World Bank. The stated objective of the program was to improve access to temporary employment
opportunities among low-skilled young (18-30) men and women in urban or semi-urban areas who
were unemployed or underemployed, as well as to develop their skills through work experience and
   1
    There are other stated advantages of workfare programs. Workfare programs contribute to the creation or
maintenance of public assets (e.g. better roads) which may benefit the broader community; this argument is
particularly relevant in contexts where physical infrastructure was destroyed or damaged because of a crisis (e.g.
climatic shocks or violent conflict). Another advantage of public work programs compared to traditional welfare
programs is that they are often politically more acceptable and sustainable: political preferences for workfare
programs are often linked to (valid or not) concerns about welfare dependency (and how unconditional transfers
may disincentivize work) as well as a desire to generate immediate visible improvements to employment conditions.



                                                        3
complementary training. Participants in the public works program were employed for a period of
7 months to rehabilitate and clean road infrastructure. Program participants worked 6 hours per
day, 5 days per week and were remunerated at the statutory minimum daily wage, corresponding
to about $10 PPP 2014 per day (CFA 2,500), or approximately $223 PPP 2014 per month (CFA
55,000).2

All young men and women in the required age range and residing in one of 16 urban localities in
C^
 ote d'Ivoire were eligible to apply to the program. Because the number of applicants outstripped
supply in each locality, fair access was based on a public lottery, setting the stage for a robust causal
evaluation of the impacts of the program. In addition, randomized subsets of beneficiaries were
also offered (i) basic entrepreneurship training to facilitate set-up of new household enterprises
and entry into self-employment, or (ii) training in job search skills and sensitization on wage
employment opportunities to facilitate access to wage jobs (e.g. help in identifying wage job
opportunities, CV preparation, interview skills, etc.). We carried out rich surveys of youth in the
treatment and control groups at baseline, during the program (4 to 5 months after the program
had started), and 12 to 15 months after the program ended.

Our results on contemporaneous impacts demonstrate that the program had limited effects on
the likelihood of employment, but induced shifts in the composition of employment. The value
of the program for the modal applicant was therefore not as a way to escape unemployment but
more as a way to escape under-employment in low-paying informal activities: monthly earnings
are about CFA 27,083 higher in the treatment group, from a base of CFA 42,841 in the control
group. While the program lifted earnings, foregone earnings are quantitatively large, with earning
gains representing only about 53 percent of the transfer.3 The intervention increased savings and
well-being. It also induced changes in work habits and behaviors in the short-term.

Twelve to 15 months after program completion, we do not find impacts on the likelihood of
employment, hours worked or the composition of employment (salaried work vs. self-employment).
While we find some post-program impacts on earnings, which mostly stem from self-employment
activities, they are small and not always robust to alternative specifications. Savings stock and
well-being remain higher, but there are no lasting impacts on work habits or behaviors.
   2
     We use an exchange rate of USD 1=XOF 493.757 (official average exchange rate in 2014 (from IMF)) to convert
CFA francs to US dollars. We use the PPP conversion factor, GDP (LCU per international $) of 246.519 for C^  ote
d'Ivoire in 2014 (from the World Bank).
   3
     Datt and Ravallion (1994) and Jalan and Ravallion (2003) estimate the net income gains from public works
programs in India and Argentina, finding foregone income ranging between 30% and 50%.


                                                       4
Since our results show that self-targeting based on the formal minimum wage failed in this context,
how much would results improve if the offered wage was lowered or if the targeting criteria
were adjusted? We use the distribution of predicted impacts derived from machine learning
methods to answer both of these questions. First, we find that lowering the wage below the formal
minimum wage would not improve program performance. As we explain in a simple theoretical
framework, this is because the improvement in self-targeting is offset by lower transfer amounts
and because the improvement in self-targeting is itself limited in our empirical context given the
small concentration of "marginal" applicants with small predicted program impacts.

Second, we show that there are substantial differences in predicted impacts across participants
during the program. The average impact on earnings in the short-term for the top 25% of the
predicted distribution (upper quartile) is approximately 2.2 times more than for the bottom 25%
(lower quartile). In contrast, we do not detect heterogeneity in post-program impacts on earnings
and find no evidence of systematic correlation (positive or negative) between short-term and
long-term impacts. We document the characteristics of those who benefit the most from public
works, and assess how alternative targeting rules based on these characteristics would improve
program effectiveness. Compared to the benchmark scenario with self-targeting based on the
formal minimum wage, the cost-effectiveness ratio would improve by 30% to 52% by targeting
women only, or by targeting youths with low predicted baseline earnings. In the end, direct
impacts on youths' earnings during and after the program remain substantially below program
costs, especially in light of large administrative costs. The cost per participant is about 2 times
the estimated direct impacts on earnings up to the endline (12 to 15 months after the program)
even under improved targeting.

Despite the popularity of public works programs, experimental evidence on their overall effec-
tiveness remains relatively limited (Subbarao et al., 2012; Gehrke and Hartwig, 2018). Existing
evidence mostly comes from quasi-experimental studies on a small number of influential programs,
especially from India (Murgai et al., 2015; Imbert and Papp, 2015, 2019; Muralidharan et al., 2016,
2017). Most evidence focuses on short-term economic impacts during the intervention,4 and in
   4
     Several papers have assessed the role of public works as a short-term safety net or insurance mechanism
providing temporary employment and income to vulnerable populations during lean agricultural seasons or after
economic shocks. Findings regarding program impacts on welfare and food security are mixed. Galasso and
Ravallion (2004) document how a workfare program in Argentina attenuated the negative welfare effects of an
economic crisis, and Ravi and Engler (2015) find beneficial impacts of India's workfare scheme on consumption
and food security. On the other hand, Beegle et al. (2017) do not find significant effects on food security in
Malawi in one of the few randomized control trial of a public works program so far. Gilligan et al. (2009) also
find limited effects of the Ethiopia PNSP program, although households who received larger transfer amounts did


                                                      5
fewer cases impacts on risky behaviors related to conflict or violence (Fetzer, 2020; Amaral et al.,
2015). The effectiveness of workfare programs largely depends on whether they have productive
impacts (Murgai et al., 2015), and our paper relates to a small literature that assesses whether
beneficiaries of public works programs find pathways towards more productive post-program em-
ployment in wage jobs or in the informal sector. Ravallion et al. (2005) do not find significant
impacts on post-program earnings in Argentina. Alik-Lagrange et al. (2017) find some persistent
effects in rural areas of Colombia and suggest participants acquired new skills. Rosas and Sabar-
wal (2016) document investments from public works beneficiaries in assets and micro-enterprises
in Sierra Leone, and Deininger et al. (2016) in agriculture in India. A few studies analyze the effec-
tiveness of complementing public works programs with training or savings facilitation, including
Galasso et al. (2004) and Almeida and Galasso (2010). Gilligan et al. (2009) report impacts of the
Ethiopia public works program combined with agricultural support on adoption of agricultural
technologies and off-farm small businesses. To our knowledge, no study has analyzed whether
there are trade-offs between maximizing contemporaneous and post-program benefits from public
works.

Our paper further complements the literature on the targeting of social programs, a topic that
has garnered substantial policy and research interest (for recent reviews, see Hanna and Olken
(2018); Banerjee et al. (2019); Gentilini et al. (2020)). Targeting experiments have predominantly
tested how best to rank households in terms of poverty in the context of cash transfer programs,
mainly contrasting community-based approaches and statistical methods such as proxy means
testing (e.g. Alatas et al. (2012, 2016); Premand and Schnitzer (2020)). Questions have been
raised as to whether there are trade-offs between selecting the poorest and maximizing program
impacts (Basurto et al., 2020). Earlier studies of workfare programs focused on analyzing the
profiles of beneficiaries and benefit incidence patterns.5 Following the seminal work of Manski
(2004), targeting has also been studied as a statistical decision problem. The approach aims to
derive an assignment rule that maximizes welfare after program implementation. Heterogeneous
treatment effects are estimated before being plugged into a social welfare objective function to
derive the optimal assignment. This is the approach followed by Bhattacharya and Dupas (2012)
see improvements in some measures of food security. A few studies have estimated the impact of public works
programs on school enrollment and child labor (Li et al., 2013; Islam and Sivasankaran, 2015; Shah and Steinberg,
2019), also with mixed results.
   5
     See for instance Ravallion et al. (1993); Datt and Ravallion (1994); Jalan and Ravallion (2003); Alik-Lagrange
and Ravallion (2018).




                                                        6
in a context, close to ours, in which the program allocation involves a budget constraint.6 In this
paper, we use machine learning techniques as a benchmark to assess alternative targeting and
self-targeting options.

On the methodological front, our paper relates to a growing literature applying machine learning
to analyze treatment heterogeneity. Since the influential contribution of Athey and Imbens (2016),
several recent papers have explored the application of these techniques.7 In our application, (i) we
assess the extent of heterogeneity in program impacts on earnings, (ii) we assess how a reduction of
the offered wage would affect performance based on the distribution of predicted impacts, (iii) we
document the profile of individuals with highest predicted impacts, (iv) we assess whether there
are trade-offs between maximizing contemporaneous and post-program impacts, (v) we illustrate
how machine learning can be used to explore mechanisms for impacts, and (vi) we compare how
alternative targeting rules compare to machine learning estimates. One important aspect of our
application is that we combine machine learning techniques with the statistical framework for
inference developed in Chernozhukov et al. (2020), of which Breda et al. (2020) offer another
application.

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines a framework to analyze how self-
targeting induces heterogeneity in public works impact. Section 3 describes the intervention design
and data. Section 4 presents the empirical strategy and machine learning approach. Section
5 presents results on average impacts, and Section 6 on heterogeneity. Section 7 concludes.
Additional material, tables and figures are presented in the Appendix.



2       Framework

2.1     Contemporaneous Impacts: A Simple Framework

In this section, we present a simple framework that clarifies how: 1) one should expect hetero-
geneity of program impacts under self-targeting; 2) alternative targeting approaches may improve
    6
     Kitagawa and Tetenov (2018) develop an alternative approach that avoids the intermediate step of estimating
heterogeneous treatment effects and directly identifies the assignment rule. See also Athey and Wager (2017) for
an application to observational studies.
   7
     For a review, see Knaus et al. (2020b), as well as applications in a variety of context including marketing
(Ascarza, 2018), cash grants for firms (McKenzie and Sansone, 2019), employment programs (Knaus et al., 2020a),
financial work incentive programs (Strittmatter, 2018), summer employment programs for disadvantaged youth
(Davis and Heller, 2017, 2020), or role models and educational choices (Breda et al., 2020).


                                                       7
program effectiveness; and 3) variation in the offered program compensation will impact self-
selection and program effectiveness. Appendix Section C provides additional details.

Let  denote potential participants' hourly earnings in non-program activities, h hours worked,
and c(h) the additive disutility of working h hours. Absent the workfare program, individuals have
an optimal number of hours worked h0 () given by  = c (h0 ), leading to earnings W0 () = h0 ()
and utility U0 () = h0 () - c(h0 ()).

Assume that participation in the workfare program provides a transfer T in exchange of hp hours
of work. Further assume that the disutility of time spent in program activities is the same as of
time spent in non-program activities. When an individual participates in the program she can
also decide to work outside the program. We note W1 (T, ) her total earnings in case of program
participation and U1 (T, ) the corresponding utility.

The impact on individual earnings before the actual decision to participate or not is defined as:



                              W1 (T, ) - W0 () = T - (T, ) = s(T, ).                                      (1)


where (T, ) represents the earnings that individuals forgo in order to participate in the program,
and s(T, ) is the net impact on earnings.

Individuals decide to participate in the program if the impact on their utility is positive: U1 () -
U0 () > 0.

There are two cases to consider (see illustration in Appendix Figures B1). The first corresponds
to a small transfer T offered for the hp hours of work: T < hp c (hp ). In such a case, only
individuals with a low productivity participate and when they participate they only work in the
program, leading to earnings W1 () = T and foregone earnings h0 (). The productivity threshold
 triggering participation is given by T - c(hp ) = U0 (). Individuals with a productivity larger
than  do not participate.8

The second case corresponds to larger transfers: T > hp c (hp ). In such a case, there are two types
of participants. Individuals with a small productivity ( <  = c (hp )) only work in the program,
again with earnings W1 () = T and foregone earnings h0 (). Individuals with intermediate
productivity ( <  < ) participate in the program but they also work outside the program;
  8
   Notice that in such a case the impact on earnings for marginal applicants is T - h() = c(hp ) - c(h()) > 0.
There is a discontinuous increase in earnings for marginal participants.

                                                      8
their number of hours worked outside of program activities will be given by h0 () - hp , as their
optimal total number of hours worked is not impacted by program participation. Their earnings
in the program will therefore be given by W1 () = T + (h0 () - hp ), with foregone earnings hp .9
Individuals with large productivity ( >  = T /hp ) do not participate in the program.10

Importantly, note that in all cases above, a change in the transfer T does not change forgone
earnings, so that (T, ) = () and hence s(T - x, ) = s(T, ) - x.

Whichever case applies, given the heterogeneity parameter , there will be variation in the program
impact on earnings.

Individuals decide whether or not to apply for the workfare program solely based on whether
participation will increase their earnings, i.e. if s(T, ) > 0.11 We call sT  s(T, ) this random
variable in the population of those who self-select into the program.

Let B be the total budget for transfers in the program and NA (T ) the number of individuals who
self-select into the program when the transfer level is T . Assume, that B < T NA (T ), that is,
the program is over-subscribed and a lottery is used to allocate program slots among the pool of
self-selected applicants, as in our application. The lottery success rate (T ) is simply given by
B = T NA (T )(T ). The average contemporaneous program impact on earnings over those who
self-select (also including those who were randomized out) is:12



                                           Slottery (T ) = (T )E (sT )                                          (2)


In order to increase program performance, targeting could be introduced to prioritize inframarginal
applicants, or the effectiveness of self-targeting could possibly be improved with a lower transfer
amount. We discuss both approaches below.

We first look at potential improvements associated with targeting. A growing literature explores
   9
      Given the unchanged total number of hours of work for these now marginal applicants, their change in utility
is the same as their change in earnings. In such a case, the lower bound of the distribution of the impacts on
earnings should be zero.
   10
      It is possible to show that  <    < .
   11
      Marginal applicants are those who have the same utility whether they participate in the program or not. As
stressed above, for marginal applicants who work outside the program, the difference in utility is the same as
the difference in earnings. In such a case, there should be no discontinuity in earnings for marginal applicants.
Our estimation of the distribution of individual treatment effects on earnings shows that this case is likely in our
setting.
   12
      Expectations are taken over the population of those who select for the transfer T , i.e. they are taken with
respect to the distribution f (|S (T, ) > 0).


                                                         9
the idea of improving program performance through targeting (see Manski (2004)). Our approach
follows Bhattacharya and Dupas (2012), who seek to maximize outcomes under a budget con-
straint for transfers (B in our case). Consider randomly assigning the program to applicants, with
probabilities depending on some observable characteristic z . The assignment probability would
be a function (z ). The objective is to find the assignment function (.) that maximizes program
impacts on earnings:



                       Stargeting (T, ) = E ((z )sT ) s.t. T NA (T )E ((z )) = B                     (3)


Given E ((z )sT ) = E ((z )E (sT |z )), the optimal assignment rule is simply  (z ) = 1(sT (z ) >
s), where sT (z ) = E (sT |z ) and s is chosen such that T NA (T )P (sT (z ) > s) = B , i.e. P (sT (z ) >
s) = (T ). In this case, the average contemporaneous program impact on earnings is given by:


                                Stargeting (T,  ) = (T )E (sT |sT > s)                               (4)


Such an assignment rule obviously dominates the assignment using a lottery. In the empirical
section of the paper, we apply machine learning techniques to estimate the function sT (z ). We
then compute the gains associated with this optimized assignment rule, compared both to lot-
tery assignment as well as alternative targeting rules (such as prioritizing women or prioritizing
applicants with low self-reported or proxied earnings at baseline).

Second, we consider the effects of changing the transfer amount from T to T - x, for a fixed
number of hours of work in the program (hp ). As long as the program is oversubscribed, lowering
the transfer reallocates program slots from those with lower impact to those with higher impact.
While this effect is positive (both in terms of reallocation and in terms of more individuals being
served), it comes at the cost of lowering the transfer which negatively affects all participants.
Therefore, the change in the average impact on earnings is ambiguous. We derive the expression
for the change in the average impact in appendix C.2 and show that it depends on the distribution
of sT .

Indeed, consider all the (potential) distributions achieving the same average impact on earnings.
Absent an adjustment of the lottery success rate, a reduction in the transfer causes an equivalent
reduction in average impact across all these distributions. However, given a fixed budget for the



                                                   10
program, the lottery success rate can increase; by how much will depend on the distribution of
individual program impacts rather than the average program impact. In particular, in distribu-
tions that include a large share of applicants with an impact close to zero, a large number of
individuals will select-out and thus the lottery success rate will increase more. If the increase in
the lottery success rate is large enough, the impact on those who can enter the program more
than compensates the initial reduction in average earnings.

More generally, under such an alternative contract, the youth who self-select for the program are
those for whom s(T - x) > 0 or, given s(T - x) = sT - x, those for whom sT > x. The number of
individuals who apply is given by NA (T - x) = NA (T )P (sT > x), and the number of people who
can be served N (T - x) is given by B = (T - x)N (T - x).13 A lottery is again used to allocate
the program among applicants as long as N (T - x) < NA (T - x). The rate of success of this
lottery (T - x) depends on x and is given in this case by (T - x) = N (T - x)/NA (T - x) =
B/(NA (T )(T - x)P (sT > x)) = (T )T /((T - x)P (sT > x)) (and by 1 otherwise). Clearly, the
lottery rate increases with x: there are fewer individuals who still apply to the program and
the amount to distribute per participant is by definition lower. The average contemporaneous
program impact on earnings over those who would self-select for the full transfer T (thus including
a zero impact for those who select out for the smaller transfer T - x as well as those who are
randomized out) can be written as:

                                                                                T
        Slottery (T - x) = (T - x)E ((sT - x)1(st - x > 0) = (T )                  E (sT - x|sT > x)           (5)
                                                                              T -x


Unlike Stargeting in equation 4, there is no direct indication that changing the transfer amount
from T to T - x would lead to an improvement in Slottery . Actually, the impact on earnings after
a reduction in the transfer depends on the form of the distribution of sT . Appendix Figure B2
provides two examples that illustrate how Slottery (T - x) changes with x for different forms of the
distribution sT .14

The two distributions are chosen to be symmetric around a mean impact of CFA 25,000. They
have very different shapes, however.
  13
     In the framework, we consider the average earnings over those who initially self-select in the program. We
could consider that the social planner seeks to maximize the average of a function of earnings instead of earnings,
for example the share of those whose earnings are above a given threshold S . In such a case, it is worth noting
that as long as the program is oversubscribed, a reduction in the transfer increases the number of individuals who
receive the transfer, which would improve this objective if the transfer is above S .
  14
     Appendix Section C studies these relationships more formally.


                                                        11
In the first example, the distribution of individual program impacts has a mode close to zero,
corresponding to a situation with a large mass of applicants with small program impacts. In such
a case, when the transfer is reduced, there are many potential participants who no longer apply
(i.e., P (s - x > 0) decreases sharply). This makes it possible to substantially increase the lottery
success rate and this increase is large enough to compensate for the reduction in the size of the
transfer, so that the average program impact on earnings in the population of initial applicants
increases.

In the second example, the mode of the distribution is located at a larger value and the density is
almost zero for very low values of s, corresponding to a situation with a small mass of applicants
with small program impacts. As a result, when the transfer decreases, there are very few people
who do not apply for the program anymore. The lottery rate increases only by a small amount,
which is not enough to compensate for the direct negative effect of the reduction in the size of
the transfer. As a result, the average program impact on earnings in the population of initial
applicants decreases with a reduction in the transfer amount.

The shape of the distribution of sT therefore plays an important role in overall program perfor-
mance and in Slottery (T - x), the average contemporaneous program impact on earnings for a
reduced transfer. For this reason, the empirical section will study the distribution of predicted
impacts on earnings. While this true density function is unknown, we can proxy for it using
machine learning estimates of treatment effects on contemporaneous earnings conditional on a
rich set of available covariates.



2.2    Post-Program Impacts

A first-order question in the public works literature relates to the existence and size of post-
program impacts in the medium to long-term. Indeed, a growing number of public works programs
also have the objective to facilitate participants' transition towards more productive occupations
after the program. There is little evidence in the literature on such long-term effects, although
there are several potential channels through which they could unfold. An important consideration
relates to the relative allocation of short-term earning gains between consumption and savings,
which will affect post-program impacts.

First, public works can help participants overcome capital constraints. Several experiments have


                                                 12
found relatively large returns to capital for poor households (for a review, see Blattman and
Ralston (2015)). Common instruments to make capital available to youth, such as micro credit,
have not proven very effective. As such, the positive income shock induced by public works
programs (but truly any income support program) could alleviate capital constraints, facilitate
savings and investments.15

There are other possible mechanisms for longer-term impacts that are specific to workfare pro-
grams. Subsidized employment could be a way to improve experience, skills and productivity
of participants, and ultimately increase the likelihood that they find a wage job post-program.
Also, there might be behavioral effects related to program participation. For example, a workfare
program requiring youths to form work habits, like getting up each morning to go to work, may
induce lasting behavioral changes that will improve future employability.

On the other hand, it is also possible that participation in a public works program may have
deleterious long-term impacts on participants. First, the work experience provided through the
program might be of little value or only enhance skills that are not demanded in the labor market.
Negative long-term impacts could also emerge because of the potential "stigmatization" of partici-
pants, with program participation sending negative signals to potential future employers. Finally,
participants may give up some valuable activities or social connections in order to participate in
the program, which may induce a form of capital destruction that may take time to rebuild upon
exit from the program.



3      Intervention and Data

3.1     The Public Works Program

The public works intervention we study is part of an Emergency Youth Employment and Skills
Development Project (PEJEDEC) set up after the 2010/2011 post-electoral crisis.16 The public
works program aims to provide access to temporary employment in road maintenance (such as
  15
     Savings can have several potential post-program benefits, including precautionary savings to absorb future
shocks, or savings to finance investments, like training or capital for income-generating activities.
  16
     Public works programs were first introduced in C^ote d'Ivoire by a post-conflict assistance project (PAPC) in the
aftermath of the 2002-2007 armed conflict. The PEJEDEC public works program built on that experience. It was
implemented by the national roads management agency (AGEROUTE), and supervised by BCP, the Coordination
Office for Employment Programs ("Bureau de Coordination des Programmes Emploi"), under the Ministry of
Labor and Social Affairs.


                                                         13
sweeping roads or cleaning ditches) for low-skilled youths in urban areas. The program targets
youths aged 18-30 in 16 localities throughout the country.17 Participants are offered temporary
employment for 6 hours per day and 5 days a week for a total of six months.18 Participants work
in teams of 25 individuals (called "brigades "), under the supervision of a team leader and a local
supervisor. The jobs are paid CFA 2,500 (approximately $10 PPP 2014) per workday, a wage
equal to the legal daily minimum wage in the formal sector. Wages are paid monthly on bank
accounts that are set-up for all participants upon enrollment. A quota of 30% of program slots
was initially reserved for women.

All participants in the public works program receive a one-week basic life skills training cover-
ing issues related to HIV-AIDS, citizenship and hygiene. Some participants are also offered a
complementary basic entrepreneurship training to facilitate transition into more productive self-
employment upon exit from the program. Finally, other participants are offered a training on
wage jobs search skills and sensitization to wage jobs opportunities, with the objective to fa-
cilitate transition into wage jobs upon exit from the program. Additional information on the
complementary training is provided in Appendix D.



3.2     Experimental Design: Enrollment and Randomization

Four waves of the PEJEDEC workfare program were organized between 2012 and 2015, each
covering 16 localities, with a similar (pre-determined) number of participant slots available for
each locality in each wave. In total, 12,666 youths participated in the program. The randomized
control trial focuses on the second wave of the program, which took place between July 2013 and
February 2014.

The identification strategy relies on a two-step randomization process. The first step involves
individual-level randomization into the program. Before the start of the second wave (and as
was the case for the other waves), an intense communication campaign was organized by the
implementing agency through local newspapers, local radios and public notice boards to invite
interested youths to visit a registration office and apply to the program. Enrollment was open for
two to three weeks in each locality. Only two eligibility criteria were applied during enrollment:
  17
     Four municipalities in Abidjan (Abobo, Yopougon, Koumassi, Marcory) and 12 cities throughout the country
(Yamoussoukro, Bouak´   e, San Pedro, Daloa, Korhogo, Abengourou, Man, Bondoukou, Gagnoa, S´ egu´
                                                                                                ela, Daoukro,
Dimbokro).
  18
     As explained later, the wave of the program under evaluation lasted 7 months.


                                                     14
applicants had to be between 18 and 30 years old, and they should not have participated in the
public works program before.

Once the enrollment period had closed, public lotteries were organized in each locality (separately
for men and women) to randomly select beneficiaries among the registered applicants present at
the lottery.19 In practice, 10,966 youths participated in the public lotteries carried out for the
second wave of the program, during which 3,125 beneficiaries were selected and assigned to 125
brigades of 25 individuals each (17 men, 8 women).20 Replacement of drop-outs was allowed
during the first two months of the program. A waiting list was created to protect the control
group, although in practice replacements were minimal.21 The public lotteries were held in each
locality between the end of June and early July 2013.

The second step involves the randomization of public works brigades into groups receiving different
types of complementary training that took place in the seventh and final month of the program.
Specifically, brigades were randomized into three groups: (i) 45 brigades (1,225 individuals) were
assigned to receiving the public works only; (ii) 40 brigades (1,000 individuals) were assigned to
receiving the public works plus the complementary basic entrepreneurship training, and (iii) 40
brigades (1,000 individuals) were assigned to receiving the public works plus the wage jobs search
skills training. This second randomization was stratified by locality, and was performed through
a lottery held in the project office in the presence of implementing partners and a public notary
in November 2013. The results of this lottery remained confidential until two weeks before the
start of the complementary training (in January 2014) in order to limit potential response bias
during the midline survey.
  19
      Public lotteries have been used continuously in C^ote d'Ivoire as an assignment mechanism to allocate limited
slots for jobs since the introduction of public works in the post-conflict period. The transparency of the process
makes it socially acceptable and limits potential tensions. As such, the first step of the randomization protocol
was already implemented as part of routine program operations.
   20
      Beneficiaries were assigned to brigades within localities based on the number they drew in the public lottery.
   21
      Replacements were only possible based on the waiting list, and had to be stopped when the waiting list was
exhausted. This ensured that individuals in the control group were not offered the program during its implemen-
tation. In practice the waiting lists were never exhausted.




                                                        15
3.3     Timeline and Data

3.3.1    Timeline and Surveys


A baseline survey was conducted shortly after the lotteries. The study sample includes all the
individuals selected to participate in the program after the first randomization (3,125 individuals),
as well as a control group obtained from a (random) sample of 1,035 individuals drawn from
the non-beneficiaries that were not on the waiting list. The data collected at baseline included
information about employment and earnings. It also captured a range of other characteristics
such as risk and time preferences, behavioral skills and results of tests measuring skills or manual
dexterity. Attrition at baseline was very low (1.5%). The public works activities started between
early and late July 2013, depending on the locality. Participants received the one-week life skills
training in August 2013.

A midline survey was conducted on 3,036 individuals (2,001 beneficiaries and the control group)
between the end of November 2013 and early January 2014, i.e. 4 to 5 months after the start of
the program.22 Both treatment and control individuals as well as the heads of their household
were interviewed at midline. Attrition at midline was low (2.6%) and balanced across treatment
and control groups.23 The midline questionnaire includes very detailed modules on employment
(up to three activities), earnings, time use, well-being, behaviors and list experiments to proxy
risky behaviors.

The public works program ended in February 2014. It was originally expected to end in January
2014. However, as the complementary training activities only started in January, participants
were given a one-month extension on their contracts, which extended the public works duration
from 6 to 7 months. This ensured that all brigades of individuals selected to participate in one
of the training programs could do so while being paid by the program (at the same wage) for at
least part of their training, which reduced their opportunity cost of time during the training.24
  22
     The 2,001 treated individuals are a sub-sample of the 3,125 beneficiaries stratified by locality, brigade and
gender. We excluded from the midline survey brigades that had been assigned to the wage employment training.
This is because their supervisors were following a management training at the time of the survey, and we were
wary of any behavioral changes that could potentially affect outcomes.
  23
     A two-weeks tracking phase was implemented in February 2014 to limit attrition, mainly due to the mobility
of control individuals. The tracking helped to reduce attrition rate from 5.4% to 2.6%. The sample for tracking
was randomly selected among the treatment and control groups (stratified by locality and gender) among non-
respondents who were alive, not outside C^ ote d'Ivoire, and excluding individuals that could not be reached since
baseline.
  24
     The complementary trainings were organized between January and mid-March and the second wave of the
program ended between early and mid-February 2014 depending on the locality. 75% of the beneficiaries attended


                                                       16
An endline survey was conducted between March and July 2015, i.e. between 12 to 15 months
after the program ended. The sample included the whole baseline sample of 4,160 individuals
in the treatment and control groups, plus 200 individuals randomly selected to be added to the
control group.25 Again, both experiment subjects and household heads were interviewed. A
tracking phase took place in September 2015. The final attrition rate was 6.2%, and was balanced
between treatment and control groups. The endline questionnaire was based on the midline survey
and enriched with retrospective information on job search, independent activities (including past
projects) and an employment calendar.


3.3.2    Descriptive Statistics


Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the selected applicants (column (1)). Public works ap-
plicants are on average 25 years old, and 94% live in urban areas. Applicants live in households
with 6 members on average, and 23% head a household. 49% did not complete primary school,
and 23% only completed primary school. One third of the applicants have attended some form of
vocational training, mostly informal apprenticeships. In line with the national employment situ-
ation marked more by underemployment in low-earning occupations rather than unemployment,
78% of applicants were working prior to the program. Finally, applicants have limited financial
resources, with only half having saved money over the last three months and 71% reporting being
highly constrained for basic needs expenditures.

Table 2 compares our evaluation sample to a national sample of urban youths (between 18 and
30 years old) to provide insights into public works applicants' profiles. The gender breakdown
and household asset index of public works applicants are quite similar to that of the national
sample, with applicants marginally more male and from marginally poorer households. One main
difference is that program applicants have lower educational attainment than the general youth
population, and are much less likely to be inactive due to being in school. Because program
applicants have left school, they are also more likely to be active and employed than the national
population. Among the active population, the program attracts a higher share of applicants that
are wage employed rather than self-employed or unemployed. As in many developing countries,
part of the second half of training after the end of their contracts. They were given a daily transport allowance of
CFA 1500 (the program wage was CFA 2500) to compensate. The transportation allowance was paid ex-post in
one transfer, based on the actual number of days attended. The remaining 25% were fully under contract during
their training.
  25
     The replenishment of the control group is further explained in section 4.1.


                                                        17
a large share of youths in C^
                            ote d'Ivoire are self-employed and work for themselves. Many are
underemployed as they work long hours but have low earnings. However, they are not necessarily
searching for wage jobs in a traditional labor market, and unemployment tends to be higher among
more educated youths (Christiaensen and Premand (2017)). Overall, Table 2 highlights that the
program attracts youths who have left school and are already active in the labor market for
wage jobs. These comparisons illustrate that the effectiveness of self-targeting is a priori unclear
in contexts with widespread underemployment among low-skill youths: public works are not
expected to attract the (more educated) inactive or unemployed youths, but the (less educated)
youths are largely already active.



4      Empirical Methodology

4.1     Main Specifications

We estimate intent-to-treat (ITT) effects on contemporaneous and post-program outcomes for the
pooled treatment via an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression:


                                         Yi =  + Wi + Xi,l + i                                               (6)


where Y is an outcome of interest for individual i, W is an indicator for treatment (being assigned
to the public works program at first randomization), and X is a vector of stratification variables
(specifically, locality and gender).26 Robust standard errors are clustered at the brigade level for
treated individuals.27

To estimate post-program ITT effects by treatment arm, we use the following specification:


                      Yi =  + 1 Wi + 1 (Wi × T 1i ) + 2 (Wi × T 2i ) + 1 Xi,l + i                            (7)


where T 1 (T 2) is an indicator for being assigned to the complementary self-employment training
  26
     Specification (6) uses probability weights to account for stratification, sampling of non-respondents during
tracking surveys, and enrollment in later waves of the program (see details in Appendix G).
  27
     We suspect within-brigade error correlation due to the interactions between treated individuals who worked
together in the same brigade for several months. Some individuals moved across brigades during the program.
When such movement occurred, we group the different brigades together into a "broad" brigade for clustering.
The results are robust to other definitions of the brigade cluster.



                                                       18
(wage employment training).  estimates the impact of the "pure" public works, while 1 (2 )
estimates the additional effect of the self-employment training (wage employment training).28

We also analyze heterogeneity in treatment effects by group G determined by a set of baseline
characteristics Z (see discussion in section 6):


                   Yi =  + 1 (Wi × Gi ) + 2 (Wi × (1 - Gi )) +   Gi + 2 Xi,l + i                                (8)


We are interested in 1 , which estimates the impact of the pooled treatment for a specific group
G.29

Table 1 presents baseline balance checks between treatment and control groups, with p-values for
differences in column (3). Column (4) contains p-values for a test of whether differences between
all treatment arms are jointly equal to zero. We focus on baseline respondents interviewed at
endline.30 We note that collecting the baseline survey after assignment to the program may have
induced some misreporting. Despite this, there are no quantitatively meaningful differences across
groups. The few imbalances that are statistically significant are of small magnitude, such as school
enrollment, self-reported constraints to repay loans, having an activity or risk aversion.

At midline, compliance to program assignment was high. Only two control individuals ended up
in the program by registering in different locations. Among youth assigned to the public works,
take-up was high with 93% participating more than five out of seven months. In total, youth
worked an average of 141 days out of a maximum of 154 workdays.

The take-up of complementary training was lower than the take-up for the public works inter-
vention: 72% of individuals assigned to self-employment training and 67.2% of those assigned to
wage-employment training attended at least 75% of the training hours. This is in line with take-up
observed in other skill training programs.31 However, for each training, only 10% of individuals
never attended, such that we focus on ITT estimates.

An unforeseen issue emerged at endline. A few individuals from the control group (140) were able
to apply (and, for some, participate) in the third or fourth wave of the program. We account
  28
     Specification (7) includes probability weights as in specification (6).
  29
     Specification (8) includes probability weights as in specification (6).
  30
     We use the same weights as for the estimation. We also verified that there is balance across groups for midline
respondents, and for baseline respondents.
  31
     For instance, in a dual apprenticeship program in C^  ote d'Ivoire, the take-up was 75% (Cr´
                                                                                                epon and Premand,
2019).



                                                        19
for this issue by excluding these individuals from the post-program impact analysis and assigning
larger weights in the post-program analysis to control individuals who also applied in future
waves but were not selected through the public lotteries.32 Furthermore, we randomly select 200
additional applicants from the enrollment lists and add them to the endline sample to maintain
the total size of the control group used for analysis and related statistical power.

Lastly, recent studies have shown that public works programs can have externalities on labor
markets and wages through equilibrium effects. This has mainly been documented in the context
of a large-scale program in India (see Imbert and Papp (2015, 2019), Muralidharan et al. (2016,
2017) or Berg et al. (2018)). With 12,666 beneficiaries over 4 years in 16 urban areas, the size of
the program we study is small and general equilibrium effects are unlikely in our setting.



4.2     Heterogeneity Analysis with Machine Learning Techniques

The standard heterogeneity analysis from equation (8) relies on the estimation of average treat-
ment effects across sub-groups using a linear interaction in a standard regression framework. The
treatment variable is interacted with covariates and predicted impacts can be recovered conditional
on these covariates. This approach raises the issue of selecting the dimensions of heterogeneity,
which pre-analysis plans (Casey et al., 2012; Olken, 2015) and multiple hypothesis testing (List
et al., 2019) can help to partly address. The main innovation of machine learning methods is that
they require fewer assumptions about the source or form of this heterogeneity. Importantly, they
can search for heterogeneity across high-dimensional sets of covariates without assuming a spe-
cific functional form.33 Our motivations to analyze heterogeneity are to find an optimal program
assignment rule in the spirit of the approach in Bhattacharya and Dupas (2012) and to study
how the average contemporaneous program impact on earnings varies with the transfer. For this
purpose, we are interested in identifying a non-parametric estimate of the conditional treatment
effect, which requires the use of a flexible estimator.34
  32
      Specifically, using administrative data from these additional program waves, we were able to identify repeat
applicants, and whether they were selected or not based on the public lotteries. We identified 140 individuals
from our baseline control group (i.e. 13.5%) among beneficiaries of the next waves of the program. We remove the
repeat applicants who were randomly selected for the program from analysis. We then over-weight the non-selected
repeat applicants. See details on weights in Appendix G
   33
      See Athey and Imbens (2016, 2017b,a) for a general discussion of machine learning techniques to analyze
heterogeneous treatment effects, or Athey and Imbens (2016) on the use of regression trees.
   34
      A large variety of estimators have been proposed in the literature, including causal forest (Wager and Athey,
2018), generalized random forest (Athey et al., 2019) or R-learner (Nie and Wager, 2017), and many others. Knaus
et al. (2020a) offer a general presentation of these algorithms as well as Monte Carlo simulations to study their


                                                        20
We are looking to estimate treatment effects for specific subgroups in the population, defined by
their (observable) characteristics z . We would like to estimate the conditional average treatment
effect (CATE) for some subgroups, corresponding to s0 (Z ) = E [Yi (1) - Yi (0)|ZiK = z ] where
Z K is a vector of K baseline covariates (features) and Y (k ) the potential outcome of interest for
treatment (k = 1) and control (k = 0).

A key challenge when using machine learning techniques to study heterogeneity is to derive confi-
dence intervals and perform inference.35 In this paper, we use the inference framework developed
by Chernozhukov et al. (2020), who present a general approach using machine learning estimators
as a proxy predictor to make inference on key features of the CATE function (rather than the whole
function).36 This allows us to (i) formally test for the existence of heterogeneity, (ii) compute
confidence intervals around the conditional treatment effect for groups of interest (such as those
at the top and bottom of the impact distribution), and (iii) compare the characteristics of the
population who benefit the most or the least from the program. The approach in Chernozhukov
et al. (2020) is "generic" in the sense that it applies to any machine learning algorithm used to
estimate heterogeneous treatment effect, including the causal forest and generalized random forest
estimators proposed by Wager and Athey (2018) and Athey et al. (2019). In our own implemen-
tation, we consider several alternative machine learning algorithms (detailed in Appendix F.2).
We present the main results for the best performing algorithm, and provide robustness checks in
the Appendix.

When applying machine learning methods, we split our data so that separate sub-samples are
used to either build the model (the auxiliary sample, on which machine learning predictors are
trained and constructed) or make inference (the main sample, to which the model is applied,
and on which we estimate the different key features of the CATE function). In our application,
this procedure is repeated 100 times on random sub-samples.37 Chernozhukov et al. (2020) offer
a procedure to aggregate results across simulations and construct valid confidence intervals and
p-values.38
performance.
  35
     The issue of detecting true heterogeneity versus noise is also discussed in Davis and Heller (2020) when using
causal forest estimators.
  36
     This contrasts with the approach in Wager and Athey (2018) who derive point-wise confidence intervals in the
specific case of causal forests.
  37
     Iterations of the data-splitting process are necessary to identify how much variation is induced by specific
data splits. It also ensures that each observation will be used on average both for construction and prediction
(depending on the data-split), so all the information contained in survey data is used. This is especially important
given our rather small sample size.
  38
     Their procedure takes into account the uncertainty coming from both the estimation of the parameters and


                                                        21
We test for the presence of heterogeneity by estimating the 2 coefficient in the following equation:


               Y = 1 + 2 B (Z ) + 1 (T - P (Z )) + 2 (T - P (Z ))(S (Z ) - E (S (Z )) +                               (9)


Machine learning is used to get S (Z ), a relevant proxy predictor of s0 (Z ), as well as B (Z ),
a machine learning predictor for Y (0) (both constructed on the auxiliary sample). T is the
treatment variable, and P (Z ) = E (T |Z ). We use weights w(Z ) = {P (Z )(1 - P (Z ))}-1 .

1 captures the average treatment effect (ATE) while 2 is the heterogeneity loading parameter
(HET).39 We are particularly interested in 2 , which offers a test for heterogeneity in treatment
effect. Rejecting the null hypothesis that 2 = 0 means that (i) there is heterogeneity, and (ii)
that our machine learning predictor is a good approximation of s0 (Z ). On the contrary, if 2
is not statistically different from zero, it means either that our machine learning predictor is
uncorrelated with s0 (Z ) (our predictor is not able to capture heterogeneity correctly), or that
there is no heterogeneity. In our application, we test for heterogeneity in impacts on earnings
both during and post program.

Besides detecting heterogeneity, we are also interested in the magnitude of the treatment effects
along the distribution. In our application, we consider the top and bottom quartiles of the
distribution, corresponding to the 25% of individuals who benefit the most and the least in terms
of impacts on earnings. This is because around 25% of total applicants were selected to participate
in the program we study.40 We recover the parameters of interest E (s0 (Z )|Gk ), also referred as
Group Average Treatment Effects (GATES), where groups are quartiles of the distribution of
predicted treatment effects, through the following weighted linear projection:

                                                          4
                               Y = 1 + 2 B (Z ) +              k (T - p(Z ))1(Gk ) +                                (10)
                                                         k=1


The projection coefficients k are the GATES parameters. The groups are defined as Gk =
the data splitting process when aggregating the results (p-values, confidence interval bounds) across simulations.
It takes the median of the estimated parameters over all splits, as well as the median of p-values which is then
adjusted by a factor of 2. Breda et al. (2020) show that these adjusted p-values can be interpreted as upper bounds.
Confidence intervals computed at 95% significance ( = 0.05) have to be re-adjusted for split uncertainty. After
adjustment, the procedure provides confidence interval bounds at 90%.
   39
      In this framework, the quantity BLP (Z ) = 1 + 2 (S (Z ) - E (S (Z )) can be interpreted as the best linear pre-
dictor of s0 (Z ) based on S (Z ). Also 1 = E [s0 (Z )] is the average treatment effect (ATE) and 2 = Cov (S (Z ),s0 (Z ))
                                                                                                         V ar (S (Z ))
is the heterogeneity loading parameter (HET).
   40
      Chernozhukov et al. (2020) consider quintiles. We adapted the procedure to quartiles in the context of our
application, as the rate of success of the lottery to assign applicants to the program is roughly 25%.



                                                           22
{S (Z )  Ik } with Ik = [qk-1 , qk ), where qk are the quartiles of S (Z ), and q0 /q4 = -/ + . We
again use weights w(Z ) = {P (Z )(1 - P (Z ))}-1 . The estimated parameter 4 (corresponding to
the top quartile of the predicted distribution of impact, group G4 ) can be interpreted as the
average treatment effect among the 25% of individuals who benefit the most from the program.
Similarly, 1 can be interpreted as the average treatment effect among the 25% of individuals who
benefit the least from the program (group G1 ).

A natural next step is to study the characteristics of the groups of interest (i.e. E [g (Z )|Gk ], where
g (Z ) is the vector of characteristics of an observation). In particular, we can compare baseline
characteristics between the top and bottom quartile of the distribution of predicted impacts,
namely groups G4 and G1 . Although machine learning methods do not allow us to exactly
identify which characteristics matter the most for heterogeneous treatment effects, learning about
the characteristics of those who benefit the most and the least provides insights about the variables
that could be used for targeting.

In the analysis below, we will also assess how belonging to a particular heterogeneity group for
a given outcome Y affects treatment effect on another outcome Y . In other words, we seek to
identify E [SY (Z )|GY,k ], where SY (Z ) is the treatment effect on variable Y conditional on Z and
GY,k is the k th heterogeneity group for the treatment effect on the variable Y conditional on Z .
This is useful to determine whether there are trade-offs between optimizing selection into the
program to maximize during-program impacts and post-program impacts. This is also useful in
buttressing our understanding of mechanisms for longer-term impacts: for example, we can assess
whether individuals that benefit most from the program in terms of during-program earnings are
also those with the greatest post-program savings or post-program well-being. In practice, we
can use equation (10) to perform this analysis, replacing Y as a dependent variable with the
alternative outcome variable Y .



5     Results

Table 3 presents ITT results. We first display pooled treatment estimates from equation (6),
both for contemporaneous impacts measured in the midline survey (4-5 months after the start of
the program, while youths are still participating; Panel A) as well as for post-program impacts
measured in the endline survey (12-15 months after youths have exited from the program; Panel


                                                   23
B). We then discuss impacts by treatment arm using specification (7) (Panel C).41 The main
outcome variables are employment, type of employment, hours worked and earnings. We also
present results for expenditures and savings. In the main specification, we consider continuous
variables (such as hours worked and earnings, winsorized at the 97th percentile) to facilitate
the interpretation of magnitudes. We also include the logarithm of the main earnings variable.
Table 4 presents results for alternative treatment of outliers, including outcomes in logarithm
and winsorized at the 99th percentile. Results are generally robust, and we discuss in the text
the few cases where there are discrepancies. Table 5 presents results for well-being and behavior
indices, as well as for time use variables proxying work habits and engagement in risky behaviors
measured from list experiments.42



5.1    Contemporaneous Impacts

Table 3 (Panel A) presents ITT estimates on employment and hours worked during the program.
Given the high share of control youths working in some form of activity at midline (85%), the
impact of the public works program on the likelihood of employment is rather small (+14 per-
centage points). A similar pattern is observed for hours worked per week, with a small overall
increase in total hours worked (by 4.9 hours) from an average of 39.2 hours per week in the control
group. Employment in the public works wage jobs accounts for approximately 30 hours a week
for individuals in the treatment group, so that the small increase in overall hours worked hides a
large decrease in hours worked in other activities.

In contrast, the intervention had a more substantial impact on the composition of employment,
with a large increase in the share of youths holding wage jobs (+48 percentage points, from a base
of 49% in the control group) and a decrease in self-employment (-10 percentage points, from a
base of 35% in the control group). Correspondingly, we observe a large increase in hours worked in
wage employment (+15.6 hours) and a decrease in hours worked in self-employment (-5.7 hours).43
This highlights that youths reorganize their portfolio of activities to participate in the program.

Table 3 (Panel A, columns 7-10) presents estimates of impacts on earnings during the program.
Participation in public works leads to a significant net increase in earnings. The magnitude of
 41
    Appendix Table A1 shows similar results based on specifications that include baseline controls.
 42
    Appendix E provides information on the definition and construction of these variables.
 43
    Youths in the treatment group also became more likely to engage in multiple activities.



                                                      24
the effect amounts to CFA 27,083 per month (or approximately US $110 PPP 2014). The net
earnings gains represent approximately 53% of the average net monthly transfer.4445 As such, the
estimated effects point to substantial foregone earnings from activities that youths left or scaled
down in order to participate in the program. Contemporaneous impacts on earnings stem from
a strong increase in earnings from wage employment (+CFA 36,799), which offsets a significant
decrease in earnings from self-employment (- CFA 5,715).

These results suggest that self-targeting did not succeed in this context in getting only the most
vulnerable (e.g. those with the least outside employment opportunities) to participate in the pro-
gram. A couple of factors likely explain this failure of self-targeting. First, governments typically
cannot legally offer public works programs with wages below the formal minimum wage,46 so a
job that pays the statutory minimum wage could be of appeal to many in an environment where
informal employment and self-employment are rampant. As in many countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa, C^
         ote d'Ivoire faces a relatively low unemployment rate, but a large share of individuals
working in low-productivity self-employment or informal wage jobs without contracts.47 Employ-
ment patterns in the control group illustrate this. Overall, many individuals earn less than the
legal minimum wage, as the regulations are only binding for formal private companies and public
administration. In this setting, the results show that the program induced a reallocation of youths'
activities and substantial forgone earnings. Second, because the work was only 6 hours per day,
many applicants with outside employment opportunities would still see value in applying for the
public works program as they could combine it with other activities, especially those that allow
for more flexible hours. Finally, while the unpleasant nature of the work may have discouraged
some, it is unclear whether this work is more unpleasant than most informal activities.

In Table 3 (Panel A, columns 11-12), we assess contemporaneous program impacts on expenditures
and savings. The observed increase in earnings CFA 27,083 per month (or approximately US $110
  44
     CFA 50,600 ($205 PPP 2014) is the average amount transferred over all individuals assigned to the public
works (independently of non-compliance and days not worked).
  45
     The average treatment effect for the variable measured in log (for which we take ln(y + 1)) in column (8) is
2.95 at midline. This is quite large compared to the average treatment effect for the variable in level in column
(7) as a percentage of monthly income in the control group (27083/42841=0.63). The difference is due to both
the large standard error of the dependent variable and the reduction of the standard error between treatment and
control group (see formula in footnote 50 below). The standard error of earnings in the treatment group (50483) is
substantially smaller than in the control group (65466). This is largely explained by a lower dispersion of earnings,
which are more concentrated among participants who receive the program wages and are less likely to have zero
earnings.
  46
     This is the case for many programs in West Africa, as well as in Ethiopia or India.
  47
     For additional discussion, see Filmer et al. (2014); Christiaensen and Premand (2017).



                                                         25
PPP 2014) is associated with an increase in expenditures (CFA 14,529 per month, or $59 PPP
2014) and savings (roughly CFA 10,000 per month, or $41 PPP 2014). The increase in total
monthly expenditures represents approximately 54% of the earnings gains. It can be decomposed
in roughly equal shares between youths' own expenditures and their contribution to household
expenditures. The additional expenditures are mostly for basic necessities (such as food and
clothes), as well as education and training. Youths are also able to save a significant share of
their net earnings gains. On average, youths in the treatment group have increased their stock
of savings by approximately CFA 39,786 ($161 PPP 2014) after about 4 months in the program.
This large impact represents a 182% increase from the average stock of savings in the control group
(CFA 19,250, or $78 PPP 2014). It is also consistent with youths saving approximately 36% of
their earnings gains, or 20% of the public works wages. Youths are not only more likely to save
and to save larger amounts, but most of these savings are kept in formal bank accounts. These
include accounts in which youths are paid their public works wages. Overall, these substantial
contemporaneous increases in savings raise the possibility that youths can invest in job search or
self-employment activities after program exit.

Table 5 documents impacts on indices of well-being and behavior, as well as work habits and
engagement in risky behaviors.48 The consideration of broader well-being indicators is important
as temporary public works jobs may have non-monetary benefits or costs. On the one hand, the
public works activities are hard manual labor activities, which some may consider depreciating.
On the other hand, there can be a certain status associated with holding a public wage job in
the community, in particular a predictable and secured formal wage job. Furthermore, changes in
youths' behavior are particularly relevant in a post-conflict setting such as C^
                                                                               ote d'Ivoire, as they
may point to potential program externalities on social cohesion, an issue of strong interest for
local policymakers. We also investigate how participation to public works affects work habits by
looking at youths' time spent in rest, leisure or work activities in the morning and in the evening.

The public works program induces substantial improvements in well-being, which increases by
0.2 standard deviation at midline (Table 5, Panel A, column 1). Improvements in well-being
stem from a larger share of treated youths reporting feeling happy and proud, scoring higher
on sub-scales for self-esteem, positive affect and positive attitude towards the future (see Table
A2). The intervention also induces improvements in the behavior index, which increases by 0.12
standard deviation (Table 5, Panel A, column 2). This is driven by reductions in impulsiveness
 48
      See Appendix E for definition, and Table A2, Table A3 and Table A4 for effects on components of the indices.

                                                        26
and anger (see Table A3). Youths' work habits also change as they reorganize their days to
participate in the program (Table 5, Panel A, columns 3-8). Participants are more likely to be
up and working (or travelling to work) at 6am in the morning, and much more likely to be asleep
at 10pm at night. Despite changes in work habits and behaviors, we do not observe changes in
an aggregate index of youths' engagement in risky behaviors measured through list experiments
(Table 5, Panel A, column 9). The estimate is negative, pointing to a reduction in risky behaviors,
but not statistically significant.49

These results highlight that the public works intervention leads to a re-organization of youths'
activities that contribute to substantial forgone earnings. It also induces improvements in non-
economic outcomes; while these may be associated with the observed impacts on economic out-
comes, it is also possible that some youths who do not benefit substantially in economic terms
may nevertheless benefit from the program in other dimensions.



5.2     Post-Program Impacts

Table 3 (Panel B) presents post-program impacts on the same outcomes. Despite strong shifts
in youths' employment portfolios during the program, no post-program impacts on the likelihood
of being employed, employment composition or hours worked are observed. Overall, while no
negative "stigmatization" or "scarring" effects are observed, the post-program results also suggest
that the public works does not bring longer-term benefits to youths in terms of employment or
hours worked (columns 1-6). Despite an increase in savings during the program, post-program
results show that youths are not more likely to be self-employed either.

Table 3 (Panel B, columns 7-10) considers earnings impacts post-program. Overall, the main
results show that the public works intervention does not lead to robust changes in earnings at
endline. We note that these results are slightly sensitive to the treatment of outliers. While
impacts on variables in logarithm are not significant (Table 3, column 8 and Table 4, columns
1-2), small but significant impacts on post-program earnings are found in the level specification
(Table 3, column 7 and Table 4, column 3): earnings increase by CFA 4,361, or about 10%
compared to the control group. This increase in earnings in the level specification is driven by
  49
    When analyzing the components of the index in Table A4, we find a decrease in the share of youths taking
drugs or displaying aggressive behaviors, but find an increase in the share of youths reportedly stealing. No changes
are found in other indicators such as smuggling, prostitution, or having a firearm at home.



                                                         27
an increase in self-employment earnings. When looking at the characteristics of micro-enterprises
that youths operate post-program, we find a relatively larger asset stock (in value) and level of
investments (see columns 4-6 in Table A5), discussed further in the next section. Finding impacts
on a variable in level but not in logarithm is consistent with potential heterogeneity in impacts,50
which we analyze in detail below.

While the intervention does not lead to post-program impacts on employment, hours worked
or robust effects on earnings, it does have sustained impacts on savings and psychological well-
being. At endline, treated youths have a significantly higher savings stock by CFA 11,505. This
represents nearly 25% of savings in the control group, and also approximately 30% of impacts
at midline (Table 3, column 12). Post-program improvements in psychological well-being remain
significant (0.11 standard deviation) but are also more muted than during the program (Table 5,
column 1). They are concentrated in a narrow set of domains such as happiness, self-esteem and
less present fatalism; in contrast, there are no lasting impacts on sub-scales for pride, positive
affect, or positive attitude towards the future (Table A2, Panel B).

Finally, there is no lasting impact on any dimension of the behavior index, risky behaviors and
work habits (Table 5). Overall, these results show that the public works program does not lead
to sustained changes in behaviors or work habits, and hence is unlikely to increase productivity
or employability via these behavioral channels. In other words, the public work program does
not appear to live up to one of its key promises for larger longer-term impact relative to a more
standard welfare program.




5.3     Post-Program Impacts by Treatment Arms

Table 3 (Panel C) documents post-program impacts by treatment arms. Overall, we observe little
variation in impacts across treatment arms, suggesting limited value-added of the complementary
skills training (micro-entrepreneurship or self-employment training and wage job search training).
Specifically, post-program impacts on the likelihood of being employed, employment composition
and hours worked are very consistent and not statistically different across the different treatment
  50
    Indeed, a first order approximation of the log function is that E (ln(y ))  ln(E (y )) - 0.5var(y )/E (y )2 ). Thus
AT E (ln(y ))  AT E (y )/E (y |T = 0) - 0.5(var(y |T = 1)/E (y |T = 1)2 - var(y |T = 0)/E (y |T = 0)2 ). As a result,
an impact can be detected in level but not in logarithm if the variance is larger in the treatment group than in
the control group.

                                                          28
arms (Table 3, Panel C, columns 1-6).51 No differences in impacts on non-economic outcomes are
found between treatment arms in Table 5 either.

Results on total earnings also show no differential impacts for individuals assigned to complemen-
tary training (Table 3, Panel C, columns 7-8). The results are robust to alternative treatment of
outliers (Table 4, Panel C, columns 1-3). Post-program impacts on self-employment earnings are
positive for treated youths assigned to the entrepreneurship training when variables are expressed
in level, but the finding is not robust when the variables are expressed in logarithm. In addition,
we cannot reject equality of the impacts on total earnings between the public works treatment
only and the public works with self-employment training, or between the treatment arms with the
self-employment and wage employment training. Since there is no statistical difference in impacts
on overall earnings across treatment arms, we pool treatments to conduct the finer heterogeneity
analysis in the rest of the paper.

The limited value-added of the complementary training suggests that skills acquisition through
training is not a key mechanism to induce post-program impacts. Table A5 shows that the training
interventions did improve knowledge as intended: knowledge on basic entrepreneurship increases
by 0.11 standard deviation for the self-employment training (column 1, Panel B), and knowledge
on job search skills improves by 0.26 standard deviation for the job search training (column 7,
Panel B). The training also led youths to apply this knowledge in practice. For instance, the
self-employment training increases the share of youths who prepared a business plan for one of
their activities by 4 percentage points (column 2, panel A). Also, the wage employment training
increased the share of youths who used a CV for a job search by 10 percentage points (column
8, Panel B). However, there are no impacts on job search expenditures or on the likelihood to
search for a job. Overall, these changes in skills and practices are small in magnitude and do not
appear sufficient to generate earnings beyond those induced by the basic public works program.
Interestingly, impacts on the value of business assets (column 4) or on investments in start-
up capital for self-employment activities (column 6) are driven by the public works treatment,
which again points to savings and investments of public work wages as a key mechanism for
post-program impacts. In sum, despite some effects on independent activities, there is no robust
impact on profits or self employment earnings.
  51
     Hours worked are significantly larger in the jobs search training arm compared to the public works only arm.
Still, the coefficient is not statistically different from 0 or from the estimate from the basic entrepreneurship training
arm.



                                                           29
6      Heterogeneity Analysis

The public works program was oversubscribed, with the number of applicants exceeding the
number of available program slots by a ratio of 4 to 1. The allocation of program slots was based
on randomized assignment, which had the advantage of being fair and transparent. At the same
time, the effectiveness of the program might have been improved with a finer targeting of the 25
percent of beneficiaries among applicants. Recall that the only criteria enforced at enrollment are
age (18 to 30) and not being a beneficiary of a previous wave of public works.

Given the self-selection mechanism, we would expect heterogeneity in impacts among program
applicants, with marginal applicants experiencing only small gains in earnings compared to in-
framarginal applicants with fewer employment opportunities outside the program (as outlined in
section 2). But by how much alternative targeting might have improved program effectiveness
is an empirical question that depends on the magnitude of heterogeneity and the shape of the
distribution of program impacts. We now turn to this question. We focus on heterogeneity in the
logarithm of total earnings since the distribution of this variable is closer to a normal distribution
than the variable in level (which has a higher dispersion even after winsorization). We also show
key results for earnings in level for completeness.



6.1     Quantile Treatment Effects

Quantile regressions provide information about the lower bound of the variance.52 Heterogeneous
quantile treatment effects are always associated with heterogeneity in treatment effects. However,
when quantile treatment effects are homogeneous, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that
the lower bound of the variance is zero, unless the intervention preserves ranks. Put differently, a
constant quantile treatment effect is consistent with homogeneous quantile treatment effects, but
the reverse is not true.

Figure 1 presents quantile treatment effects on log earnings during (Panel A) and after (Panel B)
the program. The horizontal axis in each panel reports the quantile and the vertical axis the esti-
mate of the treatment effect at the corresponding quantile. The shaded area around the estimate
provides the 95% confidence interval. The quantile analysis shows substantial heterogeneity in
  52
    See Heckman et al. (1997) or Djebbari and Smith (2008). This lower bound is reached when the intervention
preserves rank. In such a case, a quantile treatment effect can be interpreted as an effect at quantile. See Bitler
et al. (2006, 2017) for applications.

                                                        30
impacts on earnings during the program (Panel A). The quantile treatment effect is three times
larger at the 25% quantile compared with the 75% quantile. The estimated quantile treatment
effects are quite precise, suggesting the existence of true heterogeneity rather than just sampling
variation. Using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, we can reject the null that the distributions under
control or treatment are similar. In contrast, post-program quantile treatment effects are uni-
formly small. The dispersion is within confidence bounds (Panel B), consistent with sampling
variation. Although we detect larger quantile treatment effects at the top of the distribution, we
cannot reject the null of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test that the post-program distributions are
similar in treatment and control. In summary, there appears to be large heterogeneity during the
program, but little heterogeneity after the program.53

The intervention is unlikely to induce churning in the distribution of contemporaneous effects, so
that the heterogeneity seen in quantile treatment effects likely points to true underlying hetero-
geneity during the program. However, this is not necessarily the case for post-program impacts
on earnings. There might be individual-level latent factors that may not contribute to the ranking
of individual earnings in absence of the program but may contribute to the ranking of individ-
uals' post-program earnings. For example, some individuals might be trapped at the bottom
of the earnings distribution absent the program, but because of high latent returns to capital
(e.g. through setting-up a highly profitable activity), these individuals might end up higher up in
the post-program earnings distribution if the program allowed them to save and implement their
latent project. Quantile regressions might thus fail to detect heterogeneity post-program.



6.2     Machine Learning Applications

We now present applications of machine learning techniques based on the approach described in
section 4.2. First, we perform a statistical test to detect heterogeneity and then compare the
magnitude of the conditional average treatment effects (CATE) across quartiles, with a particular
focus on the bottom and top 25% of the distribution. Second, we analyze the characteristics of
individuals in the bottom and top quartiles to understand how those who benefit the most differ
from those who benefit the least. Third, we use the predicted distribution of conditional impacts
to further understand the mechanisms between contemporaneous and post-program impacts. In
  53
    Figure B3 presents the post-program quantile treatment effects by treatment arm. They show similar patterns
than those based on the pooled treatment.



                                                      31
particular, we look at post-program impacts on earnings conditional on being in the top quartile
of the predicted distribution during program. This is helpful to understand how individuals who
benefit the most during the program perform post-program; this is also helpful to assess whether
there are trade-offs between maximizing contemporaneous and post-program impacts. Finally,
we study the performance of alternative self-targeting (a lower offered wage) and targeting rules
using the machine learning estimates as a benchmark.


6.2.1    Existence and Magnitude of Heterogeneity in Impacts on Earnings


Table 6 (panel A) presents results from estimating equation 9, including a test of the statistical
significance of 2 , the coefficient of the heterogeneity loading parameter.54 We confirm finding
heterogeneous impacts on earnings during the program, as 2 is statistically different from zero in
column (1). However, we do not find evidence of heterogeneity in post-program impacts (the p-
value for 2 is 0.97 in column (2)), which means that either there is no underlying heterogeneity,
or the prediction model is not able to detect it. As for ITT estimates, we also run machine
learning analysis with the outcome variable in level. Results at midline and endline are consistent
in columns 3 and 4. Results are robust to the application of a wide variety of machine learning
estimators (Table A6, Panel A), or to the consideration of a larger set of covariates (Table A7,
Panel A). Similar results are found when analyzing heterogeneity in post-program impacts on
earnings by treatment arm in logarithm (Table A8, Panel A) or in level (Table A9, Panel A).

Panels B and C in Table 6 provide additional insights about the magnitude of heterogeneity
by reporting Group Average Treatment Effects (GATES) by quartile, as obtained by estimating
equation (10). Panel B displays GATES for contemporaneous program impacts on earnings in
log in column (1) and in level in column (3). Panel C presents GATES for post-program impacts
on earnings in log in column (2) and in level in column (4). Columns (1) and (3) of Panel B
illustrate that there is substantial heterogeneity in impacts on earnings during the program. As
shown in section 2, this is expected due to self-selection, with a fraction of marginal participants
almost indifferent between being enrolled or not, and others being inframarginal. However, the
magnitude of this heterogeneity is noteworthy. The average predicted impact on earnings is CFA
14,660 in the lower quartile of the distribution compared to CFA 31,671 in the upper quartile
(column 3). In other words, program impacts are 2.2 times larger in the top quartile than in the
  54
    Figure B4 presents the distribution of predicted impacts on earnings during the program and post-program,
both in levels and in logarithm.

                                                     32
bottom quartile. In contrast, columns (2) and (4) of Panel C suggest more modest heterogeneity,
with no significant difference in post-program impacts between quartiles. Figure 2 illustrates the
heterogeneity between groups, during and post-program.55

Since we do not observe heterogeneity in post-program impacts, we would further expect that it
is possible to improve program effectiveness by maximizing contemporaneous program impacts
without losses in post-program impacts. Figure 3 indeed confirms the absence of trade-off between
impacts during and after the program.56 A high correlation between impacts on earnings during
and post program would lead to a concentration of predictions along the diagonal from the top
right corner ­ those who have the largest impacts during and after the program - to the bottom
left corner. On the contrary, the scatter plot shows that even within the top quartile of impacts
during the program, the post program impacts are widely dispersed on the opposite axis. In Table
6, columns (2) and (4) in Panel B (respectively columns (1) and (3) in Panel C) show predicted
impacts at endline (respectively midline) per quartile of predicted treatment effects at midline
(respectively endline). They illustrate what would be the impacts on earnings post program
(respectively during program) if midline impacts on earnings were maximized (respectively endline
impacts were maximized). This further illustrates that there is no systematic relationship between
those who benefit the most during the program and those who benefit the most after the program.
We can never reject the null that coefficients are equal between groups. In other words, there is no
measurable trade-off between short and medium-term impacts when trying to improve program
effectiveness through finer targeting.


6.2.2    Patterns of Heterogeneity


Using the Classification Analysis (CLAN) in Chernozhukov et al. (2020), we analyze differences
in baseline characteristics between quartiles of the distribution of treatment effects in Table 7.
We focus on our two groups of interest, namely the bottom and top quartiles of the distribution
of predicted impacts on earnings during the program (columns 1-2). Column (3) reports p-values
for a test of equality between the lowest and highest impact groups.
  55
     Our focus is on the difference between the top and bottom quartiles. At the bottom of each panel, Table 6
reports a test of equality of the GATES across the four quartiles. We cannot reject the null.
  56
     Figure 3 shows predicted impacts on earnings during the program (x-axis) against predicted impacts on
earnings after the program (y-axis) (for log earnings, using same machine learning estimator as in Table 6). The
solid vertical and horizontal lines on the scatter plot correspond to the average predicted impacts during and after
the program. Similarly, the horizontal (respectively vertical) dashed lines represent the 25th and 75th percentile
of the distribution of predicted impacts during (respectively post) program.


                                                        33
Table 7 shows clear differences in the profiles of individuals who benefit the least and the most
during the program.57 The share of women is significantly higher in the upper quartile of predicted
impacts (53%) than in the bottom quartile (15%). Several characteristics related to financial
status, expenditures, savings and earnings suggest that the lower quartile of predicted impacts
was "better-off" at baseline. There is also a very large difference in both propensity to save and
baseline savings stock among individuals in the bottom quartile (CFA 65,925) and those in the
top quartile (CFA 6,795). Similarly, the share of participants in the bottom quartile reporting
they face credit constraints is lower (43%) than the share in the top quartile (58%). The share
of individuals working at baseline is substantially higher in the bottom quartile (100%, compared
to 44%), as are baseline earnings. Finally, three (six) times as many individuals in the bottom
quartile are engaged in self (wage) employment activities at baseline compared to the top quartile.

Participants who benefit the least during the program might still be able to save a greater share
of their wages, or might be able to better invest these savings into income-generating activities.58
It is therefore worthwhile to explore further how treatment effects on other main outcomes differ
between the two groups. By doing this, we also highlight how machine learning techniques can
help tease out mechanisms explaining program impacts.59

Table 8 presents estimates of treatment effects on the main outcomes by quartile of the (predicted)
impacts on earnings during the program (panel A), and after the program (panel B). Table 9
analyzes post-program impacts on intermediary outcomes related to productive investments by
quartile of (predicted) impacts during the program. At the bottom of each panel, we present a
test of equality of treatment effects between the bottom and top quartiles. This allows us to test
whether groups with high or low earnings impacts during the program invest differently in their
portfolio of income-generating activities or in job searching.

Table 8 confirms that, in the short run, the program has strong impacts on earnings for a more
vulnerable group, while also attracting less vulnerable individuals for whom impacts are much
more limited. Table 8 (Panel A) shows that the top quartile (corresponding to the top 25% of
predicted impacts on earnings during the program) also has the highest impact on the likelihood
  57
     As a robustness check, Table A10 shows similar results for earnings in level.
  58
     It is also possible that these individuals may particularly benefit from the opportunity to save through the
bank accounts set up by the program.
  59
     Davis and Heller (2020) also use machine learning to test underlying mechanisms relying on differential treat-
ment response from disadvantaged youth who benefited from summer jobs. They look across types of outcomes
while we also analyze outcomes over time.



                                                        34
of employment and wage employment (columns (1) and (2)). This is consistent with results in
Table 7, which showed that individuals in the top quartile were less likely to have an activity
prior to the program. Total earnings are more than twice higher in the top quartile compared to
the bottom quartile (columns (5) or (6)). Column (10) reveals that the savings stock increases
significantly for the top quartile, but not more so than for the other groups. Given that the bottom
quartile is wealthier at baseline, one could have expected that they, more than other groups, would
use program transfers to increase their savings. However, we observe similar impacts on savings
across quartiles of predicted impacts on earnings. Lastly, despite variations in impacts on earnings
during the program, there is no difference in impacts on well-being across the different quartiles
(Table 8, column (11)). This suggests that gains in the well-being dimension are also broadly
shared.

Table 8 (Panel B) and Table 9 reveal few differences across several dimensions of post-program
impacts between the top and bottom quartiles of predicted impacts during the program. We
can never reject the null of equality of treatment effects at endline between quartiles of predicted
impacts on earnings at midline. In other words, those who benefit the most during the program
perform similarly as others post-program. This illustrates again the lack of a clear trade-off
between contemporaneous and post-program impacts along a large number of dimensions.

For completeness, and given the key role that savings during the program would theoretically
play in driving any post-program impacts, we also perform the machine learning heterogeneity
analysis using saving as the outcome. Indeed, increased savings can be a catalyst for productive
investments in activities, the returns of which we might not yet observe at endline. We want to
verify that there is no trade-off along this dimension, as seemingly suggested by Table 8. Table
A11 shows a similar conclusion, with no significant heterogeneity at endline.60 This also means
that post-program impacts on savings are broadly spread across participants.

Overall, these results reveal limited heterogeneity in post-program impacts. The most vulnerable
individuals who saw the largest gains in earnings and employment during the program do not
exhibit relatively larger post-program gains. On the other hand, better-off individuals who saw
smaller gains in earnings during the program do not experience higher post-program impacts on
investments and earnings either.
  60
    In addition, the characteristics of those who benefit the most in terms of earnings and in terms of savings are
very close: patterns in Table A12 are similar to those in Table 7.




                                                        35
6.3    Effects of Lowering the Wage

Can the effectiveness of the program be increased by lowering the offered wage? Our estimated
Conditional Average Treatment Effects (CATE) together with the framework developed in section
2.1 can shed light on this question.

As we discussed in the conceptual framework, the average impact of a lower transfer given a fixed
budget B will depend on the distribution of individual impact in the population (see equation 5
and Appendix C.2). Intuitively, lowering the transfer reallocates program slots from those with
lower program impact to those with higher program impact and increases the lottery success rate.
While this effect is positive, it comes at the cost of lowering the transfer for all participants. If
there is a large share of participants at transfer level T with close to zero program impacts, the
first effect will tend to dominate. But more generally, the overall impact of a lowering of the
program wage will depend on the shape of the distribution of the individual treatment effect (see
Figure B2, which contrasts two examples).

While the true distribution of individual impact is unknown, we can use the distribution of our
CATE estimate as a proxy. The upper panel of Figure 4 displays our estimate of the distribution.
As the figure shows, the distribution reveals a situation closer to the second example in Appendix
Figure B2. The lower bound of the support of the distribution is zero, but there is a small share of
participants who experience close to zero program impact, and the distribution function increases
slowly up to its mode at around CFA 27,000. This suggests that a reduction in the offered wage
may not improve program effectiveness.

This is confirmed in the lower panel of Figure 4, where we quantify the effect of a reduction in
the transfer T using equation 5. The figure first shows how the self-selection process is affected as
the transfer amount is reduced. The reduction in the number of applicants (dotted black line) is
at first slow but becomes more substantial when the reduction in the transfer amount approaches
the mode of the distribution of sT .

The figure also shows (dashed blue line) the effect of the reduction in the transfer amount on
the lottery success rate. Naturally, given the fixed budget, the lottery success rate increases as
the transfer amount decreases as a) the number of applicants decreases (dotted black line) and
b) the size of the transfer per participant is lower. More specifically, if the original total budget
for transfers in the program (0.25T , or B in the context of our model) is randomly allocated to


                                                 36
those who still apply at the reduced transfer amount T - x, the lottery success rate is given by:
Lottery rate = 0.25T /((T - x)P (sT - x > 0)). The figure reports this lottery rate up to the value
where it reaches 1 ( CFA 27, 500). As the figure shows, given the estimated shape of sT , the
increase in the lottery success rate remains modest for a large range of reduction in the transfer
amount.

Last, the solid red line shows how the average impact on earnings varies when the transfer amount
is reduced. More precisely, the solid red line displays E ((s - x)1(s - x > 0))/(P (s - x > 0)(T - x)),
which is Slottery (T - x) from equation 5 normalized by 0.25 × 50, 000 CFA, the amount available for
each initial applicant. The figure shows that the average impact on earnings would not increase
when the transfer amount diminishes. The index we compute starts at 0.5; it reaches 0.3 for a
reduction in the transfer of CFA 15,000 and 0.1 for a reduction in the transfer of CFA 25,000.61



6.4       Alternative Targeting Rules and Cost-Effectiveness Ratios

The analysis so far suggests that self-targeting based on the minimum wage or a lower wage limits
program effectiveness, and that departing from self-targeting could improve contemporaneous
program impacts without decreasing post-program impacts. However, targeting rules based on
machine learning algorithms would be too complicated and expensive to implement, relying on
complex information that is not easily available. Are there alternative targeting rules that could
come close to achieving the predicted impacts in the upper quartile of the machine learning
estimates? This is the question we take on in the rest of this section.

Table 10 summarizes impacts on earnings during the program (panel A) and post-program (panel
B) for specific sub-populations under alternative targeting rules. For reference, the first column
displays ITT impacts on (log) earnings for the whole sample of participants selected by randomized
assignment. Since maximizing impacts during the program does not reduce post-program impacts,
column (2) documents the effect of selecting the observations in the top quartile (Q4) of the
distribution of predicted impacts at midline. For comparison, we also report in column (3) results
when selecting the bottom quartile (Q1) of the distribution of predicted impacts at midline. For
those two columns, Panel A reports group averages (GATES) from the machine learning prediction
of midline impacts and Panel B reports the average endline impacts for observations belonging
 61
      A confidence interval is obtained following the procedure in Chernozhukov et al. (2020).




                                                         37
to each quartile of the predicted impact distribution at midline.62 These estimates represent the
impacts on earnings that would be achieved by targeting those who benefit the most (respectively
the least) in terms of earnings during the program.

We then consider a scenario where only women are targeted. Table 7 showed that women are
over-represented in the population that benefit the most during the program. Column (4) (Table
10) shows that targeting only women would improve impacts during the program, with no losses in
post-program impacts. In particular, average impacts on income during (after) the program would
be CFA 32,097 (CFA 7,168) when targeting only women. This corresponds to a 19% improvement
in average estimated impacts on earnings during the program compared to randomized assignment.
The point estimate is close to the machine learning benchmark in column (2).

What about targeting on baseline earnings? If there is limited churning in the earnings distribu-
tion, those with the lowest baseline earnings are likely to also have the lowest earnings at midline
absent program participation. Columns (5) and (6) of Table 10 show results using two approaches
to directly target the bottom quartile of the earnings distribution. The first approach targets indi-
viduals based on their (self) reported earnings at baseline (column (5)). The second approach uses
machine learning techniques to predict (proxy) baseline earnings among program applicants using
a limited set of covariates that are both easily observable and not easily manipulated, including
gender, age, household characteristics and assets. We then estimate program impacts for indi-
viduals in the lowest quartile of the distribution of baseline income, either reported or predicted.
This second approach (column (6)) is meant to mimic proxy means tests, which are often used
to target safety nets to the poor and are more robust to misreporting than self-reported income.
Columns (5) and (6) show that the contemporaneous impacts under these two approaches would
come close to those predicted in the upper quartile of machine learning estimates (column (2)).
Targeting individuals with reported baseline income in the bottom quartile leads to an average
expected impact on income during the program of CFA 33,954 (column (5)), respectively CFA
32,824 (column (6)) when using predicted (proxied) baseline income. This is a 21%-25% im-
provement compared to randomized assignment. Post-program impacts are comparable to those
obtained when selecting women only, and again not lower than the machine learning benchmark.

These results show that several practical targeting rules could perform better than self-targeting
and improve program effectiveness. These alternative targeting rules come close to the machine
 62
      This is similar to Table 6, panel B, column (2).



                                                         38
learning estimates, without trade-offs between maximizing impacts during and post-program.

Panel C of Table 10 shows how program cost-effectiveness ratios vary by targeting rule. The
average public works program costs CFA 768,708 ($1,537.4) per beneficiary.63 In our calculation,
we focus on benefits captured by contemporaneous and post-program impacts on earnings under
each targeting rule. Contemporaneous impacts are estimated from the midline survey and assumed
constant during the 7 months of the program. Post-program impacts are considered constant from
the end of the program (month 8) to the endline survey (month 21), and zero thereafter. The
cost-effectiveness ratio of the existing program is presented in column (1). The discounted sum of
impacts on earnings is CFA 253,920, for a cost-benefit ratio of 3.03. This means that the average
cost per beneficiary is 3.03 times higher than the average discounted direct impacts on earnings.
This relatively high cost-benefit ratio is driven by the fact that net earnings gains are 53% of the
average transfer amounts during the program, and that direct transfers to beneficiaries represent
only 46% of overall program costs.

Note that these cost-benefit ratios are conservative. They assume zero impacts beyond what we
measure at endline, around 14 months after the end of the program. Program cost-effectiveness
clearly depends on the sustainability of post-program impacts. Figure B5 illustrates how long
the post-program impacts would need to be sustained for the program to become cost-effective
(reaching a ratio of 1 or below) based on impacts on earnings and depending on the assump-
tions about the dissipation of post-program impacts after the endline (respectively 0, 2 or 5%
of dissipation per month). For instance, assuming no dissipation of impacts, the program would
become cost-effective when targeting women if post-programs impacts are sustained for 7 years,
or after 4-6 years when targeting individuals with low baseline earnings (respectively predicted
and reported). The time to reach cost-effectiveness increases when assuming that the impact on
earnings dissipates over time. Cost-benefit ratios also do not account for non-economic benefits
such as those on psychological well-being mentioned above, or other externalities from the pro-
gram, such as the indirect benefits of roads rehabilitation. They still provide a benchmark to
assess potential program improvements such as the implementation of alternative targeting mech-
anisms, in particular if we consider in a first-order approximation that non-economic benefits or
externalities are similar across these potential improvements.
  63
     The total costs can be decomposed as follows: CFA 354,166 ($717) for direct transfers to beneficiaries, CFA
255,189 ($517) for other direct costs (material, team leaders and supervisors, basic training), CFA 108,230 ($219)
for skills training, and CFA 51,123 ($10) are indirect management costs.



                                                       39
Columns (2) to (6) in Table 10 show how adjustments in targeting would affect the cost-effectiveness
ratios. Columns (2) and (3) display cost-benefit ratios for individuals in the top and bottom quar-
tiles of predicted impacts based on machine learning techniques. The cost-benefit ratio is nearly
three times higher in the bottom quartile (7.94, column (3)) than in the top quartile of pre-
dicted impacts (2.44, column (2)). This illustrates the high cost of including marginal applicants.
Compared to the cost-benefit ratio of 3.03 for the randomly assigned program, the cost-benefit
ratio would improve to 2.33 by targeting directly women (column (5)), or around 2 by targeting
individuals with low baseline earnings (between 2 and 2.2 depending on whether they are self-
declared or predicted based on other proxies, columns 5-6). While the analysis cannot decisively
indicate which targeting scenario would maximize cost-effectiveness given the confidence intervals
around the impact estimates, it does highlight potential improvements in cost-effectiveness rang-
ing between 30 and 52 percent when departing from self-targeting based on the formal minimum
wage.



7       Conclusion

The C^
     ote d'Ivoire public works program we study in this paper shares many of the features of
other public works programs that have been adopted throughout the developing world in response
to negative economic, political or climatic shocks. It provided a few months of employment in
road rehabilitation to those willing to work at the formal minimum wage. Based on a randomized
control trial and rich data collected before, during and after the program, our analysis has allowed
us to assess the effectiveness of the program in improving contemporaneous and post-program
outcomes among participants.

Results show that program impacts on employment are limited to shifts in the composition of
employment towards the public works wage jobs during the program, with no lasting post-program
impacts on the likelihood or composition of employment. Public works increase earnings during
the program, but post-program impacts on earnings are limited. Savings and psychological well-
being improve both during and (to a less extent) post-program. However, we see no long-lasting
effects on work habits and behaviors, despite improvements during the program.

The program as currently implemented induces impacts on youths' earnings that are substantially
below program costs. This is primarily due to the limited post-program impacts and a failure of


                                                40
self-selection: in an environment where informal employment is rampant, a broad cross-section
of youth with outside employment opportunities self-select into public works participation. The
high cost-benefit ratios also stem from the fairly high indirect cost of implementing public works
programs, for instance compared to more traditional welfare programs.

We use recent machine learning techniques to document significant heterogeneity in impacts on
earnings during the program, but no significant heterogeneity is found post-program. The results
suggest that improvements in self-targeting or targeting are first-order program design questions,
and perhaps more critical than other program design aspects related to program content, such as
complementary skills training. Given the estimated distribution of individual program impacts,
we show that a lower offered wage (and the subsequent change in self-targeting) would have
been unlikely to improve program performance. In contrast, we show that a range of practical
targeting mechanisms perform as well as the machine learning benchmark, leading to stronger
impacts during the program without reductions in post-program impacts. Still, even with this
improved targeting, impacts on earnings remain substantially below program costs.

While one might be tempted to conclude from our analysis that public work programs should
be de-prioritized by policy makers in favor of welfare programs with more efficient targeting
procedures and lower implementation costs, it is important to remember that our cost-effectiveness
analysis does not take into account all possible benefits of the program, both for the beneficiaries
themselves but also for non-beneficiaries. First, we do observe lasting effects on psychological
well-being and savings among beneficiaries that are not included in the cost-benefit ratios. We
note, however, that the post-program effects we observe are of relatively small magnitude and it
is unclear, especially given the lack of similar sustained impacts on work habits and behaviors,
whether the "work" component of the workfare program is responsible for these sustained effects
or whether similar effects could be achieved solely with cash transfers. Second, there might be
other positive externalities associated with the program, such as a reduction in crime or illegal
activities due to an incapacitation effect. While we do not find much evidence of changes in
youths' engagement in risky behaviors, neither during nor after the program, it is still possible
that some externalities may arise at the level of the community and hence may be difficult to
measure. Lastly, we do not quantify the societal value of the upgraded infrastructure. These two
latter potential benefits are a specific feature of public work programs and might be particularly
large in post-conflict environments with destroyed physical infrastructure and a high need for



                                                41
social stabilization. Still, these externalities would need to be very (and likely unrealistically)
large for the program to be cost-effective.



References
Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, R. Hanna, B. A. Olken, and J. Tobias (2012): "Targeting
  the poor: Evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia," American Economic Review, 102,
  1206­40.

Alatas, V., R. Purnamasari, M. Wai-Poi, A. Banerjee, B. A. Olken, and R. Hanna
  (2016): "Self-targeting: Evidence from a field experiment in Indonesia," Journal of Political
  Economy, 124, 371­427.

Alik-Lagrange, A., O. Attanasio, C. Meghir, S. Polan´
                                                    ia-Reyes, and M. Vera-
      ´ ndez (2017): "Work pays: Different benefits of a workfare program in Colombia,"
  Herna
  Mimeo.

Alik-Lagrange, A. and M. Ravallion (2018): "Workfare versus transfers in rural India,"
  World Development, 112, 244­258.

Almeida, R. K. and E. Galasso (2010): "Jump-starting self-employment? Evidence for
  welfare participants in Argentina," World Development, 38, 742­755.

Amaral, S., S. Bandyopadhyay, and R. Sensarma (2015): "Employment programmes for
  the poor and female empowerment: The effect of NREGS on gender-based violence in India,"
  Journal of Interdisciplinary Economics, 27, 199­218.

Apostolidis, T. and N. Fieulaine (2004): "Validation fran¸
                                                         caise de l'´
                                                                    echelle de temporalit´
                                                                                         e:
  The Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory (ZTPI)," European Review of Applied Psychology,
  54, 207­2017.

Ascarza, E. (2018): "Retention futility: Targeting high-risk customers might be ineffective,"
  Journal of Marketing Research, 55, 80­98.

Athey, S. and G. Imbens (2016): "Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal effects,"
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113, 7353­7360.




                                                42
------ (2017a): "The state of applied econometrics: Causality and policy evaluation," Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 31, 3­32.

Athey, S. and G. W. Imbens (2017b): "The econometrics of randomized experiments," in
  Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Elsevier, vol. 1, 73­140.

Athey, S., J. Tibshirani, and S. Wager (2019): "Generalized random forests," Annals of
  Statistics, 47, 1148­1178.

Athey, S. and S. Wager (2017): "Efficient policy learning," Arxiv preprint, arxiv:1702.02896.

Banerjee, A., P. Niehaus, and T. Suri (2019): "Universal Basic Income in the Developing
  World," Annual Review of Economics, 11, 959­983.

Basurto, M. P., P. Dupas, and J. Robinson (2020): "Decentralization and efficiency of
  subsidy targeting: Evidence from chiefs in rural Malawi," Journal of Public Economics, 185.

Beegle, K., E. Galasso, and J. Goldberg (2017): "Direct and indirect effects of Malawi's
  public works program on food security," Journal of Development Economics, 128, 1­23.

Berg, E., S. Bhattacharyya, D. Rajasekhar, and R. Manjula (2018): "Can public
  works increase equilibrium wages? Evidence from India's National Rural Employment Guaran-
  tee," World Development, 103, 239­254.

                   ´pon, A. Marguerie, and P. Premand (2016): "Impacts a
Bertrand, M., B. Cre                                                   ` Court
  et Moyen Terme sur les Jeunes des Travaux a
                                            ` Haute Intensit´
                                                            e de Main d'oeuvre (THIMO):
  R´
   esultats de l'´
                 evaluation d'impact de la composante THIMO du Projet Emploi Jeunes et
  D´
   eveloppement des comp´
                        etences (PEJEDEC) en C^
                                              ote d'Ivoire," Washington DC: Banque Mon-
  diale et Abidjan: BCP-Emploi.

Besley, T. and S. Coate (1992): "Workfare versus welfare: Incentive arguments for work
  requirements in poverty-alleviation programs," The American Economic Review, 82, 249­261.

Bhattacharya, D. and P. Dupas (2012): "Inferring welfare maximizing treatment assignment
  under budget constraints," Journal of Econometrics, 167, 168­196.

Bitler, M. P., J. B. Gelbach, and H. W. Hoynes (2006): "What mean impacts miss:
  Distributional effects of welfare reform experiments," American Economic Review, 96, 988­
  1012.



                                              43
------ (2017): "Can Variation in Subgroups' Average Treatment Effects Explain Treatment Effect
  Heterogeneity? Evidence from a Social Experiment," Review of Economics and Statistics, 99,
  683­697.

Blair, G. and K. Imai (2012): "Statistical analysis of list experiments," Political Analysis, 20,
  47­77.

Blattman, C. and L. Ralston (2015): "Generating Employment in Poor and Fragile States:
  Evidence from Labor Market and Entrepreneurship Programs," SSRN Electronic Journal.

Breda, T., J. Grenet, M. Monnet, and C. Van Effenterre (2020): "Do Female Role
  Models reduce the gender gap in science? Evidence from French high schools," IZA Discussion
  Paper No. 13163.

Casey, K., R. Glennerster, and E. Miguel (2012): "Reshaping institutions: Evidence on
  aid impacts using a preanalysis plan," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1755­1812.

Chernozhukov, V., M. Demirer, E. Duflo, and I. Fernandez-Val (2020): "Generic
  Machine Learning Inference on Heterogenous Treatment Effects in Randomized Experiments,"
  Arxiv preprint, arxiv:1712.04802.

Christiaensen, L. and P. Premand (2017): "Cote d'Ivoire Jobs Diagnostic : Employment,
  Productivity, and Inclusion for Poverty Reduction." World Bank, Washington DC.

  ´pon, B. and P. Premand (2019): "Direct and Indirect Effects of Subsidized Dual Appren-
Cre
  ticeships," IZA Discussion Paper No. 12793.

                                                 ´
    ´, G., P. Gosselin, and I. Dagenais (2013): "Evaluation
 ^ te
Co                                                          multidimensionnelle de la
  r´
   egulation des ´
                 emotions : propri´
                                  et´
                                    es psychom´
                                              etriques d'une version francophone du Difficulties
  in Emotion Regulation Scale," Journal de Th´
                                             erapie Comportementale et Cognitive, 23.

Datt, G. and M. Ravallion (1994): "Transfer benefits from public-works employment: Evi-
  dence for rural India," The Economic Journal, 1346­1369.

Davis, J. and S. B. Heller (2017): "Using Causal Forests to Predict Treatment Heterogeneity:
  An Application to Summer Jobs," American Economic Review, 107, 546­50.

------ (2020): "Rethinking the Benefits of Youth Employment Programs: The Heterogeneous
  Effects of Summer Jobs," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 102, 664­677.



                                                44
Deininger, K., H. K. Nagarajan, and S. K. Singh (2016): "Short-term effects of In-
  dia's employment guarantee program on labor markets and agricultural productivity," Policy
  Research Working Paper No. 7665, The World Bank, Washington DC.

Djebbari, H. and J. Smith (2008): "Heterogeneous impacts in PROGRESA," Journal of
  Econometrics, 145, 64­80.

Droitcour, J., R. A. Caspar, M. L. Hubbard, T. L. Parsley, W. Visscher, and T. M.
  Ezzati (1991): "The Item Count Technique as a method of indirect questioning: A review of
  its development and a case study application," in Measurement errors in surveys, ed. by P. P.
  Biemer, R. M. Groves, L. E. Lyberg, N. A. Mathiowetz, and S. Sudman, John Wiley & Sons
  Inc., 185­210.

Fetzer, T. (2020): "Can Workfare Programs Moderate Conflict? Evidence from India," Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 18, 3337­3375.

Filmer, D., L. Fox, K. Brooks, A. Goya, T. Mengistae, P. Premand, D. Ringold,
  S. Sharma, and S. Zorya (2014): "Youth Employment in sub-Saharan Africa", World Bank,
  Africa Development Series.

Galasso, E. and M. Ravallion (2004): "Social protection in a crisis: Argentina's Plan Jefes
  y Jefas," The World Bank Economic Review, 18, 367­399.

Galasso, E., M. Ravallion, and A. Salvia (2004): "Assisting the transition from workfare
  to work: A randomized experiment," ILR Review, 58, 128­142.

Gehrke, E. and R. Hartwig (2018): "Productive effects of public works programs: What do
  we know? What should we know?" World Development, 107, 111­124.

Gentilini, U., M. Grosh, J. Rigolini, and R. Yemtsov (2020): "Exploring Universal Basic
  Income : A Guide to Navigating Concepts, Evidence, and Practices," Washington, DC: World
  Bank.

Gilligan, D. O., J. Hoddinott, and A. S. Taffesse (2009): "The impact of Ethiopia's
  Productive Safety Net Programme and its linkages," The Journal of Development Studies, 45,
  1684­1706.

Goodman, R., H. Meltzer, and V. Bailey (1998): "The Strengths and Difficulties Question-



                                              45
  naire: A pilot study on the validity of the self-report version," European Child and Adolescent
  Psychiatry, 7, 125­130.

Hanna, R. and B. A. Olken (2018): "Universal Basic Incomes versus Targeted Transfers:
  Anti-Poverty Programs in Developing Countries," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32, 201­
  26.

Heckman, J. J., J. Smith, and N. Clements (1997): "Making the most out of programme
  evaluations and social experiments: Accounting for heterogeneity in programme impacts," The
  Review of Economic Studies, 64, 487­535.

Imbert, C. and J. Papp (2015): "Labor market effects of social programs: Evidence from
  india's employment guarantee," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 233­63.

------ (2019): "Short-term Migration, Rural Public Works, and Urban Labor Markets: Evidence
  from India," Journal of the European Economic Association, 18, 927­963.

Islam, M. and A. Sivasankaran (2015): "How does Child Labor respond to changes in Adult
  Work Opportunities? Evidence from NREGA," Mimeo.

Jalan, J. and M. Ravallion (2003): "Estimating the benefit incidence of an antipoverty
  program by propensity-score matching," Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 21, 19­30.

Kitagawa, T. and A. Tetenov (2018): "Who should be treated? Empirical welfare maxi-
  mization methods for treatment choice," Econometrica, 86, 591­616.

Knaus, M. C., M. Lechner, and A. Strittmatter (2020a): "Heterogeneous employment
  effects of job search programmes: A machine learning approach," Journal of Human Resources,
  0718­9615R1.

------ (2020b): "Machine learning estimation of heterogeneous causal effects: Empirical Monte
  Carlo evidence," The Econometrics Journal, utaa014.

Kuhn, M. (2008): "Building Predictive Models in R Using the caret Package," Journal of Sta-
  tistical Software, 28, 1­26.

 ¨ nzel, S., J. Sekhon, P. Bickel, and B. Yu (2017): "Meta-learners for Estimating Het-
Ku
  erogeneous Treatment Effects using Machine Learning," Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 116.



                                               46
Li, T., S. Sekhri, et al. (2013): "The Unintended Consequences of Employment-Based Safety
  Net Programs," Manuscript. University of Virginia.

List, J. A., A. M. Shaikh, and Y. Xu (2019): "Multiple hypothesis testing in experimental
  economics," Experimental Economics, 22, 773­793.

Manski, C. F. (2004): "Statistical treatment rules for heterogeneous populations," Economet-
  rica, 72, 1221­1246.

McKenzie, D. and D. Sansone (2019): "Predicting entrepreneurial success is hard: Evidence
  from a business plan competition in Nigeria," Journal of Development Economics, 141, 102369.

Miller, J. D. (1984): "A new survey technique for studying deviant behavior," George Wash-
  ington University, Washington, DC.

                            iano, L. Layet, J.-L. Just, and N. G. (2011): "Psycho-
Morin, A., G. Moullec, C. Ma¨
  metric properties of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CESD) in French
                                                                            ´ emiologie et
  Clinical and Non-Clinical Adults," Epidemiology and Public Health/Revue d'Epid´
  de Sant´
         e Publique, 59, 327­340.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar (2016): "Building state capacity:
  Evidence from biometric smartcards in India," American Economic Review, 106, 2895­2929.

------ (2017): "General equilibrium effects of (improving) public employment programs: Ex-
  perimental evidence from India," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
  23838.

Murgai, R., M. Ravallion, and D. van de Walle (2015): "Is Workfare Cost-effective
  against Poverty in a Poor Labor-Surplus Economy?" The World Bank Economic Review, 30,
  413­445.

Nie, X. and S. Wager (2017): "Quasi-oracle estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects,"
  Arxiv preprint, arxiv:1712.04912.

------ (2020): "Quasi-oracle estimation of heterogeneous treatment effects," Biometrika, asaa076.

Olken, B. A. (2015): "Promises and perils of pre-analysis plans," Journal of Economic Per-
  spectives, 29, 61­80.




                                               47
Premand, P. and P. Schnitzer (2020): "Efficiency, Legitimacy, and Impacts of Targeting
  Methods: Evidence from an Experiment in Niger," The World Bank Economic Review, lhaa019.

Ravallion, M. (1991): "Reaching the Rural Poor through Public Employment: Arguments,
  Evidence, and Lessons from South Asia," The World Bank Research Observer, 6, 153­175.

Ravallion, M., G. Datt, and S. Chaudhuri (1993): "Does Maharashtra's Employment
  Guarantee Scheme guarantee employment? Effects of the 1988 wage increase," Economic De-
  velopment and Cultural Change, 41, 251­275.

Ravallion, M., E. Galasso, T. Lazo, and E. Philipp (2005): "What can ex-participants
  reveal about a program's impact?" Journal of Human Resources, 40, 208­230.

Ravi, S. and M. Engler (2015): "Workfare as an effective way to fight poverty: The case of
  India's NREGS," World Development, 67, 57­71.

Rosas, N. and S. Sabarwal (2016): "Public Works as a Productive Safety Net in a Post-
  Conflict Setting : Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Sierra Leone," Policy research
  working paper no. 7580, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Shah, M. and B. M. Steinberg (2019): "Workfare and Human Capital Investment: Evidence
  from India," Journal of Human Resources.

Strittmatter, A. (2018): "What Is the Value Added by Using Causal Machine Learning
  Methods in a Welfare Experiment Evaluation?" Arxiv preprint, arxiv:1812.06533.

                                                   iguez-Alas (2012): Public
Subbarao, K., C. Del Ninno, C. Andrews, and C. Rodr´
  works as a safety net: Design, evidence, and implementation, World Bank, Washington DC.

Vallieres, E. F. and R. J. Vallerand (1990): "Traduction et Validation Canadienne-
  Fran¸
      caise de L'´
                 echelle de L'estime de Soi de Rosenberg," International Journal of Psychology,
  25, 305­316.

Wager, S. and S. Athey (2018): "Estimation and Inference of Heterogeneous Treatment
  Effects using Random Forests," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113, 1228­
  1242.




                                              48
                   Table 1: Baseline Summary Statistics and Balance Checks
                                                             (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)
                                                                                              Balance
                                                           Mean in                Balance
                                                                      Mean in                   Test
                                                          Treatment                Test
                                                                      Control                between 4   Observations
                                                            group                (p-value)
                                                                       group                   arms
                                                           (pooled)               (1)-(2)
                                                                                             (p-value)
Female                                                       0.43      0.42        0.710       0.850         3781
Live in urban area                                           0.94      0.93        0.337       0.579         3736
Age                                                         24.58      24.67       0.569       0.227         3736
Nationality: Ivorian                                         0.96      0.97        0.167       0.265         3736
Nb of children                                               0.90      0.94        0.485       0.997         3736
Education
Primary education not completed                             0.49       0.49        0.944       0.839         3736
Up to primary education completed (CEPE)                    0.23       0.22        0.593       0.417         3736
Up to lower secondary education completed (BEPC)            0.18       0.16        0.480       0.725         3736
Upper secondary education completed (BAC or more)           0.09       0.12       0.0724       0.576         3736
Enrolled at school                                          0.05       0.07       0.0584       0.681         3736
Has participated in vocational training                     0.36       0.40        0.128       0.361         3733
Of which: traditional apprenticeship                        0.72       0.71        0.716       0.512         1465
Household
Household size                                              6.12       6.10        0.915       0.267         3735
Nb of children (< 18 years old)                             2.12       2.10        0.911       0.579         3736
Is head of household                                        0.23       0.23        0.983       0.869         3736
Share of members working (last 7 days)                      0.54       0.55        0.290       0.822         3735
Number of rooms in dwelling                                 3.17       3.10        0.581       0.483         3736
Household assets
Total Nb of assets                                          13.53      13.5        0.960       0.404         3736
Nb of transportation assets                                  0.74      0.83        0.466       0.230         3736
Nb of agricultural assets                                    4.61      4.52        0.890       0.772         3736
Nb of household durables                                     1.59      1.60        0.882       0.377         3736
Nb of communication assets                                   6.60      6.55        0.792       0.639         3736
Savings
Has saved (last 3 months)                                    0.49      0.51        0.438       0.619         3736
of which: share of savings (stock) in formal instrument      0.25      0.27        0.516       0.516         1811
Has a savings account                                        0.11      0.09        0.234       0.936         3736
Savings stock (CFA)                                        27644.3    26426.1      0.602       0.964         3685
Self-reported constraints to repay loans                     0.19      0.23       0.0538       0.967         3736
Self-reported constraints to access credit                   0.50      0.50        0.889       0.733         3736
Expenditures
Nb of days without a meals (last 7 days)                    0.80       0.83        0.654       0.706         3736
Self-reported constraints for basic needs expenditures      0.71       0.73        0.187       0.945         3736
Transportation expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)             1774.3     1679.5       0.495       0.724         3732
Communication expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)              1595.4     1540.8       0.721       0.739         3730
Employment
Has an activity                                             0.78       0.82       0.0782       0.912         3736
Searched for a job (last month)                             0.74       0.76        0.397       0.337         3736
Risk and time preferences
Risk aversion level (scale 0 to 10, 0=very risk averse)     4.72       4.80        0.620       0.607         3736
Is risk averse (based on hypothetical lotteries)            0.74       0.69       0.0124       0.670         3736
Patience level (scale 0 to 10, 10=very patient)             3.25       3.25        0.999       0.931         3733
Preference for present (actualization rate for 1 month)     0.59       0.59        0.899       0.210         3736
Skills (% of success in answers or tasks at each test)
Cognitive (deduction, Raven Test)                            0.23          0.23        0.930    0.256        3730
Spatial vision (NV7 Test)                                    0.27          0.27        0.679   0.0912        3736
Dexterity (Nuts Test)                                        0.39          0.38        0.119    0.263        3731
Dexterity (Bolts Test)                                       0.33          0.34        0.243    0.246        3721
The table includes all baseline respondents interviewed at endline. Means (columns (1) and (2)) and difference in means
(column (3)) estimated using endline estimation weights (see details in Appendix G). Robust standard errors clustered at
(broad) brigade level. Assets and savings stock variables winsorized at the 99th percentile.




                                                            49
Table 2: Characteristics of Applicants and National Population of Urban Youths

                                                                      Experimental            All Urban
                                                                      Control Group         Youths (18-30)
  Gender
  Male                                                                      55.7                   50.8
  Female                                                                    44.3                   49.2
  Educational attainment
  Primary education not completed                                            48.5                  38.9
  Up to primary education completed (CEPE)                                   23.2                  18.5
  Up to lower secondary education completed (BEPC)                           16.6                  20.0
  Upper secondary education completed (BAC or more)                          11.7                  22.7
  Total                                                                     100.0                 100.0
  Asset Index (z-score)                                                    -0.046                 0.000
  Occupation
  Inactive, at school                                                        2.9                  23.6
  Inactive, not at school                                                    7.1                  11.5
  Unemployed                                                                 6.4                  10.5
  Wage-Employed (including informal)                                         47.0                  25.4
  Self-Employed (non agricultural)                                           30.1                  26.0
  Self-Employed in agriculture                                               6.5                   3.1
  Total                                                                     100.0                 100.0
  The first column displays average characteristics of program applicants. Gender, educational attainment and assets
  are measured at baseline. Employment status is measured at midline. (This is because the midline survey was
  collected between November 2013 and January 2014, which was closest to the timing of a national employment
  survey). The second column displays average characteristics of youths between 18 and 30 years old who live in
  urban areas. This is based on the 2013 National Employment Survey (collected in January 2014). The asset index
  is based on a principal component analysis of household assets. We include assets that are measured in both
  surveys: carts, wheelbarrows, bicycles, motorcycles, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioning units, fans, stoves,
  computers, radio stations, televisions and TV antenna, video players, cell phones, landline phones and cars. Z
  scores are predicted using the first component, and standardized in the national employment survey.




                                                          50
                                                           Table 3: Impacts during and post program, economic outcomes

                                               (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)            (9)           (10)            (11)           (12)
                                                                                                         Hours                                                        Earnings       Earnings
                                                             Wage-           Self-          Total                        Hours           Total                                                      Total ex-
                                                                                                        worked in                                      Ln total       in Wage-           in                       Savings in
                                                           Employed       Employed         Hours                       worked in      earnings in                                                  penditures
                                           Employed                                                      Wage-                                         earnings       Empl. in      Self-Empl.                      CFA
                                                          (in at least   (in at least      worked                      Self-Empl.        CFA                                                         in CFA
                                                                                                         Empl.                                        (monthly)         CFA          in CFA                        (stock)
                                                          1 activity)    1 activity)      (weekly)                      (weekly)      (monthly)                                                    (monthly)
                                                                                                        (weekly)                                                     (monthly)      (monthly)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)            0.14           0.48          -0.096           4.89           15.5           -5.69        27082.9           2.95         36799.0        -5715.4        14529.3        39785.7
                                             (0.015)        (0.024)        (0.020)         (1.25)         (1.29)          (0.94)       (2824.9)         (0.19)        (1472.5)       (1214.6)       (1441.4)       (2389.2)
     Strata f.e. control                       Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     Mean in Control                          0.85           0.49            0.35           39.18          20.79          11.28        42841.22         7.87          20188.33       12753.65       47233.52       19250.05
     Observations                             2958           2958           2958            2958           2958           2958           2912           2912            2912           2912           2945           2958
     Perm. p-value: no effects                0.000          0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000           0.000           0.000         0.000          0.000           0.000
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)             0.015         0.0068          0.010           1.34           -0.61           1.70         4360.6          -0.037         -452.7        4005.2          1361.7       11505.2
                                             (0.015)        (0.019)        (0.022)         (1.28)         (1.14)          (1.11)        (1906.5)        (0.18)        (1002.6)       (1790.8)       (1406.9)       (3136.5)
     Strata f.e. control                       Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
     Mean in Control                          0.86           0.51            0.36           40.49          22.06          13.26        43481.10         8.42          20706.18       18872.95       50700.71       46348.14
51




     Observations                             3934           3934           3934            3934           3934           3934           3934           3934            3934           3934           3814           3934
     Perm. p-value: no effects                0.321          0.721          0.647           0.298          0.589          0.129         0.026           0.838           0.652         0.029          0.341           0.000
     Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)             0.011         0.0081         0.0035           -0.76          -0.71           -0.12         2800.5          -0.18           312.2        2168.7          925.7       10429.5
                                             (0.019)        (0.027)        (0.028)         (1.70)         (1.57)          (1.29)        (2138.7)        (0.22)        (1260.9)       (1852.5)       (1536.8)       (3410.3)
     Self-Empl. training (SET)                0.011          -0.018         0.021          3.42             0.46            2.77         4229.3           0.22         -1591.8       5595.5           278.1          7169.5
                                             (0.018)        (0.028)        (0.032)         (1.98)         (1.80)          (1.77)        (3201.3)        (0.26)        (1280.0)       (2910.0)       (1383.1)       (4729.2)
     Wage-Empl. training (WET)               0.0018           0.014       0.000048          3.12           -0.14            2.89         637.5            0.24          -792.6        135.8          1077.6         -3798.3
                                             (0.019)        (0.028)        (0.032)         (2.20)         (1.65)          (1.90)        (2204.3)        (0.21)        (1303.0)       (2302.8)       (1716.7)       (4387.5)
     Strata f.e. control                       Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes          Yes             Yes            Yes
     Mean in Control                          0.86           0.51            0.36           40.49          22.06          13.26        43481.10         8.42          20706.18       18872.95       50700.71       46348.14
     p-value: PW+SET=0                        0.238          0.672          0.375           0.168          0.870          0.153         0.018           0.878           0.289         0.004          0.459           0.000
     p-value: PW+WET=0                        0.489          0.350          0.906           0.198          0.534          0.113         0.215           0.818           0.704         0.437          0.285           0.142
     p-value: SET=WET                         0.672          0.219          0.515           0.904          0.698          0.964         0.360           0.963           0.538         0.175          0.627           0.039
     Observations                             3934           3934           3934            3934           3934           3934           3934           3934            3934           3934           3814           3934
     Perm. p-value: PW+SET=0                  0.246          0.675          0.384           0.180          0.869          0.164         0.021           0.879           0.294         0.005          0.468           0.000
     Perm. p-value: PW+WET=0                  0.502          0.364          0.908           0.208          0.544          0.115         0.230           0.816           0.709         0.452          0.302           0.153
     Perm. p-value: SET=WET                   0.688          0.230          0.513           0.907          0.705          0.967         0.364           0.963           0.548         0.178          0.639           0.042
     ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. Hours, earnings,
     expenditures, and savings winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1). Permutation tests use 10000 permutations for each hypothesis.  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
                                  Table 4: Impacts during and post program, alternative definitions of earnings and savings outcomes
                                                                 Total earnings                                               Self-Employment earnings                                         Wage-Employment earnings
                                                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)                    (4)                   (5)                  (6)                     (7)                   (8)                  (9)
                                                                                             Level,                                                            Level,                                                             Level,
                                             Ln, winsorized        Ln, winsorized                              Ln, winsorized         Ln, winsorized                              Ln, winsorized        Ln, winsorized
                                                                                          winsorized at                                                     winsorized at                                                      winsorized at
                                                 at 97%                at 99%                                      at 97%                 at 99%                                      at 97%                at 99%
                                                                                              99%                                                               99%                                                                99%
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                 2.95                  2.95                24380.2                 -1.04                 -1.06               -11303.4                5.93                   5.93                37181.6
                                                  (0.19)                (0.20)               (5998.7)                (0.20)                (0.20)               (4091.6)              (0.25)                 (0.25)               (4033.5)
     Strata f.e. control                            Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes
     Mean in Control                              7.87                   7.89                54626.16                 3.23                  3.26               23508.66                 4.62                  4.64                28163.73
     Observations                                 2912                   2912                  2912                  2912                  2912                  2912                  2912                  2912                   2912
     Perm. p-value: no effects                    0.000                  0.000                0.000                  0.000                 0.000                0.007                  0.000                 0.000                 0.000
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                 -0.037                -0.028               7597.5                  0.22                   0.23               7802.7                   -0.20                 -0.20                -542.8
                                                  (0.18)                (0.18)               (2380.5)               (0.23)                 (0.23)              (2250.6)                (0.19)                (0.19)               (1145.3)
     Strata f.e. control                           Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                    Yes                  Yes                     Yes                   Yes                  Yes
     Mean in Control                              8.42                   8.43                45690.44                 3.56                  3.57               20487.91                 5.04                  5.05                22036.94
     Observations                                 3934                   3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                   3934
     Perm. p-value: no effects                    0.846                  0.880                0.002                  0.338                 0.326                0.001                  0.295                 0.304                 0.642
     Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
52




     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                  -0.18                 -0.18               5558.1                   0.13                  0.14               5098.3                   -0.22                 -0.23                  -21.1
                                                  (0.22)                (0.22)               (2665.5)                (0.27)                (0.28)              (2288.8)                (0.24)                (0.24)               (1486.7)
     Self-Empl. training (SET)                      0.22                  0.23                5171.9                  0.28                  0.29               7999.6                  -0.065                -0.064                -1327.7
                                                  (0.26)                (0.26)               (3709.3)                (0.34)                (0.35)              (3763.3)                (0.26)                (0.26)               (1531.2)
     Wage-Empl. training (WET)                      0.24                  0.24                1188.7                -0.0027               -0.0025                439.3                  0.15                   0.15                 -299.5
                                                  (0.21)                (0.21)               (3179.3)                (0.32)                (0.32)              (3699.5)                (0.27)                (0.28)               (1544.4)
     Strata f.e. control                            Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes                    Yes
     Mean in Control                               8.42                   8.43               45690.44                 3.56                  3.57               20487.91                 5.04                  5.05                22036.94
     p-value: PW+SET=0                            0.878                  0.840                0.003                  0.184                 0.168                0.000                  0.246                 0.246                 0.318
     p-value: PW+WET=0                            0.818                  0.787                0.049                  0.706                 0.689                0.165                  0.764                 0.770                 0.826
     p-value: SET=WET                             0.963                  0.972                0.392                  0.462                 0.451                0.173                  0.456                 0.452                 0.476
     Observations                                 3934                   3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                  3934                   3934
     Perm. p-value: PW+SET=0                      0.877                  0.847                 0.003                 0.194                 0.177                 0.001                 0.254                 0.256                 0.322
     Perm. p-value: PW+WET=0                      0.826                  0.792                 0.053                 0.708                 0.693                 0.166                 0.766                 0.779                 0.836
     Perm. p-value: SET=WET                       0.962                  0.975                 0.398                 0.468                 0.465                 0.180                 0.469                 0.457                 0.481
     ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. For variables (y) in logarithms we
     take ln(y + 1). Permutation tests use 10000 permutations for each hypothesis.  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
                                           Table 5: Impacts during and post program, well-being, behaviors and work habits

                                                (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)                 (5)             (6)                 (7)               (8)                 (9)
                                             Well-being          Behavior                            Leisure at 6                         Rest at 10        Leisure at 10       Work at 10            Risky
                                                                                 Rest at 6 am                         Work at 6 am
                                               index               index                             am of prev.                          pm of prev.        pm of prev.        pm of prev.         behavior
                                                                                 of prev. day                         of prev. day
                                             (z-score)           (z-score)                               day                                 day                 day               day               (index)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)              0.20               0.12               -0.14             -0.044             0.33              0.071              -0.054             -0.028               -0.18
                                               (0.046)            (0.045)            (0.018)            (0.011)           (0.032)           (0.019)             (0.015)           (0.012)             (0.14)
     Strata f.e. control                         Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes
     Mean in Control                            -0.03              -0.02              0.24               0.09               0.20               0.68               0.18              0.08               0.62
     Observations                               2934               2946               2955               2955              2955               2953               2953              2953               2956
     Perm. p-value: no effects                  0.000              0.006              0.000              0.000             0.000              0.000              0.001             0.015              0.340
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)              0.11                -0.012             0.025            -0.0029            0.0080            -0.000063           0.0011            0.0061              -0.074
                                               (0.041)            (0.040)            (0.019)           (0.012)            (0.016)            (0.018)            (0.015)           (0.011)             (0.10)
     Strata f.e. control                         Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
     Mean in Control                            -0.05               0.01              0.26               0.09               0.24               0.68               0.19              0.09               0.63
     Observations                               3932               3933               3933               3933              3933               3933               3933              3933               3934
     Perm. p-value: no effects                  0.009              0.774              0.202              0.812             0.619              0.996              0.946             0.572              0.412
53




     Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)              0.14                 0.025             0.021             0.0036              0.021           -0.00080           0.0037             0.0041             0.0025
                                               (0.052)            (0.050)            (0.022)           (0.014)            (0.021)            (0.023)           (0.019)            (0.014)            (0.13)
     Self-empl.training (SET)                  -0.0068             -0.039            -0.0075           -0.0036             -0.016            0.0027            -0.0085            0.0030             -0.096
                                               (0.051)            (0.045)            (0.032)           (0.013)            (0.023)            (0.023)           (0.019)            (0.012)            (0.13)
     Wage-empl. training (WET)                  -0.075             -0.077             0.022             -0.017             -0.025           -0.00038           0.00041            0.0033              -0.14
                                               (0.047)            (0.052)            (0.026)           (0.014)            (0.022)            (0.022)           (0.020)            (0.015)            (0.15)
     Strata f.e. control                         Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes                Yes
     Mean in Control                            -0.05               0.01              0.26               0.09               0.24               0.68               0.19              0.09               0.63
     p-value: PW+SET=0                          0.011              0.762              0.648              0.995             0.798              0.929              0.790             0.579              0.451
     p-value: PW+WET=0                          0.187              0.293              0.076              0.383             0.834              0.957              0.839             0.583              0.324
     p-value: SET=WET                           0.169              0.410              0.230              0.385             0.652              0.895              0.680             0.981              0.757
     Observations                               3932               3933               3933               3933              3933               3933               3933              3933               3934
     Perm. p-value: PW+SET=0                    0.011              0.774              0.656              0.996             0.807              0.930              0.796             0.587              0.474
     Perm. p-value: PW+WET=0                    0.198              0.295              0.076              0.402             0.842              0.959              0.840             0.597              0.329
     Perm. p-value: SET=WET                     0.178              0.418              0.239              0.396             0.651              0.899              0.688             0.983              0.766
     ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. The definitions of the well-being index, the behavior index, and the risky
     behavior index are discussed in Appendix E (the estimation of impacts on the risky behavior index is explained in table A4). Tables A2, A3, and A4 present estimates for individual components of these three
     indices. Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. Permutation tests use 10000 permutations for each hypothesis.  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
Table 6: Heterogeneity in impacts on earnings during and post program, machine learning results

                                                       (1)                                (2)                                  (3)                                 (4)
                                                Ln total earnings                  Ln total earnings
                                                                                                                  Total earnings (Monthly)            Total earnings (Monthly)
                                                   (Monthly)                          (Monthly)
                                                     Midline                             Endline                            Midline                             Endline
 Panel A: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter
 ATE (1 )                                             2.642                              -0.0297                            24363.0                             3314.0
                                                  (2.336,2.947)                      (-0.466,0.397)                    (17618.5,31150.3)                   (-1842.7,8523.0)
                                                     [0.000]                             [1.000]                            [0.000]                             [0.414]
 HET (2 )                                             1.231                               0.111                              0.390                               0.416
                                                  (0.862,1.599)                      (-0.515,0.721)                     (0.00909,0.777)                     (-1.149,5.384)
                                                     [0.000]                             [0.970]                            [0.089]                             [0.756]
 Best ML method                           Generalized Random forest                  Random forest                      Random forest                          R-Learner
 Panel B: By quartile of predicted impacts on earnings during program (using midline ) (GATES)
 Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                        1.465                               -0.306                            14659.7                              460.9
                                                  (0.867,2.062)                      (-1.322,0.729)                     (1669.7,28176.4)                  (-11931.0,12389.1)
 Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                       2.296                               -0.311                            23172.3                             2793.9
                                                  (1.695,2.887)                      (-1.341,0.729)                     (9865.0,36605.8)                   (-9810.5,15283.1)
 Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                       2.832                              -0.0372                            29778.2                             5658.1
                                                  (2.215,3.425)                      (-1.076,0.992)                    (16363.7,42745.5)                   (-6700.1,17794.3)
 Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                      3.966                               -0.252                            31670.9                             4490.7
                                                  (3.352,4.560)                      (-1.289,0.799)                    (18254.4,44906.7)                   (-7835.4,16887.3)
 P-value all coefficients are equal                 0.000                              1.000                                0.281                               1.000
 Best ML method                           Generalized Random forest          Generalized Random forest                  Random forest                       Random forest
 Panel C: By quartile of predicted impacts on earnings post program (using endline ) (GATES)
 Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                        2.860                              -0.0834                            20120.2                            2884.7
                                                  (2.240,3.474)                      (-0.963,0.803)                     (7275.6,32824.1)                  (-7540.5,12739.3)
 Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                       2.641                              -0.0669                            26809.6                            4020.6
                                                  (2.036,3.253)                      (-0.950,0.791)                    (14045.8,39322.7)                  (-6197.8,14214.9)
 Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                       2.426                              -0.0609                            27443.4                            3920.1
                                                  (1.795,3.041)                      (-0.915,0.796)                    (14798.2,40110.1)                  (-6313.2,14117.8)
 Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                      2.652                              0.0360                             23655.1                            2549.3
                                                  (2.020,3.277)                      (-0.823,0.886)                    (11190.1,36131.8)                  (-7586.6,13104.9)
 P-value all coefficients are equal                  0.100                               0.888                               0.477                               1.000
 Best ML method                                  Random forest                       Random forest                         R-Learner                           R-Learner
 Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). Columns (1) and (3) (respectively columns (2) and (4))
 focus on outcomes at midline (respectively endline). Estimates in Panel A are based on equation 9. P-value (in brackets) for 1 tests the hypothesis of no effect. P-value (in brackets)
 for 2 tests the hypothesis of no heterogeneity. GATES estimates are based on the specification in equation 10. Panel B (respectively Panel C) shows impacts per quartile of the
 predicted treatment effects at midline (respectively endline). The best predictions are reported. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda): the larger  gets, the
 stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Predictions are estimated for each sample split, reported
 values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted confidence intervals at 90% in parentheses and adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Earnings variable is in CFA,
 winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                                                          54
Table 7: Baseline characteristics of the bottom and top quartiles of the distribution of predicted
impacts on (ln) earnings during program

                                                                      (1)             (2)                (3)
                                                                    Mean in         Mean in             Test
                                                                      1st             4th              (1)-(2)
                                                                    quartile        quartile          (p-value)
      Individual characteristics
      Female                                                         0.15             0.53                0
      Live in urban area                                             0.94             0.96              0.608
      Age                                                            25.22            24.29               0
      Nb of children                                                  0.78             0.86             0.316
      Education
      Years of education                                               11             9.69              0.026
      Primary education not completed                                 0.40            0.48              0.071
      Has participated in vocational training                         0.52            0.28                0
      Household characteristics and assets
      Household size                                                  5.91            6.45              0.060
      Is head of household                                            0.39            0.090               0
      Total Nb of assets                                              0.63            0.43                0
      Nb of transportation assets                                     0.83            0.61              0.030
      Nb of agricultural assets                                       5.39            3.39              0.041
      Nb of household durables                                        1.96            1.63              0.031
      Nb of communication assets                                      7.57            6.68              0.011
      Employment
      Has an activity                                                  1               0.44               0
      Is Wage-Employed                                               0.55             0.09                0
      Is Self-Employed                                               0.52             0.14                0
      Nb of activities                                               1.38             0.46                0
      Total Earnings (monthly, CFA)                                 49673.3           653.4               0
      Searched for a job (last month)                                 0.61            0.52                1
      Savings, constraints and expenditures
      Has saved (last 3 months)                                       0.72            0.25                0
      Of which: share of formal savings (cond. on savings)            0.33            0.17              0.001
      Has a savings account                                           0.20            0.06                0
      Savings Stock (CFA)                                           65924.9          6795.1               0
      Self-reported constraints to repay loans                        0.20            0.18              0.513
      Self-reported constraints to access credit                      0.43            0.58                0
      Self-reported constraints for basic needs expenditures          0.66            0.71              0.257
      Transportation expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                 3041.8          1021.0               0
      Communication expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                  3221.0           655.9               0
      Cognitive skills and risk preference
      Cognitive (deduction, Raven Test)                               0.24              0.23             0.738
      Dexterity (Nuts Test)                                           0.37              0.39             0.124
      Dexterity (Bolts Test)                                          0.34              0.33             0.458
      Positive affect (CES-D scale, Nb positive days)                 6.45              6.09             0.084
      Positive attitude towards the future (ZTPI scale)               29.33             29.11            0.676
      Is Risk averse (based on hypothetical lotteries)                 0.71              0.70              1
      Patience (scale 0 to 10, 10=very patient)                        3.44              3.28            0.872
      Preference for present (actualization rate for 1 month)          0.58              0.58              1
      Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and
      Appendix F.2). Column (1) (respectively (2)) displays average characteristics of the bottom (respectively top)
      quartile of the distribution of predicted impacts on (ln) earnings during the program. Column (3) reports p-values
      for a test of equality between the top and bottom quartile. Reported results are based on the algorithm with best
      predictions for midline : Generalized Random forest. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda):
      the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for
      comparisons across algorithms). Means by quartile are estimated for each sample split, reported values are the
      medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Household assets and savings stock
      variables winsorized at the 99th percentile.




                                                               55
     Table 8: Impacts during and post program on main outcomes, by quartile of predicted impacts on (ln) earnings during the program
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)             (10)            (11)
                                                                                                            Total                        Earnings in     Earnings in        Total
                                                        Wage-Empl.       Self-Empl.     Total Hours                        Ln total                                                                       Well-being
                                                                                                         earnings in                     Wage-Empl.      Self-Empl.      expenditures     Savings in
                                         Employed       (in at least     (in at least     worked                           earnings                                                                         index
                                                                                                            CFA                            in CFA         in CFA           in CFA        CFA (stock)
                                                        1 activity)      1 activity)     (weekly)                         (monthly)                                                                       (z-score)
                                                                                                         (monthly)                        (monthly)      (monthly)        (monthly)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)          0.039           0.35             -0.059         0.81            14805            1.46           28834            -6859          15414           35561            0.23
                                          (-0.0078,        (0.28,           (-0.16,        (-4.39,          (1639,          (0.87,         (21922,         (-12362,         (6633,         (23460,          (0.025,
                                            0.087)         0.42)            0.046)          6.08)          27760)           2.06)          35807)           -1345)          24276)         47674)            0.44)
     Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)         0.093           0.40              -0.11         1.12            21937            2.30           33479            -6486          10622           32056            0.21
                                           (0.046,         (0.33,           (-0.21,        (-4.09,          (8698,          (1.70,         (26487,         (-12019,         (1709,         (20219,         (0.0014,
                                            0.14)          0.46)           -0.0051)         6.35)          35146)           2.89)          40457)            -936)          19388)         44174)            0.43)
     Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)          0.13           0.44              -0.10         4.15            30085            2.83           36303            -4536          11175           40038            0.11
                                           (0.082,         (0.37,           (-0.20,        (-1.09,         (16876,          (2.22,         (29276,          (-9914,         (2444,         (27897,          (-0.10,
                                            0.18)          0.50)          -0.00068)         9.28)          43013)           3.42)          43299)             738)          19858)         51787)            0.31)
     Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)         0.23           0.53              -0.12         8.00            31604            3.97           39464            -4154          18011           40551            0.21
                                            (0.19,         (0.46,           (-0.22,        (2.63,          (18150,          (3.35,         (32525,          (-9726,         (9471,         (28577,         (0.0047,
                                            0.28)          0.60)            -0.013)         13.3)          44869)           4.56)          46318)            1312)          26864)         52610)            0.42)
     P-value all interactions equal        0.000           0.002            1.000           0.166           0.228           0.000           0.164           0.911           0.663           1.000            0.984
     P-value treatXQ1=treatXQ4             0.000           0.001            0.809           0.104           0.114           0.000           0.068           0.771           1.000           1.000            1.000
     Mean in control for Q(1)               0.97            0.85             0.34            48.3          74622.6           10.5          50610.5         14069.4         73954.4         55428.6            0.20
     Mean in control for Q(2)               0.97            0.85             0.28            45.0          65875.5           10.3          47993.5          9482.7         59611.2         45068.4            0.16
     Mean in control for Q(3)               0.94            0.83             0.25            41.9          60839.7           9.89          46146.6          7528.4         55768.8         42968.5            0.14
56




     Mean in control for Q(4)               0.91            0.79             0.21            37.0          52419.4           9.37          42025.2          5264.7         47311.8         35408.5            0.07
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)         -0.020          0.0019         -0.0025           -1.36           1579            -0.31           3157             235            3729             12399           0.16
                                          (-0.098,         (-0.11,         (-0.12,         (-8.53,        (-10755,         (-1.32,         (-3737,         (-9751,         (-5357,          (-7700,        (-0.077,
                                           0.060)           0.12)           0.11)           5.80)          13912)           0.73)          10005)          10546)          12897)           32587)           0.40)
     Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)        -0.018          -0.010          0.0047           -1.06            736            -0.31            593             836            1290              3689           0.071
                                          (-0.096,         (-0.12,         (-0.11,         (-8.27,        (-11458,         (-1.34,         (-6330,         (-9441,         (-7596,         (-16501,         (-0.17,
                                           0.061)           0.10)           0.12)           6.30)          13060)           0.73)           7529)          11045)          10055)           23859)           0.31)
     Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)        0.018          -0.0028          -0.018           2.32            6456           -0.037            830            5076             -368             6800           0.056
                                          (-0.061,         (-0.12,         (-0.13,         (-4.89,         (-6066,         (-1.08,         (-6015,         (-5057,         (-9472,         (-13642,         (-0.18,
                                           0.096)           0.11)          0.097)           9.55)          18844)           0.99)           7696)          15254)           8493)           27063)           0.30)
     Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)       0.012           -0.028           0.049          -0.065           2771            -0.25           -2661           5650            1946             10040           0.068
                                          (-0.067,         (-0.14,        (-0.064,         (-7.30,         (-9307,         (-1.29,         (-9488,         (-4708,         (-7036,          (-9921,         (-0.17,
                                           0.090)          0.087)           0.16)           7.17)          15356)           0.80)           4389)          16012)          11018)           30277)           0.30)
     P-value all interactions equal          1.000           1.000           1.000           1.000            1.000            1.000          0.800           1.000          1.000          1.000            1.000
     P-value treatXQ1=treatXQ4               1.000           1.000           1.000           1.000            1.000            1.000          0.397           0.855          1.000          1.000            0.979
     Mean in control for Q(1)                 0.94            0.64            0.40            47.6          64297.7             9.76         30622.6         27727.4        66767.3        77089.8            0.14
     Mean in control for Q(2)                 0.90            0.56            0.34            44.5          48049.5             8.86         23910.2         19502.6        53638.7        58768.3            0.10
     Mean in control for Q(3)                 0.88            0.54            0.32            42.6          45313.4             8.37         21591.9         18096.8        49538.7        52302.9            0.10
     Mean in control for Q(4)                 0.80            0.48            0.32            35.7          34223.3             7.31         16394.0         15165.5        43487.1        42764.8           -0.04
     Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). Estimates of treatment effects on the main outcomes during the program (Panel
     A), and after the program (Panel B) by quartile of the (predicted) impacts on earnings during the program. At the bottom of each panel, we present a test of equality of treatment effects between all quartiles
     respectively between the bottom (Q1) and top (Q4) quartiles. Estimation is based on a specification similar to equation 10 but replacing the dependent variable with the alternative (midline or endline) outcome
     variable. The best predictions during program are used: Generalized Random Forest. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda): the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z )
     noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Predictions are estimated for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted p-values for
     partition uncertainty. Hours, earnings, expenditures, and savings winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).
     Table 9: Impacts post program on intermediate outcomes, by quartile of predicted impacts on (ln) earnings during the program

                                                                Investment in Self-Employed Activities                               Search for Wage Jobs
                                                       (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)
                                                 Total number of         Value of       Start-up capital        Value of                            Total spent in
                                                                                                                                Searched for a
                                                     income            productive        in CFA (main        investments in                         job search in
                                                                                                                                  job (last 3
                                                   generating         assets in CFA     self-empl. act.,       CFA (last 3                          CFA (last 12
                                                                                                                                    months
                                                    activities           (stock)             stock)             months)                               months)
              Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)            0.026               11189              14723                538                0.082             1806
                                                      (-0.12,              (261,              (-310,            (-1431,             (-0.038,           (-3341,
                                                       0.18)              22223)             29499)              2560)                0.20)             6861)
              Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)          0.0093                3843               2899               322                0.0062              -580
                                                      (-0.14,             (-7105,           (-11880,            (-1654,              (-0.11,           (-5819,
                                                       0.16)              14666)             18088)              2301)                0.13)             4584)
              Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)          -0.0043              -1325               2086               -625                0.025              828
                                                      (-0.16,            (-12576,           (-13125,            (-2558,             (-0.096,           (-4278,
                                                       0.15)               9517)             17246)              1338)                0.14)             5934)
              Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)          0.038                 -20               5612               -138                0.057              887
                                                      (-0.11,            (-11026,            (-9583,            (-2121,             (-0.065,           (-4198,
                                                       0.19)              10771)             20764)              1916)                0.18)             5942)
              P-value all interactions equal            1.000              0.350                 0.893             1.000              0.956              1.000
              P-value treatXQ1=treatXQ4                 1.000              0.282                 0.710             1.000              1.000              1.000
57




              Mean in control for Q(1)                   0.55             23944.3              43103.8             3673.3              0.57             11914.3
              Mean in control for Q(2)                   0.50             18478.1              30054.0             2704.7              0.55              8466.7
              Mean in control for Q(3)                   0.47             14974.2              26206.3             2242.7              0.55              8269.3
              Mean in control for Q(4)                   0.40             10781.7              19455.5              974.5              0.56              8413.1
              Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). Estimates of post-
              program impacts on intermediary outcomes related to productive investments by quartile of the (predicted) impacts on earnings during the program.
              At the bottom of each panel, we present a test of equality of treatment effects between all quartiles respectively between the bottom (Q1) and top (Q4)
              quartiles. Estimation is based on a specification similar to equation 10 but replacing the dependent variable with the alternative (endline) outcome
              variable. The best predictions during program are used: Generalized Random Forest. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda): the
              larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Predictions
              are estimated for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Value of
              productive assets, value of investments, start-up capital and total spend in job search winsorized at the 97th percentile.
                                   Table 10: Impacts on (ln) earnings and cost-benefit ratios under alternative targeting approaches

                                                                                                    Machine learning pred. by quartile of
                                                                           Random selection                                                                           Selection on baseline characteristics
                                                                                                      pred. impacts during program
                                                                                   (1)                       (2)                       (3)                      (4)                       (5)                      (6)
                                                                                                                                                                                    Low baseline              Low baseline
                                                                                                     Mean in quartile         Mean in quartile                                        earnings                  earnings
                                                                             Treated (ITT)                                                                   Women
                                                                                                     4 (75% to 100%)           1 (0 to 25%)                                        (self-declared)             (predicted)
                                                                                                                                                                                   (bottom 25 %)             (bottom 25%)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Treatment                                                                  2.948***                  3.966***                 1.465***                  3.728***                 4.035***                  3.657***
                                                                                 (0.194)                   (0.307)                  (0.305)                   (0.349)                  (0.384)                   (0.373)
     Observations                                                                 2912                      2877                      2877                     2912                      2877                     2877
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Treatment                                                                    -0.037                    -0.252                   -0.306                    -0.050                   -0.147                    0.020
                                                                                 (0.181)                   (0.529)                  (0.525)                   (0.345)                  (0.517)                   (0.405)
     Observations                                                                 3934                      3865                      3865                     3934                      3736                     3736
     Panel C: Cost-benefit Analysis
     Effect during program in CFA [A]                                            27083                     31671                     14660                    32097                     33954                    32824
58




     Effect post program in CFA [B]                                              4361                      4491                       461                     7168                      7602                     10646
     Discounted sum of impacts (during + post program) [C]                     253920.50                 287958.58                 109428.85                330429.84                 349837.28                386817.87
     Total cost per beneficiary [D]                                            768708.10                 768708.10                 768708.10                768708.10                 768708.10                768708.10
     Cost-benefit ratio (during + post program) [E]                               3.03                      2.67                      7.02                     2.33                      2.20                     1.99
     Column (1) is the ITT estimate based on specification in equation 6. Columns (4-6) show the estimated 1 coefficient from the specification in equation 8. Columns (2) and (3) document the effect of selecting the
     observations in the top and bottom quartile of the distribution of predicted impacts at midline. Column 2 (respectively column 3) of Panel B reports group averages (GATES) endline impacts for observations in the top
     quartile (respectively bottom quartile) of predicted impacts at midline. (This is similar to Table 6, panel B, column (2)). Column (6) uses predictions of baseline earnings based on the Elastic Net method. [A] Effect
     on total monthly earnings during program in CFA, in levels, winsorized at the 97th percentile. [B] Effect on total monthly earnings post program in CFA, in levels, winsorized at the 97th percentile. [C] Discounted
                                                                                                                                                                                    21
     sum of impacts on total earnings from program start (month 1) up to 14 months after program ended (month 21). It is computed as             k = 17 (k-4)  During +      (k = 8) (k-7)  P ost , with  During (respectively
                                                                                                                                                                    1/12
      P ost ) the contemporaneous (respectively post-program) ITT estimates of impact on monthly total earnings and  the monthly discount factor.  = 1/(1 +  )           ,  = 10%. For column (3), we consider post-program
     impacts to be 0 when calculating the discounted sum of impacts in [C]. [E] = [D] / [C]. Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
          Figure 1: Quantile treatment effects for (ln) earnings during and post program




 Note: Quantile treatment effects (for non-zero earnings) up to the 99th percentile. Permutation tests use 10000
permutations for each hypothesis. Wilcoxon rank-sum test permutation p-value is 0.000 for panel (a) and 0.466 for
panel (b). Kolmogorov-Smirnov permutation p-value is 0.000 for panel (a) and 0.776 for panel (b). Total monthly
earnings variable is in CFA. The variable is not winsorized to study the top of the distribution. Results shown up
to the 99th percentile.




                                                       59
               Figure 2: Group average treatment effects (GATES) for (ln) earnings




 Note: Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2
and Appendix F.2). The best predictions are reported. Choice of algorithm is based on  and is indicated at the
top of each figure (see appendix table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Total monthly earnings variable is
in CFA, winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                      60
                Figure 3: Predicted impact on (ln) earnings during vs post program




 Note: Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2
and Appendix F.2). Median across 100 simulations. Solid lines represent the ATE. Dashed lines delimit bottom
25% and top 25% of the distribution. Predictions using Generalized Random Forest for impacts during program.
Predictions using Random Forest for post program impacts. Total monthly earnings variable is in CFA, winsorized
at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                      61
             Figure 4: Change in impact on total earnings when the transfer is reduced




Panel (a) presents the estimated distribution of our ML estimate of CATE using the best method: Random
Forest (see appendix Table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Panel (b) presents simulations of changes in
impacts induced by a reduction in the transfer by x, assuming the distribution of individual impact on earnings
in Panel (a) (see conceptual framework in section 2). The dotted black line shows the share of initial applicants
who still apply when the transfer is reduced by x. The dashed blue line shows the lottery success rate when the
transfer is reduced by x (Lottery rate = 0.25T /((T - x)P (sT - x > 0))). The figure reports this lottery rate
up to the value where it reaches 1 ( CFA 27, 500). The solid red line shows the average impact on earnings
E ((s - x)1(s - x > 0))/(P (s - x > 0)(T - x)) when the transfer amount is reduced by x, Slottery (T - x) appearing
in equation 5, normalized by 0.25 × 50, 000, the amount available for each initial applicant.




                                                        62
Appendix A   Additional Tables




                          63
                                 Table A1: Estimated impacts during and post program on economic outcomes, with baseline controls
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)             (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)            (11)            (12)             (13)
                                                                                                              Hours                                                          Earnings        Earnings
                                                               Wage-            Self-           Total                         Hours            Total                                                         Total ex-
                                                                                                             worked in                                       Ln total        in Wage-            in                         Savings in       Well-being
                                                             Employed        Employed          Hours                        worked in       earnings in                                                     penditures
                                             Employed                                                         Wage-                                          earnings        Empl. in       Self-Empl.                        CFA              index
                                                            (in at least    (in at least       worked                       Self-Empl.         CFA                                                            in CFA
                                                                                                              Empl.                                         (monthly)          CFA           in CFA                          (stock)         (z-score)
                                                            1 activity)     1 activity)       (weekly)                       (weekly)       (monthly)                                                       (monthly)
                                                                                                             (weekly)                                                       (monthly)       (monthly)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)              0.14            0.48           -0.09            5.06           15.68           -6.87         27485.77          2.92          36799.02        -5567.13       14431.49 40035.35                  0.19
                                               (0.01)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (1.26)          (1.29)          (1.03)        (2608.25)        (0.19)         (1463.69)       (1196.97)      (1317.32) (2303.55)               (0.05)
     Strata f.e. control                         Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes       Yes                    Yes
     Baseline controls                           Yes             No             Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             No              Yes            Yes       Yes                    Yes
     Mean in Control                            0.85            0.49            0.35            39.69          21.40           12.67         42841.22          7.87          20188.33        12753.65        47233.52        19250.05          -0.03
     Observations                               2958            2958            2958            2958           2958            2958            2912            2912            2912            2912            2945            2958            2934
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)               0.02            0.00            0.02            0.74            -1.58          2.47         5155.88             0.00          -665.49       4783.59          2387.97       10143.10           0.12
                                               (0.02)          (0.02)          (0.02)          (1.40)          (1.26)          (1.23)       (1902.00)          (0.19)        (1079.42)      (1852.73)       (1466.46)       (3316.16)         (0.04)
     Strata f.e. control                        Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
     Baseline controls                          Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
     Mean in Control                            0.86            0.51            0.36            41.00          22.50           13.80         43481.10          8.42          20706.18        18872.95        50700.71        46348.14          -0.05
     Observations                               3934            3934            3934            3934           3934            3934            3934            3934            3934            3934            3814            3934            3932
64




     Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)               0.01            0.00            0.02            -1.58           -1.82           0.53          3406.18           -0.14           69.13        3071.78         2131.18        8598.92           0.15
                                               (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (1.78)          (1.65)          (1.44)        (2116.14)         (0.22)        (1319.73)      (1901.47)       (1596.09)       (3644.89)         (0.05)
     Self-Empl. training (SET)                  0.01            -0.02           0.02           3.59              0.74           2.58          4226.69            0.21         -1668.02      5203.42          -207.36        8143.34            -0.01
                                               (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (2.01)          (1.83)          (1.80)        (3044.51)         (0.24)        (1287.18)      (2826.96)       (1422.57)       (4479.69)         (0.05)
     Wage-Empl. training (WET)                  0.00            0.01            0.00            3.42            -0.03           3.41          947.80             0.24          -796.06        210.73          881.90         -3206.44         -0.08
                                               (0.02)          (0.03)          (0.03)          (2.36)          (1.65)          (2.16)        (1963.81)         (0.19)        (1313.08)      (2173.59)       (1599.02)       (4242.97)         (0.05)
     Strata f.e. control                        Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
     Baseline controls                          Yes              Yes            Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
     Mean in Control                            0.86            0.51            0.36            41.00          22.50           13.80         43481.10          8.42          20706.18        18872.95        50700.71        46348.14          -0.05
     Observations                               3934            3934            3934            3934           3934            3934            3934            3934            3934            3934            3814            3934            3932
     ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. The set of baseline controls differs for each outcome. Variables are selected from a pool of 1312
     covariates using post-double selection lasso. Control variables include information about individual characteristics, education, household composition, experience of violence, household expenditure, asset ownership, and access to
     infrastructure. Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. Hours, earnings, expenditures, and savings winsorized at the 97th percentile.  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
                    Table A2: Estimated impacts during and post program on well-being index components

                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)
                                                                                                         Positive
                                                                                     Positive                                Present
                                                                 Self-esteem                             attitude                           Happiness in
                                              Well-being                              Affect                                fatalism                           Pride in daily
                                                                 (Rosenberg                            towards the                             daily
                                                index                              (CES-D sub                              (ZTPI sub                             activities
                                                                    scale)                            future (ZTPI                           activities
                                              (z-score)                                scale)                                 scale)                             (z-score)
                                                                  (z-score)                             sub scale)                           (z-score)
                                                                                     (z-score)                              (z-score)
                                                                                                         (z-score)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)               0.20***            0.14***            0.18***            0.086**             0.021             0.15***            0.15***
                                                 (0.05)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.05)             (0.05)
     Strata f.e. control                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Mean in Control                             -0.03              -0.02              -0.05               -0.01              0.03                0.01              -0.00
     Observations                                2934               2951               2958                2951               2955               2950               2949
     Perm. p-value: no effects                   0.000              0.001              0.000               0.035              0.606              0.002              0.001
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)               0.11***             0.10**             0.041              0.061             -0.093**            0.076*             0.053
                                                 (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.05)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)
     Strata f.e. control                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes
65




     Mean in Control                             -0.05              -0.05              -0.03               -0.01              0.05               -0.02              -0.02
     Observations                                3932               3933               3932                3933               3933               3933               3933
     Perm. p-value: no effects                   0.010              0.022              0.314               0.197              0.041              0.074              0.201
     Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)               0.14***             0.12**             0.063              0.094*              -0.052             0.11**             0.089*
                                                 (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)              (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)
     Self-Empl. training (SET)                  -0.0068             -0.044            -0.0078             -0.11*             -0.11**             -0.018             -0.025
                                                 (0.05)             (0.06)             (0.05)             (0.06)              (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)
     Wage-Empl. training (WET)                   -0.075             -0.019             -0.062             0.0034              -0.020            -0.082*            -0.087*
                                                 (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)              (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.05)
     Strata f.e. control                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
     Mean in Control                             -0.05              -0.05              -0.03               -0.01              0.05               -0.02              -0.02
     p-value: PW+SET=0                           0.011              0.165              0.275               0.816              0.001              0.059              0.177
     p-value: PW+WET=0                           0.187              0.065              0.977               0.046              0.201              0.598              0.972
     p-value: SET=WET                            0.169              0.703              0.232               0.038              0.073              0.138              0.216
     Observations                                3932               3933               3932                3933               3933               3933               3933
     Perm. p-value: PW+SET=0                     0.014              0.175              0.277               0.820              0.000              0.064              0.188
     Perm. p-value: PW+WET=0                     0.201              0.066              0.977               0.052              0.211              0.609              0.970
     Perm. p-value: SET=WET                      0.178              0.706              0.239               0.040              0.081              0.141              0.224
     ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. The definition of the well-being index and
     variables entering the index is detailed in Appendix E. Present fatalism enters as an inverted measure in the index (a negative impact in column (5) is associated with a
     positive impact on the index in column (1)). Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. Permutation tests use 10000 permutations for each
     hypothesis. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.
Table A3: Estimated impacts during and post program on behavior index components

                                              (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)
                                                               Conduct           Pro-social
                                                                                                  Impulsiveness         Anger in
                                           Behavior           problems            behavior
                                                                                                   (DERS sub              daily
                                             index            (SDQ sub           (SDQ sub
                                                                                                      scale)            activities
                                           (z-score)             scale)             scale)
                                                                                                    (z-score)           (z-score)
                                                               (z-score)          (z-score)
Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
Public Works Treatment (ITT)                0.12***             -0.031             0.023             -0.095**            -0.13***
                                             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)              (0.04)
Strata f.e. control                           Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Mean in Control                              -0.02               0.01               -0.00               0.02               -0.01
Observations                                 2946               2957                2956               2954                2950
Perm. p-value: no effects                    0.005              0.459               0.569              0.034               0.003
Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
Public Works Treatment (ITT)                 -0.012             0.013              -0.0032             0.0050             0.014
                                             (0.04)             (0.04)              (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.04)
Strata f.e. control                           Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Mean in Control                               0.01              -0.01               -0.01              -0.01               -0.03
Observations                                 3933               3933                3933               3933                3933
Perm. p-value: no effects                    0.772              0.767               0.941              0.894               0.731
Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
Public Works Treatment (ITT)                 0.025              0.034              0.0066              -0.051             -0.013
                                             (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.06)              (0.04)             (0.05)
Self-Empl. training (SET)                    -0.039            -0.062*             -0.054              0.054              0.012
                                             (0.04)             (0.04)             (0.06)              (0.04)             (0.05)
Wage-Empl. training (WET)                    -0.077            -0.0041             0.024              0.12***              0.072
                                             (0.05)             (0.05)             (0.07)              (0.04)             (0.05)
Strata f.e. control                           Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Mean in Control                               0.01              -0.01               -0.01              -0.01               -0.03
p-value: PW+SET=0                            0.762              0.530               0.317              0.939               0.978
p-value: PW+WET=0                            0.293              0.574               0.546              0.147               0.222
p-value: SET=WET                             0.410              0.197               0.066              0.165               0.229
Observations                                 3933               3933                3933               3933                3933
Perm. p-value: PW+SET=0                      0.767              0.534               0.322              0.940               0.980
Perm. p-value: PW+WET=0                      0.300              0.580               0.549              0.155               0.236
Perm. p-value: SET=WET                       0.418              0.212               0.079              0.170               0.240
ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. The
definition of the behavior index and variables entering the index is detailed in Appendix E. Conduct problems, impulsiveness and anger in
daily activities enter as inverted measures in the index (a negative impact in columns (2), (4) or (5) is associated with a positive impact
on the index in column (1)). Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. Permutation tests use 10000
permutations for each hypothesis. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01.




                                                                    66
                                                         Table A4: Estimated impacts during and post program on risky behaviors
                                                       (1)                     (2)                   (3)                     (4)                    (5)                     (6)                    (7)                    (8)                    (9)
                                                                                                  Believing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ties with a
                                                                          Assaulting             smuggling is                                  Threatening            Taking illicit       Smuggling stolen                                 Keeping fire
                                                    Stealing                                                            Prostituting                                                                                 smuggling
                                                                           someone              necessary (to                                   someone                  drugs                 objects                                     arms at home
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      network
                                                                                                earn a living)
     Panel A: Impacts during the program (around 4.5 months after program starts)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                     0.09                  -0.11                    0.00                   0.01                   -0.02                 -0.11                    -0.05                  0.01                    0.01
                                                      (0.05)                (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.05)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)
     Mean in Control                                   0.05                 0.18                    0.10                   0.07                   0.11                     0.03                  0.05                    0.02                    0.01
                                                      (0.04)                (0.03)                  (0.03)                 (0.04)                 (0.03)                  (0.04)                 (0.03)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)
     Strata f.e. control                               Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes
     p-value: no design effect in list A              1.000                  1.000                   0.446                  0.008                  0.156                  0.015                   0.314                  0.485                  0.152
     p-value: no design effect in list B              1.000                  1.000                   0.655                  0.373                  1.000                  0.425                   0.645                  0.107                  0.856
     Impact in list A                                  0.09                  -0.19                   -0.07                   0.03                  -0.11                  -0.08                   -0.14                   0.04                  -0.01
     Impact in list B                                  0.08                  -0.03                    0.08                  -0.02                   0.07                  -0.15                    0.04                  -0.01                   0.03
     p-value: Impact A= Impact B                      0.930                  0.097                   0.126                  0.694                  0.070                  0.501                   0.046                  0.587                  0.677
     Observations                                     2956                   2956                    2956                   2956                   2953                   2955                    2954                   2954                   2955
     Panel B: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                      0.03                  -0.01                   0.01                   -0.01                  -0.01                   0.01                 -0.09                    0.00                    0.00
                                                      (0.03)                (0.03)                  (0.03)                 (0.04)                 (0.03)                  (0.03)                 (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.03)
     Mean in Control                                   0.04                 0.09                    0.08                   0.10                   0.08                     0.03                  0.09                   0.06                    0.05
                                                      (0.03)                (0.03)                  (0.02)                 (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.03)                 (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.03)
     Strata f.e. control                               Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                   Yes                     Yes
67




     p-value: no design effect in list A              0.083                    ­                     0.317                    ­                    1.000                  0.157                   0.063                  0.510                  0.981
     p-value: no design effect in list B                ­                    1.000                   1.000                  0.083                  0.214                  0.171                   0.612                  0.425                  0.611
     Impact in list A                                  0.01                  0.04                     0.02                  -0.02                  -0.01                  -0.04                   -0.09                   0.07                   0.05
     Impact in list B                                  0.05                  -0.07                   -0.00                  -0.00                  -0.01                   0.06                   -0.08                  -0.07                  -0.04
     p-value: Impact A=Impact B                       0.592                  0.108                   0.752                  0.743                  0.945                  0.144                   0.915                  0.058                  0.190
     Observations                                     3933                   3933                    3933                   3933                   3933                   3932                    3933                   3933                   3933
     Panel C: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                      0.01                  0.03                     0.03                  -0.05                   0.00                    0.02                  -0.06                   0.01                    0.01
                                                      (0.04)                (0.04)                  (0.03)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)
     Self-Empl. training (SET)                         0.03                  -0.08                   -0.04                 0.10                    0.02                    -0.05                 -0.07                   0.01                    -0.02
                                                      (0.04)                (0.05)                  (0.04)                 (0.04)                 (0.05)                  (0.03)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)
     Wage-Empl. training (WET)                         0.01                 -0.06                    -0.02                  0.01                   -0.06                    0.01                  -0.01                  -0.03                    0.01
                                                      (0.04)                (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.03)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)                 (0.04)                 (0.04)                  (0.04)
     Mean in Control                                   0.04                 0.09                    0.08                   0.10                   0.08                      0.03                 0.09                   0.06                    0.05
                                                      (0.03)                (0.03)                  (0.02)                 (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.03)                 (0.03)                 (0.03)                  (0.03)
     Strata f.e. control                               Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                    Yes                     Yes
     p-value: PW+SET=0                                0.275                  0.344                   0.662                  0.197                  0.534                  0.498                   0.001                  0.708                  0.681
     p-value: PW+WET=0                                0.539                  0.419                   0.820                  0.316                  0.194                  0.450                   0.072                  0.571                  0.668
     p-value: SET=WET                                 0.667                  0.689                   0.613                  0.008                  0.077                  0.188                   0.185                  0.416                  0.388
     Observations                                     3933                   3933                    3933                   3933                   3933                   3932                    3933                   3933                   3933
     Variables measured using a double list experiment (Droitcour et al., 1991), whereby each respondent was assigned to a list A with sensitive items and a list B without sensitive items, or vice versa (see Appendix E). Difference-in-means estimation
     (Miller, 1984) was used to estimate the mean in control and treatment effects. In Panels A and B, the specification Yi =  + 1 Li + 2 Wi + 3 (Li × Wi ) + l Xi,l + i was used; where 1 is the mean in the control group, 3 is the treatment effect, and
     Xi,l is a vector of stratification variables. Similarly, in Panel C we used Yi =  + 1 Li + 2 Wi + 3 (Wi × T 1i ) + 4 (Wi × T 2i ) + 5 (Li × Wi ) + 6 (Li × Wi × T 1i ) + 7 (Li × Wi × T 2i ) + l Xi,l + i ; where 1 is the mean in the control group, 5 the
     effect of "pure" public works, and 6 (7 ) the additional effect of self-employment training (wage employment training). The test for the presence of design effects is based on the likelihood ratio test (Blair and Imai, 2012). The null hypothesis is no
     design effect. We report Bonferroni adjusted p-values. Weights are used for estimation but not for the design effect test (because it is not supported). The dash symbol indicates that the test statistics could not be processed due to a lack of variance
     in estimated probabilities: P (C = 4, S = 1) = P (C = 4, S = 0) = 0. However, none of the point estimates of joint probabilities were negative in such cases.  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
                  Table A5: Estimated impacts post program on skills, investments in self-employed activities and search for wage jobs

                                                                       Investment in self-employed activities                                                                      Search for wage jobs
                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)                (9)                (10)
                                                                                                                                               Start-up
                                                                                  Total number          Value of            Value of                                                                  Total spent
                                              Self-Empl.                                                                                      capital in        Wage-Empl.                                               Searched for
                                                                 Prepared a        of income          productive          investments                                               Used a CV        in job search
                                                 Quiz                                                                                        CFA (main             Quiz                                                  a job (last 3
                                                                business plan      generating        assets in CFA       in CFA (last                                             for job search     in CFA (last
                                               (z-score)                                                                                      self-empl.         (z-score)                                                 months)
                                                                                    activities          (stock)            3 months)                                                                  12 months)
                                                                                                                                             act., stock)
     Panel A: Post program impacts (pooled treatment) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)               0.12               0.024               0.048            4159.1                347.4           8712.6               0.12              0.047               -468.4              0.026
                                                (0.04)             (0.01)              (0.03)           (1529.97)           (292.63)          (2071.94)            (0.04)             (0.01)            (823.02)             (0.02)
     Strata f.e. control                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes               Yes                Yes                 Yes
     Mean in Control                             -0.07               0.05               0.48            12570.82            1910.81            22198.36             -0.09               0.15            9026.08               0.52
     Observations                                3934               3934               3934               3934               3934                3934               3934               3934              3934                3934
     Perm. p-value: no effects                   0.005              0.021              0.076              0.011              0.248              0.000               0.004              0.002             0.582               0.225
     Panel B: Post program impacts (by treatment arms) (12 to 15 months after program ends)
     Public Works Treatment (ITT)                0.073              0.013              0.040             4878.0               580.0           8282.5                0.019              0.016             -411.6              0.023
                                                 (0.06)             (0.01)             (0.03)           (1956.43)           (404.36)          (2620.46)            (0.05)              (0.02)           (915.44)             (0.03)
     Self-Empl. training (SET)                   0.11              0.041               0.0058             -661.3             -428.1            2534.1               0.048             -0.0064            -324.3             -0.0023
                                                 (0.06)             (0.01)             (0.04)           (2282.23)           (383.22)          (3330.95)            (0.05)              (0.02)           (863.67)             (0.03)
68




     Wage-Empl. training (WET)                   0.033             -0.0058             0.021             -1576.7             -296.7            -1187.7             0.26               0.10                146.5              0.011
                                                 (0.05)             (0.01)             (0.04)           (2040.88)           (450.91)          (3306.09)            (0.05)              (0.02)           (942.35)             (0.03)
     Strata f.e. control                          Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
     Mean in Control                             -0.07               0.05               0.48            12570.82            1910.81            22198.36             -0.09               0.15            9026.08               0.52
     p-value PW+SET=0                            0.001              0.000              0.217              0.046              0.625              0.000               0.162              0.546             0.449               0.458
     p-value PW+WET=0                            0.026              0.568              0.076              0.064              0.494              0.018               0.000              0.000             0.797               0.300
     p-value SET=WET                             0.107              0.001              0.695              0.648              0.764              0.236               0.000              0.000             0.591               0.746
     Observations                                3934               3934               3934               3934               3934                3934               3934               3934              3934                3934
     Perm. p-value PW+SET=0                      0.001              0.000              0.223              0.051              0.631              0.000               0.172              0.561             0.464               0.467
     Perm. p-value PW+WET=0                      0.029              0.575              0.081              0.067              0.502              0.018               0.000              0.000             0.804               0.304
     Perm. p-value SET=WET                       0.113              0.000              0.699              0.660              0.770              0.246               0.000              0.000             0.599               0.747
     ITT estimates in panels A and B based on specification in equation 6. Estimates in panel C based on specification in equation 7. Value of productive assets, value of investments, start-up capital and total spend in job search
     winsorized at the 97th percentile. Robust standard errors clustered at (broad) brigade level in parentheses. Permutation tests use 10000 permutations for each hypothesis.  p < .1,  p < .05,  p < .01.
                      Table A6: Comparison of Machine Learning algorithms to predict impacts on earnings during and post program
                                                     Estimates in logs                                                                             Estimates in levels
                        (1)              (2)                   (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)              (7)                 (8)                  (9)               (10)
                                      Generalized            Gradient                                                                  Generalized          Gradient
                    Elastic net                                               R-Learner        Random forest         Elastic net                                               R-Learner        Random forest
                                     Random forest           boosting                                                                 Random forest         boosting
     Panel A: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter during program
     ATE (1 )          2.631              2.642                 2.643            2.635               2.634            24577.6           24351.6           24238.5            24549.6           24363.0
                     (2.9,2.3)          (2.9,2.3)             (2.9,2.3)        (2.9,2.3)           (2.9,2.3)      (31323.2,17831.5) (31214.6,17669.0) (30976.0,17471.1) (31423.5,17789.9) (31150.3,17618.5)
                      [0.000]            [0.000]               [0.000]          [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]           [0.000]
     HET (2 )          0.980              1.231                 0.420            0.920               0.849              0.405             1.070             0.288             0.429             0.390
                     (1.3,0.6)          (1.6,0.9)             (0.6,0.2)        (1.2,0.6)           (1.1,0.6)         (0.9,-0.07)       (2.1,-0.05)       (0.7,-0.03)        (1.3,-0.2)       (0.8,0.009)
                      [0.000]            [0.000]               [0.000]          [0.000]             [0.000]            [0.157]           [0.121]           [0.160]           [0.353]           [0.089]
                        0.9                1.0                  0.7               0.9                0.9               6007.2             6401.7              5988.1             4621.1             6785.3
     Panel B: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter post program
     ATE (1 )         -0.0551            -0.0508              -0.0484           -0.0570            -0.0297            3217.5             3527.3              3546.3             3314.0             3474.5
                     (0.4,-0.5)         (0.4,-0.5)           (0.4,-0.5)        (0.4,-0.5)         (0.4,-0.5)      (8428.4,-1918.3)   (8737.3,-1706.6)    (8685.8,-1630.9)   (8523.0,-1842.7)   (8642.7,-1641.7)
                      [1.000]            [1.000]              [1.000]           [1.000]            [1.000]            [0.439]            [0.374]             [0.358]            [0.414]            [0.370]
     HET (2 )         -0.0581             0.156                0.0376          -0.00219             0.111             0.0837              0.391              0.0220              0.416             0.0800
                     (0.6,-0.7)         (1.6,-1.3)           (0.3,-0.2)        (3.1,-2.8)         (0.7,-0.5)         (0.6,-0.5)         (1.8,-1.0)          (0.4,-0.3)         (5.4,-1.1)         (0.5,-0.4)
                      [1.000]            [1.000]              [1.000]           [1.000]            [0.970]            [1.000]            [1.000]             [1.000]            [0.756]            [1.000]
                         0.10               0.1                0.1                0.1                0.2               1625.5             1742.1               1679.7             2182.6             1746.7
69




     Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). Estimates are based on equation 9. P-value (in brackets) for 1 tests the
     hypothesis of no effect. P-value (in brackets) for 2 tests the hypothesis of no heterogeneity. Panel A (respectively Panel B) shows estimates of 1 and 2 at midline (respectively endline). The  (lambda)
     statistic is displayed at the bottom of each panel: the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ). Predictions are estimated for each sample split, reported values are
     the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted confidence intervals at 90% in parentheses and adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Earnings variable is in CFA, winsorized at the 97th percentile.
     For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).
Table A7: Heterogeneity in impacts on earnings during and post program, machine learning results
for an extended set of covariates

                                                   (1)                          (2)                           (3)                          (4)
                                            Ln total earnings            Ln total earnings              Total earnings               Total earnings
                                               (Monthly)                    (Monthly)                     (Monthly)                    (Monthly)
                                                 Midline                      Endline                       Midline                      Endline
Panel A: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter
ATE (1 )                                          2.311                        -0.136                      27252.0                       4011.4
                                              (1.918,2.714)                (-0.723,0.449)             (17338.2,37013.8)            (-4014.3,11850.4)
                                                 [0.000]                       [0.928]                     [0.000]                       [0.631]
HET (2 )                                          2.336                         0.272                       2.297                         0.136
                                              (1.156,3.577)                (-0.306,0.814)               (0.387,4.180)                (-1.855,2.883)
                                                 [0.000]                       [0.637]                     [0.032]                       [0.888]
                                         Generalized Random                                         Generalized Random
Best ML method                                                            Random forest                                                R-Learner
                                                forest                                                     forest
Panel B: By quartile of predicted impacts on earnings during program (using midline ) (GATES)
Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                     1.430                         -0.695                      9616.7                       1309.1
                                              (0.596,2.233)                (-2.047,0.682)             (-9485.5,28647.1)            (-17605.5,20036.9)
Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                    2.063                         -0.589                     31539.2                       3483.3
                                              (1.260,2.854)                (-1.953,0.810)             (12393.6,51035.5)            (-15126.9,22326.7)
Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                    2.602                         -0.126                     32238.6                       6594.5
                                              (1.763,3.397)                (-1.515,1.306)             (12793.6,51515.6)            (-11856.0,24930.0)
Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                   3.312                        -0.0495                     33266.5                       8086.5
                                              (2.521,4.094)                (-1.417,1.326)             (13826.0,52380.5)            (-11723.2,27267.8)
P-value all coefficients are equal              0.007                         1.000                        0.292                        1.000
                                         Generalized Random            Generalized Random           Generalized Random           Generalized Random
Best ML method
                                                forest                        forest                       forest                       forest
Panel C: By quartile of predicted impacts on earnings post program (using endline ) (GATES)
Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                     1.935                        -0.338                      21497.8                       2309.3
                                              (1.102,2.761)                (-1.512,0.819)              (3457.5,39527.0)            (-12952.7,18286.3)
Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                    1.989                        -0.359                      27897.3                       5194.6
                                              (1.164,2.868)                (-1.520,0.828)             (10231.8,45734.2)            (-10461.8,20933.5)
Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                    2.246                        -0.432                      28716.5                       3064.9
                                              (1.456,3.038)                (-1.562,0.736)             (10596.6,46321.6)            (-12565.0,18074.0)
Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                   2.555                         0.368                      29256.8                       5016.5
                                              (1.768,3.370)                (-0.800,1.488)             (11482.7,46980.5)            (-10414.7,21248.5)
P-value all coefficients are equal               0.093                        0.682                         0.685                        0.998
Best ML method                               Random forest                Random forest                   R-Learner                    R-Learner
Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). All baseline variables in the
balance check table (Table 1) are used as covariates. Columns (1) and (3) (respectively columns (2) and (4)) focus on outcomes at midline (respectively endline).
Estimates in Panel A are based on equation 9. P-value (in brackets) for 1 tests the hypothesis of no effect. P-value (in brackets) for 2 tests the hypothesis of
no heterogeneity. GATES estimates are based on the specification in equation 10. Panel B (respectively Panel C) shows impacts per quartile of the predicted
treatment effects at midline (respectively endline). The best predictions are reported. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda): the larger
 gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Predictions are estimated
for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted confidence intervals at 90% in parentheses and adjusted p-values for
partition uncertainty. Earnings variable is in CFA, winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                                               70
         Table A8: Estimated impacts on (ln) earnings post program, by treatment arms


                                                    (1)                         (2)                          (3)
                                                                              PW and                      PW and
                                           Public Works only
                                                                         Self-Employment             Wage-Employment
                                                 (PW)
                                                                          Training (SET)              Training (WET)
                                                 Endline                       Endline                      Endline
Panel A: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter
ATE (1 )                                          -0.0753                      -0.0116                        0.120
                                              (-0.601,0.447)               (-0.545,0.529)                (-0.406,0.648)
                                                  [1.000]                      [1.000]                       [0.930]
HET (2 )                                          0.0866                        -0.572                        0.450
                                              (-0.211,0.382)               (-1.431,0.299)                (-0.595,1.935)
                                                  [0.818]                      [0.425]                       [0.722]
Best ML method                             Gradient boosting                 Elastic net                   R-Learner
Panel B: By quartile of predicted impacts on earnings post program (using endline ) (GATES)
Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                     -0.220                        0.408                        -0.0540
                                              (-1.270,0.826)               (-0.663,1.487)                (-1.112,1.004)
Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                    -0.141                        0.132                         0.138
                                              (-1.188,0.923)               (-0.958,1.206)                (-0.913,1.187)
Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                    -0.172                       -0.116                         0.238
                                              (-1.217,0.873)               (-1.193,0.962)                (-0.805,1.279)
Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                    0.148                       -0.522                         0.168
                                              (-0.909,1.214)               (-1.587,0.543)                (-0.912,1.223)
P-value all coefficients are equal               0.902                         0.478                         0.950
Best ML method                             Gradient boosting                 Elastic net                   R-Learner
Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2).
Columns (1-3) show estimated impacts for each treatment arm compared to the control group. Estimates in Panel A are
based on equation 9. P-value (in brackets) for 1 tests the hypothesis of no effect. P-value (in brackets) for 2 tests the
hypothesis of no heterogeneity. Estimates in panel B are based on the specification in equation 10. They show impacts per
quartile of the predicted treatment effects at endline. The best predictions are reported. The chosen algorithm is the one with
the highest  (lambda): the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ). Predictions
are estimated for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted confidence intervals
at 90% in parentheses and adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Earnings variable is in CFA, winsorized at the 97th
percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                               71
      Table A9: Estimated impacts on earnings (in levels) post program, by treatment arms


                                                       (1)                                (2)                               (3)
                                                                                                                         PW and
                                                                             PW and Self-Employment
                                          Public Works only (PW)                                                    Wage-Employment
                                                                                 Training (SET)
                                                                                                                     Training (WET)
                                                    Endline                            Endline                             Endline
Panel A: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter
ATE (1 )                                            2155.1                              4166.5                             3970.3
                                               (-3648.0,8097.0)                   (-2085.9,10463.6)                  (-2233.2,10007.5)
                                                    [0.799]                             [0.397]                            [0.412]
HET (2 )                                             0.711                               0.167                              0.859
                                                (-0.793,2.217)                      (-2.294,3.175)                     (-0.383,2.666)
                                                    [0.645]                             [0.822]                            [0.359]
Best ML method                           Generalized Random forest                    R-Learner                          R-Learner
Panel B: By quartile of predicted impacts on earnings post program (using endline ) (GATES)
Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                       -804.5                             4252.3                               954.7
                                              (-12141.7,10585.9)                  (-8217.4,16697.1)                  (-11358.2,13202.6)
Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                       314.7                             5075.0                              3213.2
                                              (-11327.4,12027.1)                  (-7721.7,17162.5)                   (-8929.3,15509.9)
Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                      2580.6                             4686.6                              3843.2
                                               (-9034.2,14329.5)                  (-8013.1,17365.6)                   (-8184.3,15983.8)
Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                     6306.2                             3651.1                              5448.1
                                               (-5642.9,17819.6)                  (-8919.7,15948.0)                   (-6760.2,17345.3)
P-value all coefficients are equal                 0.715                                0.772                              0.828
Best ML method                           Generalized Random forest                    R-Learner                          R-Learner
Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). Columns (1-3) show
estimated impacts for each treatment arm compared to the control group. Estimates in Panel A are based on equation 9. P-value (in brackets)
for 1 tests the hypothesis of no effect. P-value (in brackets) for 2 tests the hypothesis of no heterogeneity. Estimates in panel B are based on
the specification in equation 10. They show impacts per quartile of the predicted treatment effects at endline. The best predictions are reported.
The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda): the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ).
Predictions are estimated for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted confidence intervals at 90% in
parentheses and adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Earnings variable is in CFA, winsorized at the 97th percentile.




                                                                        72
Table A10: Baseline characteristics of the bottom and top quartiles of predicted impacts on
earnings (in levels) during program

                                                                      (1)             (2)                (3)
                                                                    Mean in         Mean in             Test
                                                                      1st             4th              (1)-(2)
                                                                    quartile        quartile          (p-value)
      Individual characteristics
      Female                                                         0.18             0.43                0
      Live in urban area                                             0.91             0.97                0
      Age                                                            24.91            24.41             0.012
      Nb of children                                                  0.84             0.80             0.065
      Education
      Years of education                                             10.16            10.16             0.065
      Primary education not completed                                 0.45             0.46             0.095
      Has participated in vocational training                         0.53             0.27               0
      Household characteristics and assets
      Household size                                                  6.75            5.52                0
      Is head of household                                            0.28            0.20              0.005
      Total Nb of assets                                              0.59            0.51                0
      Nb of transportation assets                                     1.22            0.42                0
      Nb of agricultural assets                                       7.74            2.42                0
      Nb of household durables                                        2.31            1.26                0
      Nb of communication assets                                      8.42            5.70                0
      Employment
      Has an activity                                                0.91             0.66                0
      Is Wage-Employed                                               0.42             0.28                0
      Is Self-Employed                                               0.52             0.22                0
      Nb of activities                                               1.23             0.72                0
      Total Earnings (monthly, CFA)                                 34385.3          8298.2               0
      Searched for a job (last month)                                 0.62            0.52              0.519
      Savings, constraints and expenditures
      Has saved (last 3 months)                                       0.52           0.45               0.033
      Of which: share of formal savings (cond. on savings)            0.28           0.24               0.467
      Has a savings account                                           0.15           0.10               0.006
      Savings Stock (CFA)                                           51724.9         14685.6               0
      Self-reported constraints to repay loans                        0.29           0.11                 0
      Self-reported constraints to access credit                      0.41           0.59                 0
      Self-reported constraints for basic needs expenditures          0.69           0.72               0.510
      Transportation expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                3066.3          1065.9                0
      Communication expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                  2810.9          895.8                0
      Cognitive skills and risk preference
      Cognitive (deduction, Raven Test)                              0.23              0.23              0.798
      Dexterity (Nuts Test)                                          0.37              0.38              0.104
      Dexterity (Bolts Test)                                         0.34              0.33              0.900
      Positive affect (CES-D scale, Nb positive days)                6.31              6.22              0.856
      Positive attitude towards the future (ZTPI scale)             29.32             29.20              0.772
      Is Risk averse (based on hypothetical lotteries)               0.71              0.72                1
      Patience (scale 0 to 10, 10=very patient)                      3.30              3.34              0.945
      Preference for present (actualization rate for 1 month)        0.57              0.58              0.917
      Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and
      Appendix F.2). Column (1) (respectively (2)) displays average characteristics of the bottom (respectively top)
      quartile of the distribution of predicted impacts on earnings during the program. Column (3) reports p-values for
      a test of equality between the top and bottom quartile. Reported results are based on the algorithm with best
      predictions for midline : Generalized Random forest. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda):
      the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for
      comparisons across algorithms). Means by quartile are estimated for each sample split, reported values are the
      medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted p-values for partition uncertainty. Household assets and savings stock
      variables winsorized at the 99th percentile.




                                                               73
                      Table A11: Estimated impacts during and post program on savings

                                                    (1)                           (2)                        (3)                           (4)
                                                                                                       Savings in CFA                Savings in CFA
                                         Ln Savings (Monthly)         Ln Savings (Monthly)
                                                                                                         (Monthly)                     (Monthly)
                                                 Midline                       Endline                      Midline                      Endline
Panel A: Predicted average treatment effect and heterogeneity loading parameter
ATE (1 )                                          3.543                          0.472                     36768.4                       9492.9
                                              (2.981,4.100)                (-0.0260,0.977)            (30901.6,42641.1)             (1192.6,17761.4)
                                                 [0.000]                        [0.127]                     [0.000]                      [0.050]
HET (2 )                                          1.303                          0.247                       0.440                        0.193
                                              (0.454,2.169)                 (-1.230,2.565)             (-0.0100,0.889)               (-0.101,0.505)
                                                 [0.005]                        [0.809]                     [0.110]                      [0.388]
                                          Generalized Random
Best ML method                                                               R-Learner                  Random forest              Gradient boosting
                                                 forest

Panel B: By quartile of predicted impacts on savings during program (GATES)
Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                     2.481                         0.748                      29852.0                       10275.5
                                              (1.355,3.611)                (-0.440,1.920)             (18249.3,41593.9)             (-9226.9,29636.8)
Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                    3.174                         0.302                      33873.9                       7074.7
                                              (2.052,4.286)                (-0.870,1.471)             (21920.6,45466.9)            (-12459.8,27015.8)
Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                    3.785                         0.563                      38335.9                       10085.7
                                              (2.671,4.889)                (-0.619,1.746)             (26568.8,49862.4)             (-9870.0,29882.8)
Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                   4.778                         0.316                      45983.1                       9897.8
                                              (3.659,5.896)                (-0.885,1.497)             (34465.3,57655.4)             (-9570.1,28961.8)
P-value all coefficients are equal               0.031                        1.000                          0.269                         1.000
                                          Generalized Random           Generalized Random
Best ML method                                                                                          Random forest                Random forest
                                                 forest                       forest
Panel C: By quartile of predicted impacts on savings post program (GATES)
Mean in quartile 1 (0 to 25%)                     3.615                         0.316                      36489.5                       3831.7
                                              (2.557,4.647)                (-0.703,1.346)             (26070.4,47031.0)            (-12411.8,19889.7)
Mean in quartile 2 (25 to 50%)                    3.551                         0.336                      37213.5                       7044.9
                                              (2.488,4.582)                (-0.705,1.367)             (26671.1,47659.7)             (-9401.7,23694.9)
Mean in quartile 3 (50 to 75%)                    3.574                         0.483                      37366.7                       9436.6
                                              (2.503,4.652)                (-0.527,1.506)             (26941.2,47912.0)             (-7461.4,25802.8)
Mean in quartile 4 (75 to 100%)                   3.585                         0.731                      39460.8                       16964.8
                                              (2.532,4.646)                (-0.286,1.740)             (28965.9,50086.8)              (816.3,33311.6)
P-value all coefficients are equal                0.507                        0.909                        1.000                        0.377
Best ML method                                  R-Learner                    R-Learner                Gradient boosting            Gradient boosting
Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and Appendix F.2). Columns (1) and
(3) (respectively columns (2) and (4)) focus on outcomes at midline (respectively endline). Estimates in Panel A are based on equation 9. P-value
(in brackets) for 1 tests the hypothesis of no effect. P-value (in brackets) for 2 tests the hypothesis of no heterogeneity. GATES estimates are
based on the specification in equation 10. Panel B (respectively Panel C) shows impacts per quartile of the predicted treatment effects at midline
(respectively endline). The best predictions are reported. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda): the larger  gets, the
stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ) (see appendix table A6 for comparisons across algorithms). Predictions are estimated
for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted confidence intervals at 90% in parentheses and adjusted
p-values for partition uncertainty. Savings variable is in CFA, winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                                            74
Table A12: Baseline characteristics of the bottom and top quartiles of predicted impacts on (ln)
savings during program

                                                                       (1)                (2)                  (3)
                                                                     Mean in            Mean in               Test
                                                                       1st                4th                (1)-(2)
                                                                     quartile           quartile            (p-value)
      Individual characteristics
      Female                                                          0.14                0.46                 0
      Live in urban area                                              0.95                0.95               0.598
      Age                                                             24.65               24.29              0.080
      Nb of children                                                   0.66                0.81              0.070
      Education
      Years of education                                              11.76               9.71                 0
      Primary education not completed                                  0.36               0.49                 0
      Has participated in vocational training                          0.47               0.34               0.001
      Household characteristics and assets
      Household size                                                   5.35               6.46                 0
      Is head of household                                             0.37               0.11                 0
      Total Nb of assets                                               0.65               0.44                 0
      Nb of transportation assets                                      0.68               0.70               0.331
      Nb of agricultural assets                                        3.88               4.44               0.402
      Nb of household durables                                         1.75               1.70               0.125
      Nb of communication assets                                       6.95               6.72               0.014
      Employment
      Has an activity                                                   1                  0.45                0
      Is Wage-Employed                                                0.55                0.12                 0
      Is Self-Employed                                                0.48                0.14                 0
      Nb of activities                                                1.30                0.49                 0
      Total Earnings (monthly, CFA)                                  38482.1              658.7                0
      Searched for a job (last month)                                  0.63               0.53               0.756
      Savings, constraints and expenditures
      Has saved (last 3 months)                                        0.74               0.24                 0
      Of which: share of formal savings (cond. on savings)             0.34               0.18               0.002
      Has a savings account                                            0.19               0.06                 0
      Savings Stock (CFA)                                            63881.6             5518.0                0
      Self-reported constraints to repay loans                         0.22               0.20               0.709
      Self-reported constraints to access credit                       0.39               0.57                 0
      Self-reported constraints for basic needs expenditures           0.66               0.72               0.252
      Transportation expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                  2754.9              967.5                0
      Communication expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                   2760.5              820.6                0
      Cognitive skills and risk preference
      Cognitive (deduction, Raven Test)                                0.24                  0.23             0.781
      Dexterity (Nuts Test)                                            0.37                  0.38             0.300
      Dexterity (Bolts Test)                                           0.34                  0.33                1
      Positive affect (CES-D scale, Nb positive days)                  6.42                  6.16             0.212
      Positive attitude towards the future (ZTPI scale)                29.34                29.10             0.586
      Is Risk averse (based on hypothetical lotteries)                  0.73                 0.71                1
      Patience (scale 0 to 10, 10=very patient)                         3.39                 3.31                1
      Preference for present (actualization rate for 1 month)           0.57                 0.59             0.507
      Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2 and
      Appendix F.2). Column (1) (respectively (2)) displays average characteristics of the bottom (respectively top)
      quartile of the distribution of predicted impacts on (ln) savings during the program. Column (3) reports p-values
      for a test of equality between the top and bottom quartile. Reported results are based on the algorithm with best
      predictions for midline : Generalized Random forest. The chosen algorithm is the one with the highest  (lambda):
      the larger  gets, the stronger the correlation between s0 (Z ) noted S (Z ) and s0 (Z ). Means by quartile are estimated
      for each sample split, reported values are the medians across 100 sample splits. Adjusted p-values for partition
      uncertainty. Household assets and savings stock variables winsorized at the 99th percentile.




                                                                75
Appendix B                  Additional Figures

             Figure B1: Participation in the program under different transfer amounts
                                   (a) Case 1: small transfer T < hp c (hp )




                                   (b) Case 2: large transfer T > hp c (hp )




This figure presents two different hypothetical distributions of individual treatment effects. The two panels present
the utility level reached by individuals when they are offered, respectively not offered the program. Panel (a)
considers the case of a small transfer, in such a case, those who decide to participate only work in the program.
Panel (b) considers the case of a large transfer and shows that the most productive participant also work outside
the program. For details, see conceptual framework in section 2.


                                                         76
Figure B2: Distribution of individual treatment effects and impact of a reduction of the transfer
amount




Panel (a) presents two different hypothetical distributions of individual treatment effects. Panel (b) presents
simulations using the conceptual framework in section 2. It illustrates the changes induced by a reduction in the
transfer by x, assuming the distribution of individual impact on earnings in Panel (a). The dotted black line shows
the share of initial applicants who still apply when the transfer is reduced by x. The dashed blue line shows the
lottery success rate when the transfer is reduced by x (Lottery rate = 0.25T /((T - x)P (sT - x > 0))). The solid
red line shows the average impact on earnings E ((sT - x)1(sT - x > 0))/(P (sT - x > 0)(T - x)) when the transfer
amount is reduced by x, Slottery (T - x) from equation 5, normalized by 0.25 × 50, 000, the amount available for
each initial applicant.




                                                        77
     Figure B3: Quantile treatment effects for (ln) earnings post program, by treatment arm




 Note: Quantile treatment effects (for positive earnings) up to the 97th percentile. Permutation tests use 10000
permutations for each hypothesis. Wilcoxon rank-sum test permutation p-value is 0.471 for panel (a) 0.464 for
panel (b) and 0.459 for panel (c). Kolmogorov-Smirnov permutation p-value is 0.751 for panel (a) 0.776 for panel
(b) and 0.750 for panel (c). Total monthly earnings variable is in CFA. For variables (y) in logarithms we take
ln(y + 1).




                                                      78
                       Figure B4: Distribution of predicted impacts on earnings




 Note: Heterogeneity analysis based on the approach in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) (see discussion in Section 4.2
and Appendix F.2). Estimated distribution of individual treatment effects (across 100 simulations). Dashed lines
delimit bottom 25% and top 25% of the distribution. Predictions use Random Forest for impacts during program
in levels, and Generalized Random Forest for impacts during program in logarithm. Predictions use R-Learner
for post-program impact in levels, and Gradient Boosting for post-program impact in logarithm. Total monthly
earnings variable is in CFA, winsorized at the 97th percentile. For variables (y) in logarithms we take ln(y + 1).




                                                       79
Figure B5: Cost-effectiveness ratios over time under alternative targeting rules, depending on the
sustainability of post-program impacts




 Note: The discounted sum of post-program impacts is assumed to continue beyond what we measure at the endline
survey, 15 months after the end of the program. The top panel assumes no dissipation of impacts. The middle and
bottom panels assume a dissipation rate on top of the discount rate: a 2% monthly dissipation rate (respectively
5%) is equivalent to a 22% decrease in impact in one year (respectively 49%).


                                                      80
Appendix C               Additional details on the framework

C.1     Individuals impacts

Let  denote potential participants' hourly earnings in non-program activities, h hours worked,
and c(h) the additive disutility of working h hours. Absent the workfare program, individuals have
an optimal number of hours worked h0 () given by  = c (h0 ), leading to earnings W0 () = h0 ()
and utility U0 () = h0 () - c(h0 ()). Notice we have U0 () = h0 ().

Assume that participation in the workfare program provides a transfer T in exchange of hp hours
of work. Further assume that the disutility of time spent in program activities is the same as
for time spent in non-program activities. Individuals seek to maximize T + (h - hp ) - c(h).
This leads to the first-order condition  = c (h). It corresponds to hours of work h1 () > hp if
c (h1 ()) > c (hp ), i.e.  > (hp )  c (hp ). Notice that in this case h1 () = h0 ().

When  > (hp ), the solution of the previous maximization leads to: h1 () = h0 (). The objective
reaches the value U1 (T, hp , ) = T + (h0 () - hp ) - c(h0 ()) = U0 () + T - hp . The corresponding
earnings are W1 (T, hp , ) = T + (h0 () - hp ) = W0 () + T - hp . Individuals will however
participate in the program only if U1 () > U0 (), which is equivalent to T - hp > 0. Thus
individuals participate in the program if  < (T, hp )  T /hp .

When  < (hp ), the maximization leads to the constrained solution h1 () = hp . The objective
reaches the value U1 (T, hp , ) = T -c(hp ) = U0 ()+T -h0 ()-c(hp )+c(h0 ()). The corresponding
earnings are W1 (T, hp , ) = W0 () + T - h0 (). Individuals will participate in the program if
T - c(hp ) > h0 () - c(h0 ()) = U (). Thus individuals participate in the program if  <
           -1
(T, hp )  U0  (T - c(hp )).

We can define the difference in earnings s(T, ) = W1 () - W0 () absent the final decision to
participate:
                       s(T, ) = T -  (hp 1( > (hp )) + h0 ()1( < (hp )))


We can show that (hp ) < (T, hp )  (hp ) < (T, hp )  T > hp c (hp ).

Notice first that (hp )  c (hp ) and (T, hp )  T /hp . Hence, (hp ) < (T, hp ) is directly equivalent




                                                 81
to c (hp ) < T /hp . Notice also that c (h0 ((hp ))) = (hp ) = c (hp ), thus h0 ((hp )) = hp . Then:


                                        (hp ) < (T, hp )

                                    (hp ) < T /hp

                                    (hp )hp - c(hp ) < T - c(hp )

                                    U ((hp )) < U ((T, hp ))

                                    (hp ) < (T, hp )


There are thus two situations (see Appendix Figures B1):

T > hp c (hp ): individuals with  < (hp ) participate in the program and they only work in the
program. Their hours of work are given by h1 () = hp > h0 (). Individuals with (hp ) <  <
(T, hp ) participate in the program and also work outside the program. Their hours of work are
given by h1 () = hp = h0 (). Marginal participants are individuals with  = (T, hp ). Because
total hours of work are the same, for marginal applicants W0 () = W1 (T, hp , ).

T < hp c (hp ). Only individuals with  < (T, hp ) participate in the program and they only work
in the program: h1 () = hp > h0 (). Marginal participants are individuals with  = (T, hp ).
Because h1 () = hp > h0 (), for marginal applicants W0 () < W1 (T, hp , ).



C.2     Overall impact and changes in the amount of the transfer T

As discussed in Section 2.1 the program is oversubscribed and a lottery is used to allocate available
slots among applicants. We discuss here some aspects related to the variation of the overall impact
when the amount of transfer is changed from T to T - x. In Section 2.1 we derive the expression
of the average contemporaneous impact:


                                                                      T
      Slottery (T - x) = (T - x)E ((sT - x)1(st - x > 0) = (T )          E (sT - x|sT > x)         (11)
                                                                    T -x

where (T -x) is the rate of success of the lottery and is given by B = (T -x)(T -x)NA (T )P (sT >
x).

Assume we start from an initial T larger than hp c (hp ), and progressively increase x. Applicants are
those for whom U1 (T -x, hp , ) > U0 (), and marginal applicants are those with productivity m (x)

                                                  82
such that U1 (T - x, hp , m (x)) - U0 (m (x)) = 0. As emphasized before, as long as T - x > hp c (hp ),
we also have W1 (T - x, hp , m (x)) - W0 (m (x)) = 0: marginal applicants have the same earnings
as if they did not participate in the program. This holds as long as T - x < hp c (hp ). All
individuals participating in the program work longer hours than absent the program and thus
W1 (T - x, hp , m (x)) - W0 (m (x)) = c(hp ) - c(h0 (m (x))) > 0, but marginal applicants are still
defined by U1 (T - x, hp , m (x)) - U0 (m (x)) = 0.

We can also obtain the derivative of this objective with respect to x. How this function varies
with x depends on the shape of the density function of sT , the density of treatment effects under
transfer T . A change dx of x leads to a change dSlottery (T - x) = (x)dE ((sT - x)1(st - x >
0) + E ((sT - x)1(st - x > 0)d(x). The first component (x)dE ((sT - x)1(st - x > 0) simply
writes as -(x)P (sT > x)dx: the increase in x has a direct negative impact because the transfer
is smaller, and this applies to all of those who receive the transfer. The second component is
driven by a change in the lottery rate. Using the equation defining the lottery rate, we see that
d(x) = (x)(1/(T - x) + f (x)/P (sT > x))dx. The derivative is unambiguously positive. The
savings made because some former participants would no longer apply (the term with f (x)) and
because the transfer per participant is reduced allows to increase the share of applicants that will
be served. The derivative is positive, as long as (x) < 1. The negative initial impact due to the
reduction in the transfer is mitigated by an increase in the lottery rate. The overall change is thus

  dSlottery (T - x)                 1      f (x)
                    = (x)              +           E ((sT - x)1(st - x > 0)) - P (sT > x)                    (12)
          dx                      T - x P (sT > x)



Appendix D                  Description of complementary training

Randomized subsets of beneficiaries received complementary training on basic entrepreneurship
or job search skills. Each training lasted approximately 80-100 hours over two two-week periods.
Field exercises were undertaken between the training periods, in parallel to the public works
jobs (typically in the afternoons). The training was delivered by work brigades, i.e. in groups
of 25 youths. Participants did not have to work during the training, but still received their
corresponding daily wage.64 The curricula for the complementary skills training were tailored for
low-skill populations that may not be able to read and write, in particular by relying on drawings
  64
    Some youths were offered the second half of the training after their exit from the public works program. While
these youths were not paid during that time, they received a small stipend to cover transportation costs.


                                                       83
and visuals.

The basic entrepreneurship training aimed to build skills to help youth set-up and manage a
small non-agricultural micro-enterprise. The training lasted 100 hours and focused on providing
cross-cutting business skills and practical guidance to develop simple business plans for small-
scale activities that can be set-up using savings from the public works program. A first phase
(40 hours over two weeks) covered topics related to basic entrepreneurship and business skills.
A second phase included field research for youths to collect information, undertake basic market
research and outline a business plan. A third phase (40 hours over two weeks) included feedback
on youths' basic business plans, and reviewed related topics from the curriculum. The final phase
(20 hours) included post-training follow-up.

The training on wage jobs search skills provided information on wage jobs opportunities, skills
on jobs search techniques, as well as a more professional environment during the public works
programs and skills certification to facilitate signaling upon exit from the program. The training
itself lasted 80 hours. The first phase (40 hours over two weeks) discussed how to identify wage
jobs opportunities (either locally or through migration), how to search for wage jobs, prepare
a CV, apply for a job and participate in a job interview. The second phase included field ex-
ercises to collect information on potential opportunities, identify and visit potential employers
or professional networks, etc. The third phase (40 hours over two weeks) provided feedback on
field exercises, reviewed part of the curriculum and provided additional practical guidance. In
addition, supervisors of the brigades who were offered the wage employment training were also
trained on how to manage teams and provide feedback to workers, with the objective to mimic
the professional experience one would have in a more formal wage job. Youths were periodically
rated on a range of skills, and these evaluations were later used to issue a work certificate that
signaled between one and five competencies identified as strengths for each participant.65



Appendix E                    Definition of key outcome variables

Total monthly earnings are expressed in CFA francs. They are aggregated over up to three
activities undertaken by an individual in the 30 days preceding the survey. They include payments
received in cash and the monetary equivalent for in-kind payments. The variable is winsorized at
 65
      The evaluation policy report contains additional details on the trainings (Bertrand et al., 2016).


                                                          84
97% (unless stated otherwise). Total monthly earnings are decomposed in total (monthly) earnings
from wage employment and self-employment (as well as earnings from other occupations, which
are generally small hence not shown separately). When shown in log, the log transformation is
applied to earnings plus one.

Has an Activity is a dummy taking a value of 1 if the individual has worked at least one hour over
the 7 days preceding the survey, consistent with the official employment indicators used in C^
                                                                                             ote
d'Ivoire. We assign a value of 0 for inactive and unemployed individuals. To provide information
on the composition of employment, we also analyze having at least one wage job (Wage employed ),
or at least one self-employment activity (Self-employed ).

Weekly hours worked capture the total number of hours worked over the 7 days preceding the
survey. It aggregates information from up to three activities undertaken by an individual across
all occupations (wage employment, self-employment or other types of activity). The variable is
winsorized at 97%. Weekly hours worked are decomposed in (hours worked in wage employment )
and (hours worked in self-employment ) (as well as hours worked in other occupations, which are
generally small and not displayed separately).

Savings stock is the total amount of savings in CFA francs at the time of the survey. It aggregates
savings from formal or informal sources. The variable is winsorized at 97%. When shown in log,
the log transformation is applied to savings plus one.

Total expenditures is expressed in CFA francs and aggregates several types of expenditures, both
for the individual and for other household members. It includes basic expenditures (health, cloth-
ing, sanitation, and accommodation), communication expenditures (mobile, internet, and medias),
investments (education, training, maintenance of assets), transportation expenditures, temptation
goods (alcohol, tobacco, gambling, and luxury goods) and social expenditures (celebrations and
charity). The variable is winsorized at 97%. When shown in log, the log transformation is applied
to expenditures plus one.

The well-being index aggregates 6 measures: two measures of happiness and pride in daily ac-
tivities from a time-use module,66 the Rosenberg self-esteem scale,67 the positive affect sub-scale
  66
     The time use module measured which activities the respondent performed at different times of the last "business
day" (at 6am, 10am, 3pm, 7pm and 10pm). Respondents were also asked whether they felt happy, proud or angry
while performing those activities. The measure of happiness (respectively pride) is the number of times (out of
the 5 times in the last day) respondents reported feeling happy (respectively proud). A z-score of the measure is
included in the well-being index.
  67
     The Rosenberg self-esteem scale includes 10 items that measure self-esteem or self-worth. We use a validated


                                                        85
from the CESD scale,68 the sub-scale of (positive) attitude towards the future and the inverted
sub-scale of present fatalism from the ZTPI scale.69 The well-being index is a z-score, with a mean
of zero and a standard deviation of one in the control group, so that estimated coefficients can be
interpreted in standard deviations. A positive impact on the well-being index is interpreted as an
overall improvement in well-being.70

The behavior index aggregates 4 measures: an inverted measure of anger in daily activities taken
from the time-use module,71 an inverted measure of impulsiveness from the DERS scale,72 the
conduct problems sub-scale (inverted) and the pro-social behavior sub-scale from the Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ).73 As for the well-being index, the behavior index is a z-score
with a mean of 0 and standard deviation of 1 in the control group, so that estimated coefficients
can be interpreted in standard deviations. An increase in the index corresponds to an overall
improvement in behavior and attitude.74

The risky behavior index is the mean of 9 risky behaviors measured through list experiments.
They include stealing, assaulting someone, believing smuggling is necessary (to earn a living),
prostitution, threatening someone, taking illicit drugs, smuggling, having ties with a smuggling
network, and having firearms at home. Because respondents may not respond truthfully to direct
questions about these sensitive behaviors, we used list experiments instead. Rather than asking
directly a sensitive question about a risky behavior (e.g. stealing), 5 affirmations are read to
respondents, and respondents are asked how many of these affirmations (between 0 and 5) are
version of the instrument in French (Vallieres and Vallerand, 1990).
   68
      The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CESD) scale includes an inverted subscale that measures
positive feelings ("Positive Affects"). We use a validated version in French (Morin et al., 2011).
   69
      The Zimbardo Time Perspective Inventory (ZTPI) captures different dimensions of time perspectives. We use
the two subscales of "future" (to have a positive attitude towards future) and "present fatalism" which is very
close to the concept of external locus of control, in the sense that one feels no control over life events. The inverted
"present fatalism" measure is therefore similar to a measure of internal locus of control. We use a validated version
of the instrument in French (Apostolidis and Fieulaine, 2004).
   70
      The index adds up the 6 measures described above, out of which one is inverted (present fatalism ). There-
fore a negative impact on the present fatalism measure induces an improvement in the overall well-being index,
corresponding to greater well-being.
   71
      This was built as in footnote 66.
   72
      The Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS) is used to measure socio-emotional regulation, in par-
ticular the difficulties of regulation of emotions in adults. Three of the six questions of the "difficulties to control
impulsive behavior" scale were retained, based on a validated French version of the instrument (C^      ot´
                                                                                                          e et al., 2013).
   73
      The Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire (SDQ) measures behavioral difficulties in young people, initially
among children and adolescents from 3 to 16 years old (Goodman et al., 1998). The instrument was slightly
adapted for an older age group 18 to 30 years old. We use two of five sub-scales from a validated questionnaire in
French available at www.sdqinfo.com.
   74
      The index adds up the 4 measures described above, which are all inverted in the index except pro-social
behavior measure. A negative impact on inverted measures, for example conduct problems, corresponds to a
positive behavior and leads to an improvement in the overall behavior index.


                                                           86
true for them. To estimate the proportion of individuals for which the sensitive question is true
in a sample, the sample is (randomly) assigned to two lists. The first list includes 5 affirmations
including the risky behavior, and the second list only includes the other 4 affirmations (without
the risky behavior). We implemented a "double" list experiment to avoid losing statistical power:
each half of the sample answered both a list with sensitive questions, and a (different) list with
control questions corresponding to the other sample. List experiments were piloted extensively
to ensure a good understanding by respondents. In the analysis, we use the likelihood ratio test
introduced by Blair and Imai (2012) to test for the existence of design effects.



Appendix F              Machine Learning Application to Study Het-
                        erogeneity in Treatment Effects

To complement Sections 4.2 and 6.2, this appendix provides additional details on the application
of machine learning methods to analyze treatment effect heterogeneity. The application is based
on Chernozhukov et al. (2020). Section F.1 describes the sample used to train the models and
make predictions. Section F.2 presents the machine learning algorithms and their parameters.
Finally, Section F.3 describes how we adapted the procedure in Chernozhukov et al. (2020) to our
experimental setting.

We use similar notations as in Chernozhukov et al. (2020). For clarity, the Baseline Conditional
Average (BCA) writes:
                                       b0 (Z ) := E [Y (0)|Z ]


And the Conditional Average Treatment Effect (CATE) is defined as :


                                s0 (Z ) := E [Y (1)|Z ] - E [Y (0)|Z ]



F.1    Sample for Machine Learning Implementation

Supervised machine learning algorithms require samples for which both covariates (features) and
outcomes are observed. In our case, this requires baseline covariates (a set of K covariates,
Z K ) and midline or endline outcome of interest (Y ). As discussed in the text, our study data


                                                 87
has two specificities. First, our midline sample is a subsample of the baseline, while the full
baseline sample is included at endline. Second, some control individuals entered subsequent
waves of the public works program between midline and endline surveys, and are excluded from
the endline sample used for analysis. As a result, the algorithms can use three potential samples:
a `midline' (ZiK , YiDuring , Wi ) (respectively `endline' (ZiK , YiP ost , Wi )) sample can be used to build
and apply the model to predict `during' (respectively `post') conditional treatment effects, where
W corresponds to the treatment variable. A third (marginally smaller) sample can be used to
study how effects vary `during' and `post' program by taking the intersection of non-attritors and
non-missing outcomes for both surveys.75 When applying the algorithm on the endline data, we
drop control individuals who applied to a later wave of the public works program (as in the main
analysis).76 The final sample size depends on the number of missing variables for the outcome
considered. The total sample we use ranges between 2,884 and 2,958 units for midline and between
3,745 and 3,910 units for endline.

We use a set (Z K , with K = 21) of features (covariates) measured at baseline (Table A13). They
include both individual and household characteristics, as well as main indicators on employment,
financial situation and self-reported constraints on basic needs expenditures. We also show the
robustness of the main results to the inclusion of all baseline variables in the balance check table
(Table 1).



F.2      Machine Learning Algorithms

We consider five alternative machine learning algorithms to estimate the proxy predictors and
apply the procedure in Chernozhukov et al. (2020): elastic net, boosted trees, random forest,
Rlearner (based on elastic net and proposed by Nie and Wager (2020)) and generalized random
forest (proposed by Wager and Athey (2018)). All algorithms are implemented in R, and we
adapted the codes provided by the authors.77 These machine learning methods can be divided in
two groups based on the way they approach the CATE function (K¨
                                                              unzel et al. (2017)).
  75
      There is also some attrition between survey rounds, and some missing values in baseline covariates. We exclude
from each sample the attritors from follow-up surveys (since outcomes are not observed). Missing values among
baseline covariates are replaced by the mean in the same strata. Individuals with missing values for the outcome
of interest (among nonattritors) are dropped from the sample.
   76
      Recall that 200 individuals were sampled to be added to the control group at endline to compensate for these
observations: because these individuals were not part of the baseline survey, the machine learning model cannot
be applied to them since predictions rely on observed Z K .
   77
      https://github.com/demirermert/MLInference


                                                        88
   1. Two learners

       The first group of machine learning methods includes Elastic Net, Random Forest and
       Boosted Trees. They predict separately E [Yi (1)] in the treatment group and E [Yi (0)] in
       the control group. In practice, a first model is fitted on the treatment group and a second
       on the control group, using an auxiliary sample.78 The two fitted models are then used
                                     ^i (1) and Y
       to predict potential outcomes Y          ^i (0) for each individual in the remaining sample

       (main sample). In order to obtain S (Z ), the difference between the two predictions for
       each individual are computed. All models are implemented using the caret package (Kuhn
       (2008)) (respectively named glmnet, ranger and gbm).

       Tuning parameters

       For each split, the tuning parameters are chosen separately for the model on the control and
       the treatment group. There are no set rule to choose these parameters. In our case, we let
       caret define a default search grid and we set a relatively high tuning length for all models
       based on our computational capacities. Tuning parameters were all selected based on the
       mean squared error estimates and 5-folds cross validation. For all methods, we pre-process
       outcomes and covariates and center-scale them before feeding the model.

       For each method we have the following tuning parameters :

         · Elastic net : alpha (Mixing Percentage), lambda (Regularization Parameter)

         · Boosted trees : n.trees (# Boosting Iterations), interaction.depth (Max Tree Depth),
            shrinkage (Shrinkage), n.minobsinnode (Min. Terminal Node Size),

         · Random Forest : mtry (# Randomly Selected Predictors), splitrule (Splitting Rule),
            n.minobsinnode

   2. Single learners

       The two alternative models we consider are Rlearner and Generalized Random Forest (with
       their variations). They are "single learners" and use a different approach to approximate
       s0 (Z ). Instead of fitting a model on the treatment and on the control group separately
       to estimate E [Yi (1)] and E [Yi (0)], they directly fit a model to estimate E [Yi (1)] -E [Yi (0)].
  78
    The sample is split between an auxiliary sample where machine learning predictors are trained and constructed
and a main sample where they are used for prediction and on which we estimate the different key features of the
CATE function.



                                                       89
       Athey and Imbens (2016) discuss the benefits of this approach compared to the two-learners
       approach. One remaining quantity, the Baseline Conditional Average b0 (Z ), is needed. For
       Rlearner with boosting, we use boosted trees fitted on the control group to estimate b0 (Z )
       and symmetrically elastic net for Rlearner based on lasso. For Generalized Random Forest
       we predict b0 (Z ) using the random forest already fitted on the control group. We rely on
       the grf package to implement Generalized Random Forest and on the rlearner79 package
       for Rlearner.

       Tuning parameters

       For each split of the data, we choose the tuning parameters separately for S (Z ) and B (Z ).
       Again, there is no theoretical basis to determine the choice of search grid parameters. We
       keep the package default grid and put a convenient length of parameters combination ac-
       cording to our computational capabilities. Parameters were selected based on the mean
       squared error estimates and 5-folds cross validation.



F.3      Adaption to the Experimental Setting

In our application, we repeat S = 100 times the procedure developed by Chernozhukov et al.
(2020).80 The first step of the method requires partitioning our dataset into an auxiliary and a
main sample. We adapted the algorithm so that the sample splits are stratified by our random-
ization blocks (locality  gender), which represents 32 strata. This is important to preserve the
identification strategy when estimating directly the CATE for the single learners, since they fit a
model on different splits of the data.

Lastly, we introduce two adjustments in the linear projections of Best Linear Predictor (BLP)
and Group Average Treatment Effects (GATE) along with predicted baseline effect B (Z ) and
predicted treatment effect S (Z ). We add locality-gender fixed effects, corresponding to the ran-
domization stratification variables. We also adjust the weights used. In the main specification
of the paper, we use weights to take into account randomized assignment by lotteries, survey
  79
     https://github.com/xnie/rlearner
  80
     Appendix figure B6 shows the scatter plot of earnings yi and yi for midline and endline as well as the regression
line of y on y . The figure shows that the slope coefficients are close to 1 and that the R2 remain low. Note that a
low R2 on y (1) and y (0) does not mean that our algorithm cannot identify heterogeneity in the treatment effects,
which is related to difference between y (1) and y (0). This is illustrated in the paper where we find heterogeneity
in impacts on midline earnings.



                                                         90
attrition, and sub-sampling at midline. Since our survey weights will be multiplied by inverse
propensity score weights as recommended by Chernozhukov et al. (2020), we make sure not to
incorporate two times the inverse propensity score.




                 Table A13: Baseline variables used in Machine Learning algorithms

 Variable description                                                             Type
 Individual characteristics
 Female                                                                           Binary
 Age                                                                              Continuous
 Nb of children                                                                   Continuous
 Live in urban area                                                               Binary
 Education
 Education (total number of years)                                                Continuous
 Has participated in vocational training                                          Binary
 Household characteristics
 Household size                                                                   Continuous
 Is head of household                                                             Binary
 Household assets
 Total nb of assets1                                                              Continuous
 Employment
 Total nb of activities                                                           Continuous
 Total nb of wage-employment activities                                           Continuous
 Total nb of self-employment activities                                           Continuous
 Is engaged in (at least one) casual activity                                     Binary
 Total Earnings (monthly)                                                         Continuous
 Savings, Expenditures and Constraints
 Has Saved (last 3 months)                                                        Binary
 Savings Stock (FCFA)                                                             Continuous
 Has a Savings Account                                                            Binary
 Self-reported constraints to repay loans                                         Binary
 Self-reported constraints to access credit                                       Binary
 Transportation expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                                   Continuous
 Communication expenditures (last 7 days, CFA)                                    Continuous

 [1] Assets include livestock, chicken, other animals, plows, field sprayer, carts, wheelbarrows, bicycles, mo-
torcycles, pirogues, refrigerators, freezers, air conditioning units, fans, stoves, computers, radios, television,
TV antenna, video players, landline, mobile phones, cars.




                                                        91
    Figure B6: Relation between predictions and actual earnings (in level) (Random forest)


                                                                       (a) Midline
                                                       Treatment                                                                      Control
     Total earnings (thousands CFA)




                                                                                   Total earnings (thousands CFA)
                                      300                                                                           300
                                      270                                                                           270
                                      240                                                                           240
                                      210                                                                           210
                                      180                                                                           180
                                      150                                                                           150
                                      120                                                                           120
                                       90                                                                            90
                                       60                                                                            60
                                       30                                                                            30
                                        0                                                                             0
                                            10  25 40 55 70 85 100 115                                                    10  25 40 55 70 85 100 115
                                                 Prediction (thousands CFA)                                                    Prediction (thousands CFA)
                                            Y=-10.763+1.145*X                                                             Y=-8.517+1.173*X
                                            R2=0.025                                                                      R2=0.073


                                                                       (b) Endline
                                                       Treatment                                                                      Control
     Total earnings (thousands CFA)




                                                                                   Total earnings (thousands CFA)




                                      220                                                                           220
                                      200                                                                           200
                                      180                                                                           180
                                      160                                                                           160
                                      140                                                                           140
                                      120                                                                           120
                                      100                                                                           100
                                       80                                                                            80
                                       60                                                                            60
                                       40                                                                            40
                                       20                                                                            20
                                        0                                                                             0
                                            20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100                                                   20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                                 Prediction (thousands CFA)                                                    Prediction (thousands CFA)
                                            Y=-13.308+1.263*X                                                             Y=-8.735+1.190*X
                                            R2=0.082                                                                      R2=0.084


                                            ^ =B
 Note: Predictions estimated using equation Y  ^ (Z ) + T  ^(Z ). Each value plotted is the median across 100
sample splits.




                                                                              92
Appendix G                       Weights

This appendix describes the weights used in the analysis. Table A14 summarizes the weights used
with midline data, and Table A15 with endline data. In general results are robust if weights are
not included.

Randomization weights

We consider two sets of randomization weights. First, for both midline and endline, we consider
weights that account for variations in selection probability by lottery location and gender. There
are K different public lotteries (K = 32 ) with Nk individuals participating to each lottery.
Denote Nk1 the individuals from lottery k selected in the program (`treated') and Nk0 those who
are not selected, with Nk = Nk1 + Nk0 . Among the Nk0 , Nk0s are randomly drawn to be surveyed
and constitute the `control group'. The size of the population of lottery participants is NP , with
NP =       k   Nk = N1 + N0 . The size of the survey sample is NE =               k   Nk1 + Nk0s = N1 + N0s . We
use weight wki (i = 0s ; 1 according to treatment status) for individuals in the survey sample, with
wk1 = Nk Nk1 × N1 NP and wk0s = Nk Nk0s × N0 NP . This means that we put a higher weight
on lotteries where the demand for the program (total population participating in the lottery) was
higher, compared with other lotteries.

Second, when estimating treatment effects by arm using endline survey data, we also consider that
the number of brigades assigned to each treatment arm varies by locality. Brigades of treated
individuals (N1 ) are assigned to 3 treatment options Ta , Tb and Tc . We use the following notation:
Nk = Na,k + Nb,k + Nc,k + N0,k with N1,k = Na,k + Nb,k + Nc,k , and NP =                 k   Nk = N0 + Na + Nb + Nc
with N1 = Na + Nb + Nc . We put a weight wj,k to treated individuals from lottery k who were
assigned to treatment Tj , and a weight wk0s for control individuals in the survey sample, with:

                                                            81
      · wj,k = Nk1 Nj,k × Nj N1 with j = a, b, c

      · wk0s = Nk1 Nk0s × N0 N1

Sub-sampling weights (midline survey only)

The sample for the midline survey includes the control group (N0s ) and a sub-sample of the
treatment group. Consider that we draw a random sub sample of group l in proportion Pl =
NlS /Nl . To take sub-sampling into account, original weights are multiplied by S/Pl . Therefore,
 81
      Note :    j   wj,k = wk1 = 1, which is the weight used for midline data when there is only one treatment group.


                                                           93
                           S
in group l = k, 1 we draw Nk 1 individuals out of Nk1 , and the original weight wk1 becomes
S                 Sk1
k 1 = wk1 × Nk1 /Nk1 . All control units are included in the midline sample so that their weights

wk0s are unchanged.

Control group and subsequent enrollment in the program (endline survey only)

When using endline data, we adjust weights for control individuals because some of them were
able to apply (and sometimes get selected) in waves 3 and 4 of the program, as discussed in section
4.82 Weights for control individuals depend on their status in wave 3 and wave 4, which is one of
the following 7 situations:

                 ¯4 : Applied to wave 3 (C3 ), was selected as `beneficiary' of wave 3 after public
  1. Group C3 T3 C
                                                                          ¯4 ).
        lotteries (T3 ) and was therefore not allowed to apply to wave 4 (C

              ¯3 C4 T4 : Applied to wave 3 (C3 ), was not selected after public lotteries (T
  2. Group C3 T                                                                            ¯3 ), applied

        to wave 4 (C4 ) and was selected as `beneficiary' of wave 4 after lotteries (T4 ).

              ¯3 C4 T
  3. Group C3 T     ¯4 : Applied to wave 3 (C3 ), was not selected after public lotteries (T
                                                                                           ¯3 ), applied
                                                              ¯4 ).
        to wave 4 (C4 ) and was not selected after lotteries (T

              ¯3 C
  4. Group C3 T  ¯4 : Applied to wave 3 ( C3 ), was not selected after public lotteries (T
                                                                                         ¯3 ) and did
                             ¯4 ).
        not apply to wave 4 (C

           ¯3 C4 T4 : Did not apply to wave 3 (C
  5. Group C                                   ¯3 ), applied to wave 4 (C4 ) and was selected as

        `beneficiary' of wave 4 after public lotteries (T4 ).

           ¯3 C4 T
  6. Group C     ¯4 : Did not apply to wave 3 (C
                                               ¯3 ), applied to wave 4 (C4 ) and was not selected
                                ¯4 ).
        after public lotteries (T

           ¯3 C
  7. Group C  ¯4 : Did not apply to wave 3 (C
                                            ¯3 ), and did not apply to wave 4 (C
                                                                               ¯4 ).

We introduce a new multiplicative weight for control units (wk0s,j ). We do not include control
units that have benefited from subsequent waves of the program (waves 3 and 4) in the estimation.
                                                   ¯4 , C3 T
This means we assign a weight of 0 to groups C3 T3 C       ¯3 C4 T4 and C
                                                                        ¯3 C4 T4 .83 To compensate,

we put a higher weight on individuals who also applied in subsequent phases (waves 3 and 4) but
were not selected during the lotteries. The weights for the remaining four groups are:
                             Nk0s,C 3         Nk0s,C   ¯
                                                    3 T3 C 4
      · wk0s,C3 T
                ¯     ¯ =
                 3 C4 T4    Nk0s,C T ¯
                                         ×   Nk0s,C  ¯      ¯
                                   3 3            3 T3 C4 T4

 82
      Recall that the study focuses on wave 2 (out of 4 waves) of the public works program
 83                                                                            N
      Hence wk0s,C3 T3 C            ¯3 C4 T4 = 1 × 0 = 0 ; wk0s,C3 T
                       ¯4 = 0; wk0s,C                              ¯3 C4 T4
                                                                            = N k0s,C 3¯ × 0 = 0.
                                                                              k0s,C3 T3




                                                                94
                           Nk0s,C 3               Nk0s,C 3
       · wk0s,C3 T
                 ¯  ¯ =
                  3 C4    Nk0s,C T ¯
                                       ×1=       Nk0s,C T ¯
                                 3 3                    3 3

                                Nk0s,C¯
                                         3C4
       · wk0s,C
              ¯3 C4 T
                    ¯4
                       =1×     Nk0s,C¯       ¯
                                       3 C4 T4


       · wk0s,C  ¯4 = 1
              ¯3 C


Tracking weights

Lastly, we add a weight taking into account the differential response rate of individuals during
each survey (midline and endline). More precisely, each survey consisted in two phases a and b:

       · A main data collection phase (a), during which the response rate is Ra,j for group j = 1, 0.

       · An additional tracking phase (b), targeting attritors from the main phase. We note Rb,j the
         response rate of the tracking phase for group j = 1, 0.

To determine the tracking sample, we first define a sub-sample of `eligible' attritors.84 Eb,j from
                                                        S
which a random sub-sample is drawn in proportion j = N Eb,j /N Eb,j (j is an index for treatment
status x locality). Individuals interviewed during the tracking phase take a different weight
than those interviewed during the main survey phase. Tracking respondents are weighted by
T     S           S         S     S                                          S,f   S   T
j = (Ra,j + j sj Rb j
                      (1 - Ra,j )Eb,j , with j , so that the final weight is j   = j × j .

                                                            S           S                 S
The sum of the weights on population j is therefore : j × (Na,j + j N ERs,b j
                                                                              ), with N ERs,b j

the number of individuals from the tracking sample who responded during tracking phase. We
                                                S
make the hypothesis that residual non-response Rb,j is random. We seek to be representative of
                                                                         S        S
the respondent population of phases a and b. This lead us to take j = N Eb,j /N ERs,b,j

In group j , weights will be set such as:85

         S
       · j × 1 for phase a respondents

         S      S        S
       · j × N Eb,j /N ERs,b,j for phase b respondents




  84
     Among the attritors of phase (a) some individuals were considered `ineligible' for tracking as they were (quasi)
impossible to reach: dead individuals, individuals who migrated to another country, (for endline) individuals who
were already impossible to find at baseline.
  85                                                                              S
     In theory, j should be adjusted so that it does not use correction Nj /Nj      but rather the correction corre-
sponding to the total of eligibles Na,j + N Eb,j . However, this number is only known for selected units Sj = 1.
Therefore we will ignore this aspect, which is fair considering that units where randomly drawn. Finally, it means
                                                             S        S          S
that we estimate the unknown amount Na,j + N Eb,j by Na,j       + N Eb,j × Nj /Nj


                                                              95
                                   Table A14: Summary of weights used with midline data

                                                                  S                                        T
       Randomization weights wk              Sub Sampling weights k                       Tracking weights j

                wk 1   =   Nk Nk 1 ×                     S            Sk1      Respondents
                                                       wk,    = Nk1 /Nk 1 ,
     Treated                             Treated           1                   main phase       T = 1
                N1 NP                                  k =locality
                                                                               (Ra = 1)
                                                                                                  T        S       S
                                                                                                j   = N Eb,j /N ERs,b,j if re-
                wk0s = Nk Nk0s ×                                                                spondent in tracking phase
                                                        S
     Control                             Control       wk, 0 = 1               Non              (Eb = 1 et Rb = 1),
96




                N0 NP , k =locality x
                gender                                                         Respondents      j =locality x treatment sta-
                                                                               main phase       tus
                                                                               (Ra = 0)          T = 0 if non respondent
                                                                                                (but sampled) in tracking
                                                                                                phase (Eb = 1 et Rb = 0)
                                                                                                 T = 0 if not sampled for
                                                                                                tracking phase (Eb = 0)

                              F            S     T
               Final weight: wk,i = wk,i × k,i × k,i , i = 0, 1 (treatment status), k  1, 32 (locality x gender)
                                            Table A15: Summary of weights used with endline data

                                                                                                                                         T
     Randomization weights wj,k                  Post-enrollment weights k,j                                            Tracking weights j

                                         Selected to participate
     Treatment     wj,k = Nk Nj,k ×                                                                       Respondents
                                         to wave 3 or 4 (groups
     arm Ta , Tb                                ¯4 , C3 T
                                                        ¯3 C4 T4 et   0                                   main phase     T = 1
                   Nj NP , j = a, b, c   C 3 T3 C
     or Tc                                ¯3 C4 T4 )                                                      (Ra = 1)
                                         C
                                                                                                                           T        S       S
                                                                       Nk0s,C 3         Nk0s,C   ¯                       j   = N Eb,j /N ERs,b,j if
                   wk0s =                         ¯3 C4 T
                                         Group C3 T     ¯4                         ×          3 T3 C 4
                                                                                                          Non
                                                                      Nk0s,C T ¯
                                                                             3 3
                                                                                       Nk0s,C T¯ C T
                                                                                             3 3 4 4
                                                                                                      ¯                  respondent in tracking
                   Nk Nk0s × N0 NP                                                                        Respondents    phase (Eb = 1 et Rb = 1),
97




     Control
                   , k =locality x                ¯3 C
                                                     ¯4                Nk0s,C 3                           main phase     j =locality x treatment
                                         Group C3 T                   Nk0s,C T ¯
                   gender                                                    3 3                          (Ra = 0)       status
                                                                                                                          T = 0 if non respondent
                                                                       Nk0s,C¯                                           (but sampled) in tracking
                                               ¯3 C4 T
                                         Group C     ¯4                        3C4
                                                                      Nk0s,C¯      ¯
                                                                             3 C4 T4                                     phase (Eb = 1 et Rb = 0)

                                                                                                                          T = 0 if not sampled for
                                               ¯3 C
                                         Group C  ¯4                  1                                                  tracking phase (Eb = 0)

                    F                  T
     Final weight: wk,i = wj,k × i,l × k,i , j = 0, a, b, c (treatment status), i = 1, 0s, l post-enrollment group, k  1, 32 (locality x gender)
