                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION OF SOCIAL MEDIA

                                       Apostolos Filippas
                                        John J. Horton

                                      Working Paper 28666
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28666


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Hunt Allcott, Erik Brynjolfsson, Paul Oyer, Evan Sadler, Yo Shavit, Alex Tabarrok,
and Johan Ugander for their very helpful comments. We are grateful to Jie Lu for his excellent
research assistance. Author contact information, code, and data are currently or will be available
at http://www.john-josephhorton.com/. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Apostolos Filippas and John J. Horton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Production and Consumption of Social Media
Apostolos Filippas and John J. Horton
NBER Working Paper No. 28666
April 2021
JEL No. D51,D71,D85

                                          ABSTRACT

We model social media as collections of users producing and consuming content. Users value
consuming content, but doing so uses up their scarce attention, and hence they prefer content
produced by more able users. Users also value receiving attention, creating the incentive to attract
an audience by producing valuable content, but also through attention bartering--users agree to
become each others' audience. Attention bartering can profoundly affect the patterns of
production and consumption on social media, explains key features of social media behavior and
platform decision-making, and yields sharp predictions that are consistent with data we collect
from #EconTwitter.


Apostolos Filippas
Gabelli School of Business
Fordham University
140 W 62nd Street
New York, NY 10023
apostolosfilippas@gmail.com

John J. Horton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
john.joseph.horton@gmail.com
1    Introduction
Traditional media, such as newspapers, TV, and radio, are characterized by a few "stars"
who produce content, and a much larger collection of people who purely consume that con-
tent (Rosen, 1981; Krueger, 2005). On social media, by contrast, a large number of users
both produce and consume content: the "social" of "social media" is that millions of people
tweet on Twitter, dance on TikTok, rant on Facebook, open boxes on YouTube, share sunsets
on Instagram, and announce exciting new professional chapters on LinkedIn. However, all of
this new content has not been matched by an equal increase in the total supply of human
attention--the scarce factor consumed during content consumption (Simon, 1971). This pa-
per examines how human attention is allocated in equilibrium over social media content--who
consumes what--and how this allocation in turn affects the incentives for content production.
    A necessary starting point is to observe that the costs of producing, distributing, and
accessing content have fallen dramatically with digitization, and with the proliferation of
modern computing technology. Today, marginal distribution costs are de minimis, and tech-
nical production costs have diminished radically, even for audio and video content. Falling
costs can explain the larger number of professional producers, the greater variety of con-
sumption, and why users spend more time on social media. Nevertheless, producing content
still has an opportunity cost. Why then do so many amateur users produce content on social
media, when almost no one is paid to do it?
    Part of the explanation for amateur social media production is the desire for an audience
and positive reaction from that audience. Although people sometimes produce content with-
out an external audience--diaries exist, and people enjoy playing music by themselves--many
clearly value having an audience. The desire for an audience can explain the effort put into
social media--the production decision--but it can also affect the consumption decision, in a
way that is particular to social media.
    We argue that the distinguishing feature of social media platforms is that they allow
users to exchange some of their own attention for the attention of others, in order to obtain
a larger audience. Unlike most economic situations where individuals produce to consume,
social media users can partially consume in order to produce. In particular, social media users
can "follow" others not to consume their content, but to be "followed back" and consume
their attention. We call this exchange attention bartering.
    Attention bartering is an explicit part of the design of several social media platforms.
For example, Twitter allows unilateral following, and users can decide whether to engage in
reciprocal following--"I'll follow you if you follow me." On other social media platforms where
relationships are bilateral, such as Facebook and LinkedIn, attention bartering is informal
and takes the form of users engaging with each others' content--"I like your posts, but only
if you like mine."


                                              2
       Consider Alice, a user who decides where to allocate her attention. On traditional media,
Alice can only use her attention to consume content, and hence she allocates her attention
towards consuming the best possible content--content produced by "stars." Alice also likes
receiving attention, but is not quite good enough to command an audience by producing
content alone.1 On social media, however, Alice can strike a "deal" with similarly good-but-
not-great user Bob. Alice agrees to give Bob some attention, in exchange for Bob giving some
attention to her. With this deal in place, they both get an audience member, and they now
have the incentive to start producing content. If Bob follows Alice then we say that Bob is
Alice's follower, and that Alice is Bob's followee.
       Both Alice and Bob would have not attracted any followers without the ability to attention
barter, and hence they would have remained silent in a world without attention bartering.
The cost of their deal is the attention that they would have rather allocated elsewhere:
if Alice was to renege from their deal and stopped following Bob, Bob would also renege
because Alice's content is not good enough to attract his attention "organically." Their
deal is sustained because social media platforms make it easy to verify that each holds their
end of their bargain. Importantly, because attention bartering requires consuming what the
partner produces, both parties have an incentive to seek out the best bargain, that is, the best
producers who are willing to barter with them. Together, these incentives create pressure for
a kind of assortative matching.
       We formalize the Alice and Bob situation in a model of attention bargaining, and solve for
its equilibrium. In our model, we assume that each user has limited attention and that there
is substantial vertical differentiation among users. We set aside horizontal differentiation to
keep the analysis focused, but show later that it can be incorporated without qualitatively
changing the results. We also assume that attention from other users has increasing but
diminishing returns. As such, users are better off bartering with users who produce better
content, all else equal, and two types of users do not attention barter in equilibrium: (1)
users with such low ability that others are not willing to barter with them, and (2) users with
very high ability that attract followers organically, and have no incentive to barter because
attention has decreasing marginal returns. In-between these two extremes, attention barter-
ing "clubs" emerge, whose "members" have similar abilities, barter with all other members of
the same club, and actively produce content. Higher-ability barterers barter more, and select
themselves into more populous clubs, comprising members of higher average quality. Note
that clubs are not assumed explicitly, but emerge due to the production and consumption
incentives of social media users.
   1
     We use "ability" here and throughout the paper as a measure of the consumption value other users
place on the content without any implied judgement of the true value or worth of that content. One of the
most "able" twitter users by our definition was the 45th President of the United States, who routinely shared
to his more than 70 million Twitter followers "content" that would have otherwise been confined to poorly
photocopied newsletters and email chains--before his suspension on January 8, 2021. :-)


                                                     3
   Users in reciprocal following relationships--club members--would have not attracted any
followers, and would not have produced any content without attention bartering. With at-
tention bartering, club members attract some followers and produce content actively, thereby
experiencing lower consumption utilities, but higher attention utilities and higher total util-
ities from using the platform. As such, attention bartering results in more active users, and
more content produced on the platform, albeit of lower average quality.
   To assess some of the model assumptions and predictions empirically, we collect data
from #EconTwitter, a Twitter community comprising professional and amateur users who
tweet mostly about economics, and often follow each other. An important feature of our data
is that it allows us to observe the production and consumption decisions of #EconTwitter
users, as well as to obtain measures of attention bartering and user ability.
   The distributions of #EconTwitter users' follower and followee statistics are consistent
with our key assumptions of (a) vertical differentiation in ability, and (b) scarce attention.
Follower counts are highly right-skewed, with some "stars" attracting enormous numbers of
followers. This is consistent with producers facing no distribution costs and being vertically
differentiated, with the "best" users having vast audiences. In contrast, the distribution of
users' followees is substantially less right-skewed, and does not have a long tail. This is con-
sistent with consumers having limited attention--there are no "super consumers" that are
able to consume 100x or 1000x the content of the typical user. Despite this follower/followee
distinction--and some star users having enormous ratios--follower-to-followee ratios are clus-
tered around one. These patterns are consistent with findings reported in previous work
spanning several social media platforms, and over a long period of time (Kwak, Lee, Park
and Moon, 2010; Myers, Sharma, Gupta and Lin, 2014; Sadri, Hasan, Ukkusuri and Lopez,
2018). Many models of network formation can be made consistent with the patterns de-
scribed above; what is distinguishing about our model are predictions about outcomes and
behaviors conditional upon user ability.
   We of course cannot obtain some objective measure of user ability, and trying to infer
it from network statistics is backwards--we want to predict outcomes and behaviors from
ability, not infer ability from outcomes. As a proxy for ability, we use how many Twitter
"lists" a user has been added to by other users, but adjusted for how active the account has
been up until when we collected data. Lists allow users to consume the content of listed
members without affecting their follower and followee count. Importantly, because lists are
not salient within users' profiles, prospective followers cannot use list memberships to infer
ability. Because of these features of lists, our view is that list memberships are more likely
to capture the actual consumption value users have for a given user's tweets, untainted by
attention bartering considerations.
   Consistent with our ability measure being a good proxy for what users want to consume,
the average number of followers is strongly increasing in their ability. In contrast to followers,

                                                4
the average number of followees is first increasing in ability, attains its maximum at medium-
to-high ability levels, and then sharply decreases at the highest ability levels. This "followee
dip" is a telltale for attention bartering in our model--the most able users who attract many
organic followers have little need to reciprocate, and so they only follow accounts they enjoy
following. It is of course possible that the most able users also happen to have more limited
amounts of attention, but there is no obvious reason this would be the case. Actually looking
at the reciprocation decisions directly is illuminating on this point.
   In our data, we observe who follows whom, and we use reciprocal following as a proxy for
attention bartering. We find that low-ability users form reciprocal following relationships with
just about any willing reciprocator, i.e., any user who is willing to "follow back." As users'
abilities increase they become more selective, following reciprocally higher-ability users on
average. Among all users, medium-ability users engage in reciprocal following most intensely.
In stark contrast to reciprocal following, no such pattern exists in unreciprocated following:
the content that users are willing to consume organically is unrelated to their own abilities,
and is of high average quality. The patterns are what our model predicts.
   Although we offer a novel perspective on social media, the economic phenomena we high-
light have social and economic antecedents. For example, consider an "open mic night" at
a cafe. The participants are not paid for the content they produce, but rather barter for
attention: would-be poets listen to the poetry of their fellow poets, in exchange for their
own poetry to be listened to. The cafe owner--like the operators of social media platforms--
provides the meeting place for this exchange, profiting off the sale of food and drinks. They
are happy to sit silently in the background--insofar as the poets do not get too rowdy. In the
context of academia, paper-reading seminars among grad students, and all-day workshops
exhibit similar economics: academics listen to others' work for their work to be listened to.
Presenting at a workshop but not sticking around to hear others' talks is a faux pas that only
the most famous and high-ability academics can pull off safely. In both the open mic night
and the seminar/workshop, individuals would like to be members of the best club that will
have them, as they would prefer to hear better-written poems, and to attend presentations of
higher-quality papers. However, the higher the quality of the other members, the less likely
club membership is to be obtained.
   The social media platform assumes a passive role in our analysis, but the importance of
attention bartering can also explain several platform strategy decisions. Platforms have the
incentive encourage attention bartering, because it increases the utilities of users who barter,
inducing them to be more active on the platform, and in turn creating more opportunities
to present ads. Platforms can encourage attention bartering in several ways, including:
rendering follower and followee content highly salient and creating reminders of the presence
of the audience (such as "likes"); allowing users to verify easily whether they are being
followed by others; instituting rules against aggressive follow-churn behavior (which is a kind

                                               5
of attention bargaining fraud/defection); and implementing features to be used in lieu of
unfollowing, such as "muting" and algorithmic curation. Algorithmic curation of the feed
spares the user some of the disutility of following low ability users, but without them giving
up the attention of having that low ability user as a follower. However, this is a line the
platform has to walk carefully because algorithmic curation weakens the promise that any
follower is in fact seeing the followed user's content, weakening the attention utility that
motivates production.2
    One advantage of our descriptive model perspective is that it generates non-obvious in-
sights for how policy changes might affect the equilibrium. For example, rather than "ban-
ning" users, a platform could simply prevent their following choices from being visible to
others, thus prohibiting them from credibly bartering without silencing them. The patterns
of reciprocal following also makes clear the contours of "clubs" which in turn allows the
platform to more easily remove troublesome users root and branch. For example, the mass
removal of "Q anon" conspiracy accounts on Twitter was surely facilitated by a high degree
of reciprocal following, and was not purely determined by the content.3
    This paper joins a burgeoning literature on social media (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017;
Alatas, Chandrasekhar, Mobius, Olken and Paladines, 2019; Allcott, Braghieri, Eichmeyer
and Gentzkow, 2020; Levy, 2020), but is distinctive in taking a particularly economic lens.
Our modeling focus is on the importance of users' scarce attention in both their production
and consumption decisions, complementing previous work examining the effects of algorith-
mic features (Bakshy, Messing and Adamic, 2015; Berman and Katona, 2020; Levy, 2020).
Whereas we abstract away from the precise reasons why users want an audience, taking
that desire as a given, several papers have explored the bases of this desire (Toubia and
Stephen, 2013; Del Vicario, Vivaldo, Bessi, Zollo, Scala, Caldarelli and Quattrociocchi, 2016;
Pennycook, Epstein, Mosleh, Arechar, Eckles and Rand, 2021).
    User connections on social media form graphs, and hence our model can be viewed as
an economic network formation model, with rational economic agents severing and creating
links to maximize their utilities (Jackson, 2010), albeit adapted to our particular application.
One important assumption of our model is that cooperation between would-be barterers is
sustainable, due to the repeated nature of the underlying game, and because forming and dis-
engaging from relationships is costless on social media. As attention bartering seemingly has
substantial explanatory power, cooperation could be a fruitfully embedded in network for-
mation models--see Overgoor, Benson and Ugander (2019) and Chandrasekhar and Jackson
(2021) for excellent overviews of recent work.
   2
     Algorithmic curation is on a continuum with "shadow banning"--a forum moderation technique designed
to drive away users through reducing nullifying engagement with their content, by means of making their
content invisible to non-shadow banned users.
   3
     See https://www.npr.org/2020/07/21/894014810/twitter-removes-thousands-of-qanon-accounts-
promises-sweeping-ban-on-the-conspir.


                                                   6
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief introduction
to Twitter as a paradigmatic social medium that allows for attention bartering. In Section 3,
we present a model of attention bartering, derive the main results, and examine extensions. In
Section 4, we assess empirically some of the predictions of the model using data from Twitter.
We discuss the implications of our results in Section 5, and we conclude in Section 6.


2        How Twitter works
Twitter is a platform that allows its users to generate tweets--snippets of text, URLs, images,
and videos, which do not exceed 280 characters--and share them with other users. Twitter
serves as the main motivating example throughout the rest of this paper. For brevity, we
henceforth use "Twitter" in lieu of "social media" whenever it is possible, but our results
should be understood to apply to any social medium that shares the features of Twitter that
enable attention bartering.
        A user's tweets are publicly available, unless she has elected to "protect" them by making
her account private, or by "blocking" another user. Users choose to see the tweets of others
by "following" them. Upon logging in Twitter, a user's "timeline" displays a stream of
tweets from her followees--the users she follows. Twitter allows unilateral following: any
user is free to follow any other user.4 In addition to the tweets of followees, other content
may be displayed on a user's timeline, including suggestions of users to follow, tweets from
users not followed, and advertisements. Users can choose between seeing tweets displayed in
chronological order, or using Twitter's proprietary algorithmically generated ranking.5
        The number of a users' followers and followees is prominently displayed. Figure 1a shows
a Groucho Marx Twitter parody account, which has about 10,800 followers and 734 followees.
Additional content the user may opt to provide is also reported, such as the user's location.
When a user views other users' profile pages, she can see whether she is following them, and
whether they are following her. Figure 1b shows an example of how other users' profiles are
viewed when logged in as a user. In this example, the two users follow one another, indicated
by the "Following" and "Follows you" tags.
        A user can interact with any tweet that is visible to her by "liking" it, "commenting" on it
by generating another tweet, and "retweeting" it--which makes the original tweet appear on
the timeline of her followers. The user who generated the original tweet receives notifications
about the interaction other users have with her tweets. Figure 1c shows a tweet that has
received 14 comments, 46 retweets, and 198 likes.
    4
     Social media platforms Instagram, Youtube, and TikTok also allow unilateral following. However, on some
social media, such as Facebook and LinkedIn, all relationships are bilateral.
   5
     Twitter's "top tweets" feature produces algorithmically curated tweet rankings, utilizing a variety of
signals such as how popular a tweet is, and how the user's followees are interacting with it. For more details,
see https://help.twitter.com/en/using-twitter/twitter-timeline.


                                                      7
                        Figure 1: Elements of Twitter's information design.

                                  (a) The profile page of a twitter user.




                          (b) Features of the relationship of two Twitter users.




                                          (c) Features of a tweet.




Notes: This figure reports screenshots depicting core elements of Twitter's information design. The top
panel is a screenshot of the home page of a Groucho Marx parody Twitter account. The numbers next to
"Following" and "Followers" denote the number of followees and followers of this user. The middle panel is a
screenshot of the home page of The Friars Club Twitter account. The page indicates prominently that "The
Friars Club" follows the user, and that the user follows The Friars Club, creating a bidirectional following
relationship. Note that this relationship may have been either formed organically, or may be a result of the
two users engaging in attention bartering. The bottom panel is a screenshot of a tweet. The number of
comments, retweets, and likes associated with that tweet, appear below the content of the tweet.




                                                      8
3        A model of social media production and consumption
3.1       Setup
Consider a unit mass of Twitter users. Each user is endowed with publicly known ability ,
and generates tweets of quality q (), where q is a strictly increasing differentiable function.
For ease of exposition, we assume throughout the rest of the paper that q () = , and that
abilities are uniformly distributed on the unit interval.
        Users obtain consumption utility by following others and consuming their tweets. The
consumption utility of a user is the sum of the tweet quality of her followees, minus an
opportunity cost q0  [0, 1] for each followee. All users face the same opportunity cost to
consumption. With these assumptions, users have homogeneous consumption preferences.
        Users also obtain attention utility when their tweets are consumed by their followers.
Attention utility increases in the number of a user's followers, exhibits diminishing returns,
and does not depend on the identity of the followers--only the number of followers matters.
Formally, attention utility is a function I : [0, 1]  [0, 1] such that I > 0 and I < 0.
        Users make an extensive margin decision--whether to tweet. We assume that users gen-
erate tweets only if they can obtain positive attention utility; users without followers "lurk,"
consuming but not generating tweets. We assume that users have homogeneous attention
preferences. As such, the model assumes that no horizontal differentiation exists, and that
users are identical except in their abilities. We discuss how our model can be extended to
allow for heterogeneous consumption and attention preferences in Section 3.5.
        The coexistence of consumption and attention utilities gives rise to two distinct follower
types: organic and reciprocal followers. An organic follower is a user who follows some other
user that increases her consumption utility. Because preferences are homogeneous, only users
with ability  > q0 have organic followers. Users with ability  < q0 do not have organic
followers, but may obtain followers by engaging in attention bartering.
        A reciprocal follower is a user with ability  < q0 that follows a user with ability  < q0 ,
only if that user follows her back. In reciprocal following relationships, users engage in
attention bartering, trading off decreases in consumption utility for increases in attention
utility. In addition to the consumption utility decrease, we assume that users also incur a
cost c > 0 for every reciprocal following relationship they engage in. Because of the incentive
to defect, users have to exert effort to maintain each reciprocal relationship--the parameter
c captures the cost of this effort.6
        We consider the equilibria under two platform configurations: (i) when attention bar-
tering is impossible, which happens when follower information is not public and hence non-
contractible, and (ii) when attention bartering is possible, which happens when follower
    6
    For example, a user engaging in attention bartering may periodically monitor that her reciprocal followers
are holding their end of the bargain, and have not stopped following her back.


                                                      9
information is public.

3.2     Equilibria
Let f : [0, 1]  {0, 1} denote the (follow) strategy of user , such that f (x) = 1 if she
follows users with ability x, and f (x) = 0 otherwise. The set of strategies of a user is F ,
and the set of strategy profiles is F = ×[0,1] F . For a profile f = (f , f- )  F , we denote
by f- the profile of all users with ability not equal to . Note that because users have
homogeneous preferences, we can refer to them by their abilities--in what follows, we refer
to a user with ability  as "user ," whenever it is convenient.
                                                         1
      Given profile f , user  (i) follows n (f ) =      0 f (x)dx   users, and obtains consumption
                    1                                                      1
utility U (f ) =   0 f (x) (x   - q0 ) dx, (ii) is followed by m (f ) =   0 fx ()dx   users, and obtains
                                                                                              q0
attention utility I (f ) = I (m (f )), and (iii) attempts to engage in r (f ) =              0     f (x)dx
reciprocal following relationships, and incurs monitoring cost C (f ) = r (f )c. User  obtains
total utility equal to
                                   V (f ) = U (f ) + I (f ) - C (f ).                                  (1)

      We restrict our attention to profiles any two users ,   q0 will either engage in reciprocal
following, or will not follow each another. Formally, we consider profiles in the set

                      F + = {f  F : f ( ) = f ()  < q0  < q0 }.                                        (2)

A profile f   F + is an equilibrium profile if

                                    V (f  )  V (f )  f  F + .                                          (3)

It is worth noting that by restricting feasible profiles to F + , our equilibrium notion assumes
a user who considers unfollowing a reciprocal follower takes into account that she will be "un-
followed back." As such, we assume that cooperation is sustainable due to the "repeated"
nature of the underlying game, and because forming and disengaging from following relation-
ships is costless on social media.7 Without this restriction, no attention bartering would take
place in equilibrium, as users are always better off unilaterally deviating from a reciprocal
following relationship. Furthermore, note that Equation (2) requires that no coalition of users
can block an equilibrium profile.
      Consider a profile f  F + where users ,   q0 reciprocally follow each other, and a
profile f  F + where they do not, but is otherwise identical to f . The change in the utility
  7
    For example, we can think of each pair of reciprocating users as playing a repeated game with costly
perfect monitoring, where the monitoring cost is much lower than the stage game payoff.




                                                   10
of user  from unfollowing reciprocal follower  is:

            V (f ) - V (f ) = U (f ) - U (f ) + I (f ) - I (f ) + C (f ) - C (f ) .           (4)
                                    U > 0                I < 0             C > 0

Disengaging from a reciprocal relationship leads to an increase in consumption utility, a
decrease in attention utility, and a decrease in monitoring costs; engaging in a reciprocal
relationship has the opposite effects. It is this fundamental trade-off that our paper examines.

3.3    Attention bartering is impossible
We first examine the equilibrium outcomes in a platform where attention bartering is impos-
sible. This can be thought of as the case of a social media platform where follower information
is hidden, and hence non-contractible. In terms of the parameters of our model, no attention
bartering takes place when the monitoring cost c is so large that reciprocal following always
decreases a user's total utility.
   When attention bartering is impossible, it is straightforward to show that every user
follows only those users that increase her consumption utility, i.e., users with ability  > q0 .

Proposition 1. In a platform without attention bartering, there exists a unique equilibrium
f  such that for all , f (x) = 1 for x > q , and f  (x) = 0 otherwise.
                                          0       

    Figure 2a illustrates the equilibrium of a platform where attention bartering is impossible,
                        
for the case of I (x) = x/2, q0 = 0.8, and c = 0.2. Every user obtains consumption utility

                                            1
                                                           1
                              U (f  ) =         x - q0 dx = (1 - q0 )2 .                      (5)
                                           q0              2

Users with ability   q0 lurk--they are not followed by anyone, and hence they do not
generate tweets--and obtain total utility equal to their consumption utility, i.e., V (f  ) =
U (f  ). Users with ability  > q0 are followed by every user, generate tweets, and obtain
total utility V (f  ) = U (f  ) + I (1).

3.4    Attention bartering is possible
We next examine the equilibrium outcomes when attention bartering is possible--this is
case when follower information is publicly accessible, thus enabling reciprocal following. In
terms of our model parameters, the monitoring cost c is small enough that some users are
incentivized to engage in attention bartering.
   To derive the equilibrium in this case, we need to make a number of observations. A first
observation is that organic following is invariant to whether attention bartering takes place--
no user is better off not following high-ability users. Formally, for any equilibrium profile f  ,

                                                   11
                       Figure 2: Following, consumption, and attention with homogeneous user preferences.


                                               (a) Equilibrium when attention bartering is impossible.

                       1                                                                                                       only high-ability users
                                            high-ability users are
                                                                                                                               obtain attention utility
                                            followed by everyone
 Number of followers




                                                                                   Utility
                                                                                                    all users obtain equal
                                                                                                     consumption utility

                                           "lurkers"                                         uc

                       0                                                                     0
                                                                     qo   1                         0                                    q0         1
                                             User ability                                                            User ability 



                                                 (b) Equilibrium when attention bartering is possible.

                       1                                                                                                           high-ability users
                                            high-ability users are
                                                                                                                                      unaffected
                                            followed by everyone
 Number of followers




                                                                                                            club "members" trade off
                                                                                                            consumption for attention
                                                                                   Utility




                                   attention bartering "clubs"                                     "lurkers"
                                                                                                  unaffected

                           "lurkers"

                       0                                                                     0
                               q5 q4 q3     q2    q1                 q0   1                             q5 q4 q3    q2    q1             q0         1
                                             User ability                                                            User ability 



Notes: This figure plots users' followers, consumption utilities, and attention utilities, with and without
attention bartering. It illustrates the case of uniformly distributed valuations on the unit interval, q0 = 0.8,
              
and I (x) = x/2. In all panels, the yellow-shaded area depicts the number of organic followers, the blue-
shaded area depicts the number of reciprocal followers, the green-shaded area depicts consumption utility
minus monitoring costs, and the red-shaded area depicts attention utility. Panel 2a plots the users' followers
(left panel) and utilities (right panel) in a platform where attention bartering is impossible. Only high-ability
users are followed, and those users are followed by every user. Every user obtains the same consumption utility,
but only high-ability users obtain attention utilities. Panel 2b plots the users' followers (left panel) and utilities
(right panel) in a platform with attention bartering. The monitoring cost parameter is set to c = 0.2. Attention
bartering clubs emerge, in which users trade off decreases in consumption utility for increases in attention
utility. The number of lurkers decreases, and both lurkers and high-ability users experience no utility change.
Figure 4 reports additional quantities for the attention bartering equilibrium.




                                                                              12
f (x) = 1 for all x > q . As such, users with ability  > q are followed by every user, do
                       0                                  0
not engage in reciprocal following, and obtain the same consumption and attention utilities
as in the case where attention bartering is impossible. Only users with ability   q0 have
incentive to engage in reciprocal following. Proposition 2 derives the structure of optimal
reciprocation.

Proposition 2. In any equilibrium f  , users with ability   q0 will reciprocally follow users
of abilities in a continuum (q (), q ()], that is, f (x) = 1 if x  (q (), q ()], and f  (x) = 0
                                                                                      
otherwise. Furthermore, for any users 1 and 2 such that 1 > 2 , q (1 )  q (2 ) and
q (1 )  q (2 ).

Proof. Consider any equilibrium where user 1 engages in reciprocal following, but does not
employ a continuum strategy. This implies that user 1 does not reciprocally follow some user
2 , but reciprocally follows some user 3 < 2 . User 1 would then be better off reciprocally
following user 2 , and incur a smaller consumption decrease. For the same reason, all users
with ability higher than 1 that reciprocally follow user 2 will also reciprocally follow user
1 ; this proves the second part of the proposition.

Under profile f , a user  who reciprocally follows increases her utility by

                                     q ()                           q ()
  R (f ) = R q (), q () =                   x - q0 dx      -               cdx    + I q () - q () ,
                                   q ( )                          q ()

                              consumption util. decrease       monitoring costs    attention util. increase
                                                                                                         (6)
for a total utility V (f ) = U (f ) + R (f ). Proposition 3 constructs the unique equilibrium.

Proposition 3. In a platform with attention bartering, there exists a unique equilibrium f  ,
that can be computed as follows

  1. For any , f (x) = 1 for all x > q .
                                      0

  2. For users with ability  > q0 , f (x) = 0 for all x  0.


  3. Set 1 = q0 . For all users with ability 1 , f (x) = 1 iff x  (q ( ), q ( )], where
                                                                      1      1

     q (1 ) = 1 and q (1 ) = argmaxx[0,q(1 )] R x, q (1 )                    . Users with ability  
     (q (1 ), q (1 )] reciprocally follow each other, and only each other.

  4. Iterate by setting i+1 = q (i ), and repeating the previous step.

  5. The process stops when either q (i ) = q (i ), or q (i ) = 0.

Proof. Amongst users who reciprocate, users with ability  = q0 are the most "valuable"
ones, as they decrease their reciprocal followers' consumption utility by the least amount. In

                                                 13
any equilibrium profile, users that are reciprocally followed by those users will reciprocate--
reciprocally following a higher ability user always is utility-improving for a lower-ability user,
so long as it is utility-improving for a higher-ability user. As such, any profile where these
users do not follow the highest-ability reciprocal followers can be improved upon, and is not
an equilibrium profile. Because users are homogeneous, if a user belongs to the continuum
of a higher-ability user, then that user's continuum is identical. Any continuum that stops
before marginal utility starts decreasing can be improved upon, and is not an equilibrium.
Evoking the same arguments, uniqueness is obtained by contradiction.

    In Figure 2a, we illustrate the platform equilibrium when attention bartering is possible,
                       
for the case of I (x) = x/2, q0 = 0.8, and c = 0.2. Users with ability  > q0 , are unaffected by
the possibility of attention bartering--they are followed by every other user, and they do not
engage in reciprocal following. The set of lurkers shrinks, as lower-ability users can improve
their total utilities by forming attention bartering clubs. Five attention bartering clubs form
in our example, comprising users of abilities in the continua [q1 , q0 ], [q2 , q1 ], [q3 , q2 ], [q4 , q3 ],
and [q5 , q4 ]. Note that the extent of reciprocal following--the size of these clubs--gradually
becomes smaller, as reciprocally following lower-ability users is costlier. Reciprocation stops
when users no longer find it profitable to follow their own type: users with ability   q5
maintain their lurker status, and continue to only consume.8 Club members are better off
in terms of total utility but their consumption utility decreases, as they are forced to follow
users below the opportunity cost q0 . Higher-ability users belong to more populous clubs, and
hence incur higher monitoring costs and more pronounced consumption utility decreases.9
       The model generates testable predictions, which we summarize in Proposition 4:

Proposition 4. In the equilibrium of a platform where attention bartering takes place,

  (i) The number of followers and follower-to-followee ratio are weakly increasing in user
         ability. Only high-ability users have follower-to-followee ratios higher than one.

 (ii) The number of followees is concave in user ability: it weakly increases initially, and
         then decreases for high-ability users. High-ability users and lurkers , who follow an
         equal number of users as lurkers.

(iii) Lurkers and high-ability users do not engage in attention bartering. Every other user's
         number of reciprocal followers is positive and weakly increasing in her ability.
   8
     This can be thought of as the (Groucho) Marx condition: the marginal user who does not engage in
attention bartering does not want to be a member of any club that would have her as a member.
   9
      Interestingly, these clubs have increasing inbreeding homophilly without any notion of costly search
(Davis, 1970; Currarini, Jackson and Pin, 2009).




                                                     14
 (iv) Users comprising an attention bartering club have the same number of followers, fol-
           lowees, and ratios. The size of the clubs--and hence the magnitude of these statistics--
           increases weakly in user ability.

We depict these predictions in Figure 2, as well as in Figure 4 and Figure 5 where we compare
the model predictions with estimates from the #EconTwitter data.

3.5        Preference heterogeneity
Our basic model considers users that differ only in their abilities. This can be a reasonable
approximation for social media communities, but real-life users are surely heterogeneous in
more ways than one. It is worth examining how introducing additional sources of hetero-
geneity affects the predictions of the model.
         Users may have heterogeneous consumption preferences. One way to model this type
heterogeneity is to introduce a horizontal consumption component to the model, in addition
to the vertical component--user abilities. Appendix A develops one such extension, where
users face idiosyncratic and non-symmetric opportunity costs to consumption. If the hor-
izontal component outweighs substantially the vertical component, users of very different
abilities may now follow each another, either organically or reciprocally, introducing inter-
club connections. Importantly, because higher-ability users attract more organic followers,
they engage in less reciprocation, and hence they incur less pronounced consumption util-
ity decreases. However, if consumption preferences correlate strongly with user abilities,
attention bartering still takes place predominantly between users of similar abilities.
         Users may also differ in how much they value attention. All other factors equal, a user
 that obtains higher attention utility from attracting followers will attempt to engage in
reciprocation with users with ability lower than her club's lower bound q ().10 These users
will follow her back, as her ability is higher than the abilities of other members of their own
club. Having gained a more valuable reciprocal follower, these users may in turn unfollow their
lowest-ability reciprocal followers. This effect ripples through the population of reciprocal
followers, "smoothing out the edges" of attention bartering clubs, and introducing inter-club
connections. Introducing heterogeneous monitoring costs has identical effects.


4         Evidence from #EconTwitter
We next assess empirically core assumptions and predictions of our model. Toward that end,
we collected from #EconTwitter, a Twitter community comprising professional and amateur
    10
     In the extreme, a user whose preference for attention far outweighs her preference for consumption will
reciprocally follow any willing user. These are likely the social media users who openly advertise their "follow-
for-follow" policies.



                                                       15
users who tweet mostly about economics, and often follow each other.11 Our rationale for
focusing on #EconTwitter is to obtain data that closely matches the setting of our model,
that is, data on users with higher preference homogeneity than what would be expected in a
random sample of Twitter users.
    It is important to emphasize the nature of this empirical exercise. We are not fitting the
#EconTwitter data to our model. Instead, what we are doing is comparing the patterns in
the #EconTwitter data--specifically network statistics as a function of user ability--to the
patterns predicted in our model. For example, our model predicts a "followee dip" at the
highest levels of user ability--we look for this dip in the #EconTwitter data. This exercise is
somewhat similar to comparing the coefficients in a regression to the comparative statics of
a model, except that we are making this comparison at many ability levels, where the signs
of some predictions change i.e., followees is increasing in ability up until the dip, at which
point the sign changes.

4.1    Data collection and sample definition
Because there is no "tag" on Twitter indicating that a user is an economist, we adopted a
heuristic process based on Twitter's list feature. Lists are groups of Twitter users created
and curated by individual users, in order to organize tweets thematically. Lists can be made
private or public, and can be shared with other users. Importantly, adding a user to a list
does not affect follower or followee counts, and hence prospective followers cannot see the
number of lists to which a user has been added.12
    We began by collecting data on users comprising RePEc's "Economists on Twitter" list.
We then collected data on users followed by at least 3 users on the RePEc list, for a total
of 68,592 users. The data features for each user include the unique identifiers of her followers
and followees, the number of tweets she has produced, the number of tweets she has liked, her
tenure on the platform, and the number of lists that she has been added to by other users.
All data was collected using Twitter's public API.13
    We refined the data sample as follows. First, we removed "inactive" users, defined as users
with fewer than 25 followers, fewer than 10 followees, or fewer than 50 tweets. Second, we
removed "superstar" users, defined as users with more than 200,000 followers. This restriction
removes few economist outliers, but many non-economists who are particularly popular with
  11
     On Twitter, users may prepend the hashtag character to relevant keywords or phrases within their tweets,
as a form of tagging that enables cross-referencing of content sharing a theme or subject. Twitter commu-
nities often derive their names from recurring hashtags that their members use to broadcast messages to the
community. For more details, see https://help.twitter.com/en/using-twitter/how-to-use-hashtags,
and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hashtag.
  12
     For more details on Twitter lists, see https://help.twitter.com/en/using-twitter/twitter-lists.
  13
     The RePEc list can be found at https://ideas.repec.org/i/etwitter.html. The official documentation
describing the features of data obtained through Twitter's API can be found at https://developer.twitter.
com/en/docs/twitter-api/v1/data-dictionary/object-model/user.


                                                     16
#EconTwitter users.14 Third, to eliminate some "spam" accounts from our data, we removed
users with more than 5,000 followees. This restriction only drops a small number of users,
and is consistent with the Twitter-imposed basic followee limit.15 The final sample consists
of 55,966 #EconTwitter users, who collectively follow and are followed by 26,284,663 users.

4.2                      Followers, followees, and ratios
Figure 3 reports the distributions of followers, followees, and follower-to-followee ratios of
#EconTwitter users. We plot a Gaussian kernel density estimate of the distribution of each
outcome, with the bandwidth selected using Silverman's rule of thumb (Silverman, 1986).
The red vertical lines depict the median (solid) and the mean (dashed) of each distribution.

                         Figure 3: Distributions of followers, followees, and ratios of #EconTwitter users

                        0.5
                        0.4
                        0.3                                                                           (a)
                        0.2                                                                       followers
                        0.1
 Probability density




                        0.0
                       1.00
                       0.75
                       0.50                                                                           (b)
                                                                                                  followees
                       0.25
                       0.00
                        0.6
                                                                                                     (c)
                        0.4
                                                                                              follower / followee
                        0.2                                                                         ratio
                        0.0
                                10-2    10-1    100     101    102     103    104     105

Notes: This figure reports kernel density estimates of the probability density function of the distributions
of followers, followees, and follower-to-followee ratios for #EconTwitter users. For each facet, the vertical
red lines depict the median (solid) and the mean (dashed) of the corresponding distribution, and the kernel
bandwidth is selected using Silverman's rule of thumb (Silverman, 1986). See Appendix B for density estimates
of the same statistics for all users.

                       On average, an #EconTwitter user has 10,304 followers, 1,273 followees, and a ratio of
13.98, whereas the median user has 2,004 followers, 913 followees, and a ratio of 2.05.16
  14
     For example, Barack Obama, Shakira, and Britney Spears are the three most followed non-economists
who are followed by 3 or more users in the RePEc list. Among economists in the RePEc list, the "superstar"
restriction resulted in Paul Krugrman, Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Joseph Stiglitz, and Alejandro Gaviria being
dropped from the sample. Erik Brynjolfsson (barely) made it.
  15
     For more details, see https://help.twitter.com/en/using-twitter/twitter-follow-limit.
  16
     In Appendix B, we report estimates computed on the entire sample. Compared to the average Twitter
user, #EconTwitter users have on average more followers and followees, and higher ratios: the median user
in the entire data set has 266 followers, 524 followees, and a ratio equal to 0.52.


                                                                17
   Follower counts are highly right-skewed, with some "stars" that attract vast numbers of
followers. This is consistent with producers facing no distribution costs and being vertically
differentiated, with the "best" users having large audiences. In contrast, the distribution
of users' followees is substantially less right-skewed, and does not have a long tail. This is
consistent with consumers having scarce attention.
   Despite this follower/followee distinction--and some star users having enormous ratios--
follower-to-followee ratios are clustered around one. This is consistent with Proposition 4 (i).
This clustering of ratios near one has been documented in previous work spanning several
social media, and a relatively long period of time (Kwak et al., 2010; Myers et al., 2014;
Sadri et al., 2018). Interestingly, our "clubs"--where all users follow each other--have ratios
slightly less than one, with the denominator inflated by the "stars" those users follow. If
there are few stars, our model predicts large numbers of users with ratios of approximately
one.

4.3    Constructing a proxy for user ability using lists
The key distinguishing feature of our model is the predictions it makes about ability and
outcomes. However, the "abilities" of Twitter users cannot be observed directly. As proxy
for user ability, we use the number of lists to which a user has been added by other users.
Lists have several properties that are useful for constructing a proxy for user ability. First,
adding a user to a list indicates interest in her tweets, without increasing the enlister's followee
count. Second, the number of lists to which a user has been added is not observable by her
would-be followers, and hence list-adding cannot be bartered similarly to attention.
   One limitation of the list count is that users with greater tenure on the platform are
likely to have been added to more lists. To remove some of the tenure dependency effect, we
residualize the log number of lists to which a user has been added, by partialing out the log
number of tweets that the same user has generated. We hereafter refer to user ability as the
percentile a user belongs to in our data with respect to the (residualized) number of lists to
which she been added.

4.4    User ability and network statistics
Our model makes sharp predictions about users' network statistics in the attention barter-
ing equilibrium. In Figure 4, we compare these predictions to estimates obtained from the
#EconTwitter data. Each row depicts a separate network statistic. The left-column facets
depict the empirical estimates as a function of the list-defined user ability. Each point repre-
sents the mean value for users belonging to the same ability percentile, and a 95% confidence
interval is plotted around each point estimate. The right-column facets depict the equilib-
rium predictions as a function of user ability, using the model parameterization of Figure 2.


                                                18
The model parameters were chosen for ease of exposition--what matters for our empirical
exercise is the shape of the equilibrium predictions.
    Facet (a) plots the number of users' followers. Followers increase in users' abilities, sug-
gesting that our choice of proxy is reasonable. Consistent with our modeling assumption
and with Proposition 4 (i), high-ability users attract a far larger number of followers than
low-ability users.
    Facet (b) plots the number of followees--the number of users followed by each user.
Followees increase initially in user ability, but at a much slower rate than the number of
followers, and then decrease at high ability levels. This "followee dip" is consistent with
Proposition 4 (ii), and supports our modeling approach that following users is costly in terms
of consumption, and not just a matter of awareness or opportunity.17
    Follower-to-followee ratios are reported in facet (c). These ratios are increasing in user
ability, but at a slower rate than the number of followers: users within broad ability ranges
have similar ratios, consistent with Proposition 4 (i) and (iv).18

4.5    Reciprocation and attention bartering
We cannot observe whether a relationship is truly reciprocal in the sense of our model--we
do not know what would happen if one side of the deal unfollowed. As such, we cannot
verify whether a bilateral relationship was the result of the two users following each other
organically, or due to attention bartering. Nevertheless, we refer to any bidirectional following
relationship in our data as reciprocal in what follows.
    Facet (d) in Figure 4 plots the number of users' reciprocal followers as a function of
user ability. The number of reciprocal followers initially increases in user ability, but then
decreases, and eventually attains its minimum at high user abilities. In facet (e), we see clearly
that the reciprocator-to-follower ratio is strictly decreasing in user ability. Low-ability users
reciprocally follow the majority of their (few) followers, and users become more selective as
their abilities increase. At the extreme, users of very high abilities follow back fewer than
0.5% of their followers.
    Facet (f) reports the fraction of a user's followees that follow her back. About 20% of the
followees of high-ability users follow them back, whereas the same number is about 40% for
medium-ability users. The predictions of our model are borne-out in our #EconTwitter data:
middle-ability users are the ones who barter the most, with their attention bartering intensity
  17
     For example, economists Susan Athey and David Autor belong to the highest ability tier in our data, but
only follow a below-median 875 and 176 users, respectively.
  18
     At high ability levels, ratios seemingly become more dispersed within the same ability level. One possible
explanation is that high-ability users, as captured by our proxy, comprise both star users with many followers
and few followees, but also users with large numbers of both followers and followees. The latter are likely users
who have attained visibility due to attention bartering, and have been subsequently added to many lists. This
does illustrate a limitation of our ability proxy.



                                                       19
       Figure 4: #EconTwitter estimates and model predictions of network statistics.

                                                          #EconTwitter estimates                                                                                                                                                      Model predictions
                               60000                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq



                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q

                                                                                                                                                                                           q



               (a)                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q


                               30000                                                                                             q


           followers
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                         qq                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                           q    q q
                                                                                                         q   qqq
                                                                                                   q q qq q q                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                    qq q                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                         q   q qqqq
                                                                               q    qqqqq qqq qq                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                    qqqqqqqqqqq qqqq
                                                     qqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                       qqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                0                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                               1500                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q                   q
                                                                                                                                                              q           q
                                                                                                                                                    q     q qq                 q q
                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                 q              qqq      q                 q
                                                                                                                                q q                     q
                                                                                                           q                 q
                                                                                                            q q

               (b)
                                                                                                 q                                     q                                                   qq
                                                                                                      q                                 q                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q                           q
                                                                                             qq q                q                 q q                                                            q
                                                                                                                q q
                               1250                                          q     qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                     q       q
                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                     q                                                         q q                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq


           followees                   qq
                                              q     qq
                                                              q

                                                              qq
                                                                q
                                                                 q
                                                                     q
                                                                         qq
                                                                              q
                                                                               q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                            q q
                                                                                               q       q qq


                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q


                                                          q
                                                                      q
                                                 q                q
                                                q        q                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                            q           q
                                                          q

                               1000       q




                                160                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq




               (c)
       follower / followee      80                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q




              ratio                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q


                                                                                                                                                                                  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                           qqqqq
                                                                                                                  q qq   q
                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                         q   q qqq qq qqq                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                         qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq qqq q                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                    qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                0      qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q




                                                                                                 q                           q                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                550                                                          q
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                              q    qq   q
                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                q                q qq
                                                                             q          qq            q   q      q   q q qq                   q q        q
                                                                                   qq         q      q      q q                           q
                                                                              q                                               q       q             q
                                                                                  q   q                                                                  q q q    q
                                                                                 q        q                      q   q                  q               q
                                                                         q                                                                  q
                                                               q q                                                                                           q

              (d)               400                 q
                                                      q
                                                          qq
                                                              q q


                                                                  q
                                                                     q
                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




         reciprocators
                                                  q                                                                                                                       q       q
                                                         q                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                q                                                                                                                              q                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                        q                 q                                                                                                                   q       q
                                                        q
                                       q                                                                                                                                           q
                                             q
                                            q                                                                                                                                          q

                                                                                                                                                                                          q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                          q

                                250                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q q

                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                       q                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                        q q q
                                0.5      q q
                                              qq
                                             q q
                                                  q    q
                                                 q qq q   q
                                                     q   q q
                                                        q
                                                            q qq
                                                             q qq
                                                                 qqq q


              (e)                                                   q qq qq q
                                                                        q q
                                                                           q q q q
                                                                              q
                                                                                q q
                                                                                   qqqqqqq


     reciprocator / follower
                                                                                          q
                                                                                           qq
                                                                                             qq q                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                               0.25                                                            q q q
                                                                                                  q qq
                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                       q qqqqq

             ratio                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                qqqq
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                      q qq
                                                                                                                          qqqq
                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                                      q q

                                0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq




                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                               0.43                                   q q q
                                                                             q
                                                                               q q
                                                                            q q q
                                                                                 q qqq
                                                                                      qq q
                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                             qq q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                   q
                                                                 qq                                   qq       q q
                                                                        q q                 q              qq   q
                                                                    qq q                                          q
                                                            q                                                 q     qqq
                                                         q    qqq q                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q


              (f)                                q q
                                                    qqq
                                                       q
                                                        q
                                                          q qq
                                                           q
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq



    reciprocator / followee    0.33             q
                                                  q                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                qq

                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q




             ratio
                                         q q
                                        q                                                                                                                                     q     q
                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q q

                               0.23                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq




                                      0                                                                                                                                                           1    0                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                              User ability
Notes: This figure reports empirical estimates and theoretical predictions for networks statistics (y-axis) as a
function of user ability (x-axis). On the left-column, we plot estimates of #EconTwitter users' (a) followers,
(b) followees, and (c) follower-to-followee ratios, (d) reciprocators, (e) reciprocator-to-follower ratios, and (f)
reciprocator-to-followee ratios. Each point represents the mean value (y-axis) for users belonging to the same
ability percentile (x-axis), and a 95% confidence interval is shown around each point estimate. On the right
column, we plot model predictions for the same quantities. The illustrated attention bartering equilibrium
                                                                                        
assumes uniformly distributed valuations on the unit interval, q0 = 0.8, and I (x) = x/2. See Section 4.3 for
details on the definition of abilities of #EconTwitter users, and Figure 2b for an alternative representation of
the same attention bartering equilibrium.




                                                                                                                                        20
increasing in their abilities, while low- and high-ability users barter the least--consistent with
Proposition 4 (iii).

4.6        Assortative matching
We find strong evidence of assortative matching. Figure 5 plots the ability ranges of users'
organic and reciprocal followees as a function of user ability. Panel 5a reports estimates from
the #EconTwitter data. The left facet plots the distributions for users' organic followees--
followees who do not follow back--and the right facet plots the distribution for users' recip-
rocal followees. In each facet, we report the median (black dots) and the interdecile range
(pink-shaded area) of the ability distribution of followees, for each ability level. Panel 5b
reports model predictions for the same quantities, reporting the median ability of users fol-
lowees in the attention bartering equilibrium (black dots), and the ability range that users
are willing to follow organically and reciprocally (pink-shaded area).
         The data estimates and the predictions of the model are remarkably similar. Low-ability
users are willing to reciprocate with any willing user who is not of extremely low quality.
High-ability users are only form reciprocal relationships with other high-ability users--note
that these relationships are bidirectionally organic. The picture is completely different for
organic followees: users follow unconditionally only high ability users, independent of their
own abilities, both in our data and in our model.19


5         Discussion
5.1        Production, consumption, and quality of content
Our model has several touch points with the economics of club goods (Buchanan, 1965).
Each club member pays for membership with their attention, in exchange for consuming a
finite resource--the attention of other members. In every club, members are not quite good
enough for the club "above," but are too good for the club "below." The marginal club
member of the lowest-ability club has ability equal to the marginal utility of receiving the
attention of a single follower: this is exactly the first user whose ability is so low that she
would not barter with herself.20 Particular to the social media context is the fact there is no
    19
      Network formation models based on preferential attachment could explain some but not all of these
patterns (Barab´ asi and Albert, 1999). For example, highly right-skewed follower distributions are consistent
with rich-get-richer link formations, but would require more able users to have systematically joined the
platform earlier. Had this been the case--and assuming that users do not "re-wire" frequently--it would
also explain why higher ability users tend to reciprocate with high ability users, as those are the users that
were already present when they joined. We find very little relationship between user tenure and our ability
measure, and our ability measure is has substantially more predictive power than tenure with respect to users'
follower-to-followee ratios. For more details, see Appendix B.
   20
      On a somewhat more general context than social media, Groucho Marx famously made a similar obser-
vation: "I don't want to belong to any club that will accept me as one of its members."


                                                     21
                                                                                                                                         Figure 5: Ability ranges of users' followees

                                                                                                                                                                                               (a) #EconTwitter estimates

                                                                                                         organic followees                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    reciprocal followees
                    1       q       qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                         qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                               qqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                 qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq                    qqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q             q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                        q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q        qq       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q        q       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q        qqqq         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqq         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
 Followee ability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q       qqq   qqqqq         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        qq       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q




                        0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               User ability

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) Model predictions

                                                                                                         organic followees                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    reciprocal followees
                    1
                        q
                        q
                        q
                        qq
                         q
                         q
                         qq
                          q
                          q
                          qq
                           q
                           q
                           qq
                            q
                            q
                            qq
                             q
                             q
                             qq
                              q
                              q
                              qq
                               q
                               q
                               qq
                                q
                                q
                                qq
                                 q
                                 q
                                 qq
                                  q
                                  q
                                  qq
                                   q
                                   q
                                   qq
                                    q
                                    q
                                    qq
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           q
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           q
                                                           q
                                                           qq
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             q
                                                             qq
                                                              q
                                                              q
                                                              qq
                                                               q
                                                               q
                                                               qq
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                qq
                                                                 q
                                                                 q
                                                                 qq
                                                                  q
                                                                  q
                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        qq
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           qq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            qq
                                                                                             q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                             qq
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              qq
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
 Followee ability




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq




                    0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq




                        0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1       0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               User ability

Notes: This figure reports empirical estimates and theoretical predictions of the following behavior of
users. Panel 5a plots the median and interdecile range of the distribution of followee abilities (y-axis) for
#EconTwitter users belonging to the same ability percentile (x-axis). The left facet reports the distribution
for organic followees--followees who do not follow the user, and the right facet for reciprocal followees--
followees who are also followers. Panel 5b plots model predictions for the same quantities. The illustrated
attention bartering equilibrium assumes uniformly distributed valuations on the unit interval, q0 = 0.8, and
        
I (x) = x/2. See Section 4.3 for more details on the definition of abilities of #EconTwitter users. See
Figure 2b for an alternative representation of the same attention bartering equilibrium.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           22
mechanism excluding non-members from consuming the content produced within clubs--the
scarce resource is not the content, but the attention bartered between the club members.21
       In our model, attention bartering induces users of lower abilities to form clubs and to
produce content--these users would have otherwise lurked. Consequently, the quantity of
content produced on the platform increases, but its average quality decreases. This low-
quality content is consumed only by users belonging to the club wherein it was produced.
However, it can also spread to the platform through channels that include platform features
such as algorithmic recommendation systems, new users who "join" these clubs unwittingly,
and the inter-club connections created by preference heterogeneity (see Section 3.5).
       If low-quality content is likely to be less truthful, attention bartering clubs become nat-
ural "reservoirs" of disinformation--these can be thought of as the social media analogue
to the epidemiological concept of reservoirs of pathogens (Haydon, Cleaveland, Taylor and
Laurenson, 2002). New users may then pick up and spread this disinformation unintention-
ally. Furthermore, to the extent that beliefs and behaviors are shaped by one's community,
attention bartering may also exacerbate polarization.
       Attention bartering can have positive effects that are not strictly captured by our model.
Although in our base model attention bartering decreases the average quality of content
produced, it may increase the average quality of content consumed in practice. For exam-
ple, assume instead that every user has the potential to produce extremely valuable "star"
content with a very low probability, which does not depend on her ability. Attention bar-
tering increases the number of users who actively produce, and hence the amount of star
content produced on the platform. Similarly, by introducing additional edges to the network,
attention bartering may also increase the probability that star content will become "viral."22

5.2      Network statistics and user ability
Social media platforms typically display network information, such as the number of followers
and followees, prominently within each user's home page (see Figure 1). This information
presumably signals ability to prospective followers, and is conceptually similar to "reader-
ship" and "viewership" statistics reported by traditional media. It is worth examining how
attention bartering affects the informativeness of these signals.
       The two most common proxies for user ability on social media are a user's number of
followers and "ratio." The ratio of a user is defined as the number of users that follow her
over the number of users she follows. In our base model, both statistics are weakly increasing
in user ability; only high-ability users have ratios greater than one, and users belonging to the
same club have the same ratio and number of followers. With heterogeneous preferences, the
  21
    Social media clubs have no officers, no explicitly stipulated rules, and (potentially) fractional memberships.
  22
    Presumably, attention bartering is to thank for--according to some--the best viral video of 2019, which
can be accessed at https://twitter.com/indiemoms/status/1189587264654974980.


                                                       23
two statistics become strictly increasing in users' abilities, and hence likely more informative
(see Appendix A). Attention bartering increases the ratio of users with more organic followees
than followers, and vice versa for users with more organic followers than followees--as the
number of reciprocal followers increases, ratios converge to one in both cases. This finding
helps to explain why social media users attempt to emulate the equilibrium outcome, keeping
their ratios close to one.
       The informativeness of these signals can break down if users have heterogeneous attention
preferences, or heterogeneous monitoring costs. For example, if the disutility of attention
bartering is low enough, a low-ability user who values attention greatly can form a large
number of reciprocal following relationships, potentially making her number of followers and
ratio greater than those of a higher-ability user who values attention less. Furthermore, real-
life users may fail to monitor successfully that their reciprocal users have unfollowed them.
Consequently, a user who "follows-then-unfollows" unrelentingly may achieve statistics that
resemble those of a high-ability user.23

5.3      Platform strategy and market design
Social media platforms may be better off allowing--or even encouraging--attention bartering.
To see why, recall that a user who engages in attention bartering experiences higher utility
from using the platform, and hence she is more likely to remain active on the platform.
By remaining active, she then increases the attention utilities of users she follows either
organically or reciprocally, as well as the consumption utilities of her organic followers. This
reinforces the underlying network effect. Today, the business model of social media platforms
typically hinges upon monetizing user activity through advertising, and hence more or more
active users likely result in higher profits--at least in the short run.
       As social media platforms mature, they are likely to address some of the downsides of
attention bartering. Social media platforms regularly employ mechanisms aimed at increasing
the consumption utility of users. A side effect of these mechanisms is that they alleviate
the consumption utility penalty of attention bartering, thereby making it more compelling.
Examples include "lists" that allow users to consume content generated by a subset of the
users--even ones they do not follow, the option to "mute" content generated by a user
without unfollowing her, and algorithmically curated rankings that display content in non-
chronological order. However, because these features affect directly the attention utility users
receive, they may also affect adversely the production incentives of non-bartering users.
       Attention bartering is sustained in equilibrium because users choose to incur monitoring
costs to ensure that their reciprocal followers hold their end of their bargain. Increasing these
  23
    This is likely the reason why social media platform TikTok displays prominently the amount of "likes"
each user's content has garnered within her home page.



                                                   24
monitoring costs can decrease the amount of attention bartering taking place. Platforms
could make it harder to barter attention by ceasing to notify users who attempt to initiate
such relationships that their prospective reciprocal followers have followed them back. Post
the relationship formation period, platforms could also increase users' costs of finding out
whether other users follow them. For example, Twitter could remove the "Follows you" tag
(see Figure 1), and make it costlier--or impossible--to sift through users' lists of followers
and followees. To dissuade "follow-then-unfollow" strategies, platforms could impose a time
limit before being able to unfollow a user, and display prominently the number of unfollowed
users within each user's home page.

5.4        Social and individual welfare
The potentially negative effect of social media on individual welfare has received substantial
attention. Millions of people clearly enjoy using social media--or at least prefer them to their
next best alternatives (Pew Research Center, 2019). Social media can amplify individuals'
reach, diversify news consumption, facilitate participatory discourse, and influence public
opinion positively, but they may also increase political polarization, and serve as a vector for
misinformation (George and Waldfogel, 2003; Tufekci, 2017; Vosoughi, Roy and Aral, 2018;
Alatas et al., 2019; Allcott et al., 2020; Levy, 2020).
         In an interesting experiment that speaks to individual welfare, Allcott et al. (2020) find
that users who were paid not to use Facebook reported being happier, and used social media
less even after the experiment ended. They point out that the pattern they observe is
consistent with social media usage being an addictive good in the Becker and Murphy (1988)
sense. If it was the consumption of social media per se that made people unhappy, it would
be hard to understand why anyone used social media in the first place. But our "two kinds of
utilities" perspective fits the fact nicely--social media consumption makes people unhappy
(at at least not as happy if they consumed only what they truly wanted), but it is necessary
to gain the pleasurable attention that consumption obtains. It is interesting to note that
Becker himself viewed people as the most addictive "good."24


6         Conclusion
This paper offers an economic model that can explain otherwise puzzling patterns of con-
sumption and production on social media. In our model, attention bartering profoundly
affects the production and consumption of content on social media platforms: users of sim-
ilar abilities form clubs and actively produce content, and consume the content of members
of the same club--but they would have otherwise not produced any content. Social media
    24
         See https://freakonomics.com/2008/11/11/gary-becker-thinks-the-most-addictive-thing-is/.



                                                   25
looks quite different from regular media, and the difference is the possibility of attention
bargaining.
   We show empirically that many of the features of a prominent Twitter community are
explicable through an economic, attention bartering lens. The empirical findings that we
report are consistent with attention bartering taking place on #EconTwitter, and our model
predictions are largely borne out. In both our model and in our data, medium-ability users
are the keenest attention barterers, forming large fractions of their relationships with their
attention utilities in mind. On the other hand, low- and high-ability users follow others seem-
ingly to only increase their consumption utilities, albeit for very different reasons: low-ability
users would like to barter but lack the opportunities to do so, and bartering opportunities
abound for high-ability users--who have no incentive to barter.
   Attention bartering emerges because of the coexistence of production and consumption
incentives for users. As such, it can occur even in the absence of algorithms steering users to
form connections. In contrast to approaches that point to algorithms as the culprit, we offer
an incentives-based model of network formation, with algorithms playing no real role. This
is simplification of course, but much of the discussion about social media has focused on the
role played by algorithms, with relatively little attention paid to incentives. The degree to
which the main patterns in the #EconTwitter data are explicable only with an incentives
perspective suggests that a focus on algorithmic explanations is at the very least incomplete.
   In addition to offering a description of social media, our paper illustrates a core market
design challenge for would-be social media platform designers. Platforms may try to harness
attention bartering for good but reduce its negative effects. We lay out several market
design interventions that can potentially address the downsides of attention bartering; future
research could evaluate these mechanisms empirically, or propose other ways to dissuade
social media users from playing the ensuing "game of follows."




                                               26
References
Alatas, Avi, Arun Chandrasekhar, Markus Mobius, Benjamin A. Olken, and
  Cindy Paladines, "When celebrities speak: A nationwide twitter experiment promoting
  vaccination in indonesia," Working paper, 2019.

Allcott, Hunt and Matthew Gentzkow, "Social media and fake news in the 2016 elec-
  tion," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (2), 211­36.

  , Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, and Matthew Gentzkow, "The welfare effects
  of social media," American Economic Review, 2020, 110 (3), 629­76.

Bakshy, Eytan, Solomon Messing, and Lada A Adamic, "Exposure to ideologically
  diverse news and opinion on Facebook," Science, 2015, 348 (6239), 1130­1132.

Barab´
     asi, Albert-L´
                  aszl´
                      o and R´
                             eka Albert, "Emergence of scaling in random networks,"
  science, 1999, 286 (5439), 509­512.

Becker, Gary S and Kevin M Murphy, "A theory of rational addiction," Journal of
  political Economy, 1988, 96 (4), 675­700.

Berman, Ron and Zsolt Katona, "Curation algorithms and filter bubbles in social net-
  works," Marketing Science, 2020, 39 (2), 296­316.

Buchanan, James M, "An economic theory of clubs," Economica, 1965, 32 (125), 1­14.

Chandrasekhar, Arun G and Matthew O Jackson, "A network formation model based
  on subgraphs," Available at SSRN 2660381, 2021.

Currarini, Sergio, Matthew O Jackson, and Paolo Pin, "An economic model of friend-
  ship: Homophily, minorities, and segregation," Econometrica, 2009, 77 (4), 1003­1045.

Davis, James A, "Clustering and hierarchy in interpersonal relations: Testing two graph
  theoretical models on 742 sociomatrices," American Sociological Review, 1970, pp. 843­851.

George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel, "Who affects whom in daily newspaper markets?,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 2003, 111 (4), 765­784.

Haydon, Daniel T, Sarah Cleaveland, Louise H Taylor, and M Karen Lauren-
  son, "Identifying reservoirs of infection: a conceptual and practical challenge.," Emerging
  infectious diseases, 2002, 8 (12), 1468­1473.

Jackson, Matthew O, Social and economic networks, Princeton university press, 2010.



                                              27
Krueger, Alan B, "The economics of real superstars: The market for rock concerts in the
  material world," Journal of Labor Economics, 2005, 23 (1), 1­30.

Kwak, Haewoon, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue Moon, "What is Twitter,
  a social network or a news media?," in "Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web" AcM 2010, pp. 591­600.

Levy, Roee, "Social media, news consumption, and polarization: Evidence from a field
  experiment," Working Paper, 2020.

Myers, Seth A, Aneesh Sharma, Pankaj Gupta, and Jimmy Lin, "Information
  network or social network? The structure of the Twitter follow graph," in "Proceedings of
  the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web" 2014, pp. 493­498.

Overgoor, Jan, Austin Benson, and Johan Ugander, "Choosing to grow a graph:
  Modeling network formation as discrete choice," in "The World Wide Web Conference"
  2019, pp. 1409­1420.

Pennycook, Gordon, Ziv Epstein, Mohsen Mosleh, Antonio A Arechar, Dean
  Eckles, and David G Rand, "Shifting attention to accuracy can reduce misinformation
  online," Nature, 2021, pp. 1­6.

Pew Research Center, "Social media fact sheet," https://www.pewresearch.org/
  internet/fact-sheet/social-media, 2019.

Rosen, J Ben, "Existence and uniqueness of equilibrium points for concave n-person games,"
  Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 1965, pp. 520­534.

Rosen, Sherwin, "The economics of superstars," The American economic review, 1981, 71
  (5), 845­858.

Sadri, Arif Mohaimin, Samiul Hasan, Satish V Ukkusuri, and Juan Este-
  ban Suarez Lopez, "Analysis of social interaction network properties and growth on
  Twitter," Social Network Analysis and Mining, 2018, 8 (1), 1­13.

Silverman, Bernard W, Density estimation for statistics and data analysis, Vol. 26, CRC
  press, 1986.

Simon, Herbert, "Designing organizations for an information-rich world," Computers, com-
  munications, and the public interest., 1971, pp. 37­72.

Toubia, Olivier and Andrew T Stephen, "Intrinsic vs. image-related utility in social
  media: Why do people contribute content to twitter?," Marketing Science, 2013, 32 (3),
  368­392.

                                             28
Tufekci, Zeynep, Twitter and tear gas: The power and fragility of networked protest, Yale
  University Press, 2017.

Vicario, Michela Del, Gianna Vivaldo, Alessandro Bessi, Fabiana Zollo, Antonio
  Scala, Guido Caldarelli, and Walter Quattrociocchi, "Echo chambers: Emotional
  contagion and group polarization on facebook," Scientific reports, 2016, 6 (1), 1­12.

Vosoughi, Soroush, Deb Roy, and Sinan Aral, "The spread of true and false news
  online," Science, 2018, 359 (6380), 1146­1151.




                                             29
A     Heterogeneous consumption preferences
We extend the model of Section 3 to allow for horizontal consumption preferences. Our
modeling approach is to assume that a user's opportunity cost for following another user is
independently and identically drawn from a given distribution. As such, there is now both
a vertical component (user ability) and a horizontal component (idiosyncratic opportunity
costs) to consumption preferences. Users no longer share one universal ordering of abilities;
rather, each user has an individual preference ordering for the other platform users. It is
worth noting that high-ability users are more likely to rank higher in a user's ordering, as a
vertical component still exists. For ease of exposition, we fix the opportunity cost distribution
to be the uniform distribution on the unit interval in what follows.
    Because there is no universal ordering of user abilities, each user now decides on the
maximum consumption utility decrease that she is willing to incur in order to engage in a
reciprocal following relationship. We adjust the strategy notation, and denote by f  [0, 1]
the maximum consumption utility decrease that user  is willing to incur to reciprocally
follow another user. If f = 0, user  follows only organically, whereas if f > 0, user  is
willing to engage in reciprocal relationships.

A.1    Attention bartering is impossible
When attention bartering is not possible, reciprocal following relationships cannot be sus-
tained. There exists a unique equilibrium f  , where f = 0 for all users. In this equilibrium,

only organic followers exist. The probability that a user  will organically follow a user x is
Pr(q0  x) = x. User  follows

                                                        1
                                                                     1
                                        n (f  ) =           x dx =                           (A1)
                                                    0                2

users, and obtains consumption utility
                                1                                            1
                                                                                 x2     1
                U (f  ) =           E [x - q0 |q0  x] Pr(q0  x)dx =                 da = ,   (A2)
                            0                                            0       2      6

where E [x - q0 |q0  x] is the expected consumption utility obtained conditional on a user
with ability x being followed organically. Similarly, user  attracts
                                                        1
                                        m (f  ) =            dx =                            (A3)
                                                    0

followers, from whom she obtains attention utility I (f  ) = I ().




                                                    30
A.2     Attention bartering is possible
When attention bartering is possible, user  may increase her threshold f , thereby trading
off a decrease in her consumption utility for an increase in her attention utility.
    By symmetry, users of the same ability will choose the same strategy in any equilibrium--
recall that abilities are uniformly distributed on the unit interval. Consider a user , and a
profile f = (f , f- ). Under this profile, user  has a number of reciprocal followers equal to

                         1
          r (f ) =           (1 - )(1 - x) Pr(x + fa > q0 |x < q0 ) Pr( + fx > q0 | < q0 )dx
                     0
                         1
                                                              f                     fx
                 =           (1 - )(1 - x) min                   , 1 min               , 1 dx.                          (A4)
                     0                                       1-x                   1-
                                                            ra,x (f )

It is worth examining the terms of Equation (A4). Consider some ability level x, and observe
that user  is followed organically by an  fraction of users of any ability level, including
users with ability x. Amongst the remaining 1 -  users that do not follow her, user  follows
a fraction x organically herself, leaving a fraction (1 - )(1 - x) to be candidates for recip-
                                                                                                       f               fx
rocal following. Amongst these potential relationships, a fraction min                                1-x , 1   min   1- , 1
materializes for follow strategies fa , fx , giving a total of ra,x (f ).
                                                                        1
    Under the profile f , user  follows n (f ) =                        2   + r (f ) users, and is followed by m (f ) =
 + r (f ) users, and obtains total utility

                         1                                                                 1
               1
   V (f ) =      +           r,x (f )E [x - q0 |q0 - f  x  q0 ]dx -c                           r,x (f )dx + I  + r (f )
               6     0                                                                 0
                                 consumption utility decrease
                                                                                                                        (A5)
                         1                              1
            1                           f
           =  -              r,x (f )      dx - c           r,x (f )dx + I  + r (f )                                    (A6)
            6        0                   2          0
            1        f
           = -          + c r (f ) + I  + r (f )                                                                        (A7)
            6         2

Because V (f , f- ) is concave in f for any f- , a unique equilibrium exists (Rosen, 1965).
Because attention utility is a concave increasing function, lower-ability users have stronger
incentives to increase their attention utility, and will tolerate larger consumption utility
decreases in equilibrium. As such,  >  implies f < f .
                                                    


A.3     Illustration of market equilibrium
Figure 6 illustrates the market equilibrium with and without attention bartering, in a platform
where users are characterized by heterogeneous consumption preferences (as described in the


                                                                  31
beginning of this section). Our goal is to highlight the differences between the effects of
attention bartering in the homogeneous and the heterogeneous consumption preferences case.


                   Figure 6: Following, consumption, and attention with heterogeneous user preferences.

                                                          (a) Hidden follower information.

                       1                                                                 1
                                                                                                         users with higher ability
                                 number of followers
 Number of followers




                                                                                                       obtain higher attention utility
                                 analogous to ability




                                                                               Utility
                                                                                         uc

                       0                                                                 0
                           0                                          1                       0                                          1
                                          User ability                                                          User ability 


                                                          (b) Public follower information.

                       1                                                                 1
 Number of followers




                               all users engage in
                                                                                              lower-quality users obtain
                               attention bartering
                                                                                                less consumption utility
                                                                               Utility




                                                                                         uc

                       0                                                                 0
                           0                                          1                       0                                          1
                                          User ability                                                          User ability 



Notes: This figure plots users' followers, consumption utilities, and attention utilities, with and without
follower information. It illustrates the case of uniformly distributed valuations on the unit interval and
I (x) = log(1 + x) and c = 0.2. In all panels, the yellow-shaded area depicts the number of organic followers,
the blue-shaded area depicts the number of reciprocal followers, the green shaded-area depicts consumption
utility, and the red shaded area depicts attention utility. Panel 6a plots the users' followers (left) and utilities
(right) in a market with hidden follower information. Only organic followers exist, and users are followed by a
number of followers commensurate to their ability. Every user obtains both consumption and attention utility:
all users obtain the same consumption utility, but attention utility is commensurate to their abilities. Panel 6b
plots the users' followers (left) and utilities (right) in a market with public follower information. Reciprocal
following now emerges, and users trade off decreases in consumption utility for increases in attention utility.
Figure 7 reports additional quantities for the attention bartering equilibrium.




                                                                          32
    In Figure 6a, we illustrate the equilibrium when attention bartering is not possible, for
the case of I (x) = log (1+ x) and c = 0.2. Introducing heterogeneous consumption preferences
"smooths out" following relationships, as each user attracts a followers in accordance to her
ability. This is in contrast to the homogeneous preferences case, where the number of followers
is a step function (see Figure 2a).
    The equilibrium when attention bartering is possible is depicted in Figure 6b. In this
simulation, we set the attention utility to I (x) = log(1 + x), and the monitoring cost to
c = 0.2. In the left panel, we observe that users find it utility-improving to engage in
reciprocal following--except users of the highest ability,  = 1, who are already followed
by every user of the platform. In the right panel, we plot the corresponding utilities. All
users obtain lower consumption utility, because they follow users of abilities less than their
opportunity cost, and they incur monitoring costs to maintain the reciprocal relationships.
Lower-ability users engage in reciprocation most intensely: these users reciprocally follow
higher-ability users, and hence obtain less consumption utility, but also the highest attention
utility increase.

        Figure 7: Followers, followees, and ratios when attention bartering is possible


    (a) Homogeneous consumption preferences                       (b) Heterogeneous consumption preferences

    2                                                             2                                  ratio
                                                 ratio




                                               followers                                           followers
    1                                                             1


                                                                                                   followees
                                            followees

    0                                                             0
        0 q5 q4 q3    q2    q1            q0             1            0                                      1
                       User ability                                               User ability 

Notes: This figure plots network statistics in the equilibrium of a platform where attention bartering is
possible. Panel 7a shows the number of followees (dotted green line), the number of followers (solid red line),
and the follower-to-followee ratio (two-dash blue line) for each user ability , when consumption preferences
are homogeneous, and with all other parameters set as in in Figure 2. Panel 7b shows the same quantities
when consumption preferences are heterogeneous, and with all other parameters set as in in Figure 6.




                                                             33
B                        Additional empirical results
B.1                       Follower, followee, and ratio distributions of all users
Figure 8 reports the distributions of followers, followees, and follower-to-followee ratios of
users in the entire sample. For each outcome, we report a Gaussian kernel density estimate
of its distribution with the bandwidth selected using Silverman's rule of thumb (Silverman,
1986), as well as the estimated median (solid red vertical line) and the mean (dashed red
vertical line).
                       Compared to the average #EconTwitter user, Twitter users in our data have on average
fewer followers and followees, and lower ratios: the median user in the entire data set has
266 followers, 524 followees, and a ratio equal to 0.52. Only 25.1% of the users have ratio
higher than one in the entire sample, and the distribution of ratios exhibits a noticeable kink
at the unit ratio--this is consistent with Proposition 4 (i). It is worth noting that the effects
of Twitters followee limits are easily discernible in the kinks of the middle facet.

                              Figure 8: Distributions of followers, followees, and ratios of all users

                        0.6
                        0.4                                                                             (a)
                                                                                                    followers
                        0.2
 Probability density




                        0.0

                       0.75
                       0.50                                                                             (b)
                                                                                                    followees
                       0.25
                       0.00

                       0.75
                                                                                                       (c)
                       0.50                                                                     follower / followee
                       0.25                                                                           ratio
                       0.00
                                10-2   10-1     100     101     102     103     104    105

Notes: This figure reports kernel density estimates of the probability density function of the distributions of
followers, followees, and follower-to-followee ratios in the entire data. For each facet, the vertical red lines
depict the median (solid) and the mean (dashed) of the corresponding distribution, and the kernel bandwidth
is selected using Silverman's rule of thumb (Silverman, 1986). See Figure 3 for density estimates of the same
statistics for #EconTwitter users.




                                                                34
B.2        More details on the empirical estimates of Figure 4

                                                                 Figure 9: #EconTwitter estimates of network statistics.

                                                                                                                                               #EconTwitter estimates
 60000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

 40000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                 (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               followers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q


 20000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q               q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                   q           q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q q q             q
                                                                                                                 q q           q q q q
                                                                                                         q q q q     q q q q q
                                                                             q q q q q q q q q q q q q q
                                                                 q q q q q q
                                     q q q q q q q q q q q q q q

     0       q q q q q q q q q q q q




  1600                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q q                         q                       q

  1400                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q           q q q                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                               q q q               q                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q           q               q                   q
                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                             q                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                             q               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       q q             q                                                                 q                               q                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                     q       q           q                           q
                                                                                                         q               q q                                                               q                             q
                                                                                                                                   q                                           q q                                                                                               q                                                                                                                           q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               followees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                       q

  1200       q q
                             q           q q
                                                             q
                                                                 q

                                                                     q q
                                                                             q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                                 q q         q
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                   q           q
                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q       q q



                                                                                             q
                                     q                                               q
                                 q                   q
                         q                       q
                                                         q

  1000               q




   200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q


   150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (c)
   100                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q         follower / followee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ratio
      50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q q q q q q                   q
                                                                                                                                                 q q q q q q q q q
                                                                                                                 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q

       0     q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q
                                                                       q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q




   600                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                 q           q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                           q                               q q                     q q                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                               q                           q       q                                                 q                           q q                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q

   500                                                                                                                                                                         q                           q                                                 q       q                               q
                                                                                                         q                         q q                             q                                                     q       q           q q                                             q                           q
                                                                                                                         q q                       q           q                       q           q                                                                                 q
                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                           q                   q                           q                   q
                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                     q         q
                                                                                                                                           q                                                                   q             q                                                   q                               q q                 q           q


                                             q
                                                                     q
                                                                         q
                                                                             q
                                                                                 q

                                                                                         q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                        (d)
   400                           q
                                     q
                                         q

                                                     q
                                                         q
                                                             q q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             reciprocators
                 q                               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                             q


   300               q
                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q

   200
             q
                 q       q       q
                             q           q q
                     q
                                     q           q       q
                                                     q       q q         q q             q
                                                                     q               q       q
                                                                                 q

    0.4
                                                                                                 q           q
                                                                                                     q q         q q
                                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                       q q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                       q

                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                       q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (e)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         reciprocator / follower
    0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q       q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q q

    0.0
   0.45                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q q             q                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q                   q           q
                                                                                                                                                   q       q       q                                                   q q
                                                                                                                           q           q       q                                                   q q         q             q q                 q               q q                                 q       q
                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                                                                                                 q

   0.40                                                                                                                            q       q                                                                       q                                     q q                 q q                 q
                                                                                                                     q q                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q q

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (f)
                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                     q                       q q q               q
                                                                         q               q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                             q       q
                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q

   0.35
                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                 q q q


                                 q
                                     q
                                         q
                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q                                                     reciprocator / followee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q

   0.30      q
                 q
                     q
                         q
                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                        ratio
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q

   0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q




            0                                                                                        25                                                                                                50                                                                                                75                                                                                              100
                                                                                                                                                                           User ability
Notes: This figure reports unscaled #EconTwitter estimates of various network statistics, as a function of
user ability. For more details on the construction of the estimates, see the description of Figure 4.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35
B.3     Ability is not highly correlated with tenure
One alternative explanation for the patterns we observe in the #EconTwitter data can be
found with preferential attachment. Namely, if more able users join the platform earlier, then
these users would attract more followers--ability is not the reason for attracting followers,
but time of entry is. Furthermore, these users may also follow more able users on average
because those users were active at the time of relationship formation.
    Table 1 examines the relation of tenure, ability, and users' follower-to-followee ratios.
Tenure is positively correlated with ability and with follower-to-followee ratios, but it only
explains about 4% of the variability in both quantities. In contrast, user ability is about eight
times more predictive of a users' follower-to-followee ratio. The lack of predictive power of
user tenure suggests that the preferential attachment explanation is not strongly supported
in our data.
             Table 1: The relation of tenure, ability, and follower-to-followee ratio.


                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                               Ability (percentile)           Follower/followee Ratio
                                                         (1)                    (2)                 (3)
 Tenure (days)                                        0.006                  0.0003
                                                      (0.0001)              (0.00001)

 Ability (percentile)                                                                            0.025
                                                                                                 (0.0001)

 Constant                                            33.461                  0.777               0.267
                                                      (0.375)                (0.016)             (0.008)

 Observations                                         55,231                  55,231             55,231
 R2                                                   0.041                   0.042               0.344
 Adjusted R2                                          0.041                   0.042               0.344
 Residual Std. Error (df = 55229)                     28.271                  1.184               0.980
 F Statistic (df = 1; 55229)                       2,338.288               2,436.529          28,907.850
Notes: This table reports regressions where the dependent variable is ability (columne 1) and follower-to-
followee ratio (columns 2 and 3). The independent variables are users' tenure on the platform, and users'
abilities. For more details on the definition of user ability, see Section 4.3 Significance indicators: p  0.1 : ,
p  0.05 : , p  0.01 : , and p  .001 :   .




                                                       36
