                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE INSURANCE VALUE OF FINANCIAL AID

                                         Kristy Fan
                                       Tyler J. Fisher
                                     Andrew A. Samwick

                                     Working Paper 28669
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28669


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Martin Boyer, Scott Carrell, Elizabeth Cascio, Susan Dynarski, Glenn Harrison, Jason
Houle, Annamaria Lusardi, Jonathan Meer, Jonathan Skinner, and seminar participants at the
Quantitative Society for Pensions and Savings Summer Workshop, the Boulder Summer
Conference on Consumer Financial Decision Making, the Society of Labor Economists annual
meeting, the Association for Education Finance and Policy annual conference, the CEAR-RSI
Household Finance Workshop, the American Economics Association annual meeting,
Middlebury College, and Southern Methodist University for helpful comments. We are grateful
to Will Zhou, Raymond Chen, Madison Minsk, Sarah Hong, and Amy Hu for research assistance;
to John Hudson for computational assistance; and to the James O. Freedman Presidential Scholars
program and the Nancy P. Marion Academic Enrichment Fund at Dartmouth College for
financial support. Any errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kristy Fan, Tyler J. Fisher, and Andrew A. Samwick. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Insurance Value of Financial Aid
Kristy Fan, Tyler J. Fisher, and Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 28669
April 2021
JEL No. D15,G52,I22

                                           ABSTRACT

Financial aid programs enable students from families with fewer financial resources to pay less to
attend college than other students from families with greater financial resources. When income is
uncertain, a means-tested financial aid formula that requires more of an Expected Family
Contribution (EFC) when income and assets are high and less of an EFC when income and assets
are low provides insurance against that uncertainty. Using a stochastic, life-cycle model of
consumption and labor supply, we show that the insurance value of financial aid is substantial.
Across a range of parameterizations, we calculate that financial aid would have to increase by
enough to reduce the net cost of attendance by 30 to 80 percent to compensate families for the
loss of the income- and asset-contingent elements of the current formula. This compensating
variation is net of the negative welfare consequences of the disincentives to work and save
inherent in the means-testing of financial aid. Replacing just the "financial aid tax" on assets with
a lump sum would also reduce welfare.

Kristy Fan                                        Andrew A. Samwick
Google, LLC                                       6106 Rockefeller Hall
17203 Hansom Way                                  Department of Economics
Malta, NY 12020                                   Dartmouth College
kristyfan07@gmail.com                             Hanover, NH 03755-3514
                                                  and NBER
Tyler J. Fisher                                   andrew.samwick@dartmouth.edu
Dartmouth College
26 Tamara Court
Melville, NY 11747
Tyler.J.Fisher.17@dartmouth.edu
1       Introduction
Attending college is an important pathway to higher earnings. Unconditional es-
timates of the gap in median earnings between year-round, full-time workers with
bachelor's degrees and those with only high school diplomas are about 40 percent for
both men and women. Carneiro, Heckman and Vytlacil (2011) estimate the marginal
returns to a year of college and find an earnings premium of 8 percent per year of
college.1
     The high returns to college have made the financing of college an important topic
for both academic research and public policy over the last several decades. High re-
turns to college have been accompanied by high and rising costs of college attendance.
Launched as part of the Great Society programs of the 1960s, the federal financial aid
system has grown in scale and complexity to help ever more students from low- and
middle-income families afford college and the access to higher earnings that college
can provide. Most states and institutions of higher education also operate financial
aid programs. As shown in recent surveys by Fidelity Investments (2018), how to
pay for college is often a savings decision that parents begin before their child enters
pre-school.
     Financial aid programs enable students from families with fewer financial resources
to pay less to attend college than other students from families with greater financial re-
sources. As implemented through both federal and institutional formulas, the amount
of financial aid a student receives declines with both the income and assets of his or her
family at the time of enrollment and is recalculated for every subsequent school year.
The inclusion of family assets in the formulas to determine a student's "Expected
Family Contribution" (EFC) toward college expenses has attracted considerable at-
tention from economists, who have highlighted the resulting disincentive for families
to save for college expenses. The concept of the "financial aid tax" dates back to
Case and McPherson (1986), and Edlin (1993) provided an early, readable discussion
of the financial aid tax. Empirically, Feldstein (1995) estimated a large crowding out
of saving due to this tax, spawning a small literature testing the robustness of those
    1
    The unconditional estimates are based on the tabulations of person income for 2018 in the
Current Population Survey, 2019 Annual Social and Economic Supplement, by U.S. Census Bureau
(2019). See Barrow and Malamud (2015) for a recent review of estimates of the returns to college.




                                               1
initial results.2
    Omitted from this literature is the recognition that the saving disincentives due
to the financial aid tax comprise only the "incentives" side of a standard incentives-
insurance tradeoff. In general, providing insurance against risks beyond a family's
control will distort incentives along margins that the family can control. When income
is uncertain, a financial aid formula that requires more of an EFC when income and
assets are high and less of an EFC when income and assets are low provides insurance
against that uncertainty. The incentives-insurance tradeoff is well understood in the
literature on optimal redistributive taxation.3 What has not yet been recognized is
that, as redistributive mechanisms based on assets and income, an analogous tradeoff
is present in financial aid formulas.
    The contribution of our paper is to estimate the insurance value of financial aid
using a stochastic, life-cycle model of consumption and labor supply in which families
save in anticipation of a planned retirement, uncertain income, and the college edu-
cation of their children.4 The main results show that the insurance value of financial
aid is substantial. We calculate the insurance value of financial aid by comparing
lifetime expected utility under two financial aid systems ­ one in which there is a
stylized version of the current financial aid formula and one in which colleges give aid
by simply discounting their tuition, regardless of a family's income or assets. This
comparison is analogous to substituting a revenue-equivalent lump-sum tax for a dis-
tortionary tax, which under certainty would be expected to make the family better
off. However, given sufficient income uncertainty and risk aversion, the substitution
may lower welfare by removing the insurance value of financial aid. Across a range of
   2
     The implicit tax on assets also figures prominently into practitioner guidance on saving for
college. See, for example, Onink (2014).
   3
     See Eaton and Rosen (1980) and Varian (1980) for early analyses of this tradeoff in optimal
income tax systems. Using variation in tax and transfer systems across U.S. states, Grant et al.
(2010) show that state-level measures of redistributive taxation correlate negatively with the stan-
dard deviation of the within-state consumption distribution, consistent with an insurance effect of
redistributive taxation. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Hoynes and Luttmer (2011)
show that while the redistributive value of state tax-and-transfer programs declines sharply with
income, the insurance value of these programs is increasing in income.
   4
     In this respect, the analysis is similar to prior papers that have examined the insurance aspects
of other tax and expenditure policies. See Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995) for precaution-
ary saving and social insurance, Engen and Gruber (2001) regarding precautionary saving and the
unemployment insurance system, and more recent papers by Rostam-Afschar and Yao (2014) on pre-
cautionary saving and progressive taxation, Athreya, Reilly and Simpson (2014) on the insurance
value of the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Stepner (2019) on the insurance value of redistributive
taxes and transfers, focusing on risks of illness and layoff.


                                                  2
parameterizations, we calculate that financial aid would have to increase by enough
to reduce the net cost of attendance by 30 - 80 percent to compensate families for the
loss of the income- and asset-contingent elements of the current formula. For parents
facing the income process representative of college graduates, a dollar of financial aid
delivered through the current formula is worth $1.44 in lump-sum tuition discounts.
Further, this compensating variation is net of the negative welfare consequences of
the disincentives to work and save inherent in the means-testing of financial aid.
     Similar results obtain when we isolate the incentives-insurance tradeoff that results
from the inclusion of assets in the financial aid formula. For the same college-educated
family discussed above, with the asset tax removed but the treatment of income the
same, the average EFC falls by 44 percent. Replacing the contribution from assets
with a fixed fee that keeps the family at the same lifetime expected utility requires 15
percent more aid on average. That the family needs to be provided with more aid on
average when aid is not linked to assets demonstrates that assets provide incremental
insurance beyond that of current income and that the insurance value of the including
assets in the formula outweighs the welfare loss due to the disincentives to save. In
a life cycle model, having high assets indicates multiple years of fortunate income
draws, and families are made better off by a financial aid formula that offers them
less aid in these scenarios if that permits more aid to be provided in the opposite
scenarios, when a given year of possibly high income has been preceded by multiple
years of less fortunate income draws.
     The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the key
features of the financial aid system and briefly reviews the literature on the relation-
ship between financial aid and household saving. Section 3 develops the stochastic
life-cycle model of consumption and labor supply that will be used to simulate work
and saving decisions and thus measure the insurance value of financial aid. The main
results on the insurance value of financial aid are presented in Section 4, along with
sensitivity analyses. We consider the elimination of the asset tax in Section 5. Section
6 discusses directions for further research, and Section 7 concludes.


2     The Financial Aid Tax
Most need-based financial aid is governed by either of two formulas: a "Federal
Methodology" set by Congress that determines eligibility for federal financial aid,

                                            3
as well as institutional aid at some colleges, and an "Institutional Methodology" set
by the College Scholarship Service that is used by many selective colleges and uni-
versities to determine eligibility for institutionally provided aid. While both require
information on income and assets, they differ principally in that the Institutional
Methodology considers more sources of income, assets (including home equity), and
possible deductions.5 The key omission from both formulas is assets held in retire-
ment accounts like 401(k) plans and Individual Retirement Accounts. Our analysis
abstracts from this portfolio choice, classifying all assets as covered by the formula to
avoid the additional complexity. We also analyze an alternative framework in which
no assets are covered by the formula.
     Aid awarded under the Federal Methodology is based on information reported
on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The FAFSA combines
information on family structure, income, and assets to generate the Expected Family
Contribution (EFC), and financial need is calculated by subtracting the EFC from
the student's cost of attendance at a given school (to which we refer as tuition). The
components of the formula are presented in the EFC Guide published each year and
form the basis of the algorithm used in this paper to calculate financial aid.6 Students
who are unmarried and sufficiently young apply as dependents of their parents. Those
who are older, married, veterans, or have dependents of their own apply under the
more favorable status of independent students. As our focus is the parents' labor
supply and saving decisions, we consider students as dependents and simplify the
model by zeroing out the student's contributions. We further simplify the modeling
of financial aid by using the formula in the Federal Methodology for combining assets
and income to calculate the EFC but a fully general measure of assets and income
that is more consistent with the Institutional Methodology.7
     Following the Federal Methodology, the EFC is obtained by considering a family's
"Adjusted Available Income," (AAI) which is the sum of "Available Income" (AI)
   5
      See National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators (2017) for background on
both methodologies and a discussion of their differences.
    6
      The methodology for determining the EFC is found in Part F of Title IV of the Higher Education
Act of 1965 (Public Law 89-329), as amended, and governs awards for federal Pell grants, subsidized
Stafford loans, Perkins loans, federal work-study programs, and other opportunities. The latest
and archived EFC Guide publications are available at https://fsapartners.ed.gov/knowledge-center/
library.
    7
      In the absence of this simplification, each different type of asset in the formula would necessitate
both a state variable and a choice variable in the model below. Other alternatives are possible. For
example, all assets could be treated as 529 plan assets that accumulate tax free.


                                                    4
and the "Contribution from Assets" (CA), defined as follows:

                         AI = Adjusted Gross Income -
                                 (Federal Income Tax Paid +
                                 State and Other Tax Allowance +
                                                                                                 (1)
                                 Social Security Tax Allowance +
                                 Income Protection Allowance +
                                 Employment Expense Allowance)

               CA = Max (0, 0.12 · (Assets - Asset Protection Allowance))                        (2)


                                    AAI = j  CA + k  AI                                          (3)

    Available Income begins with the parents' adjusted gross income (AGI) from their
tax return and subtracts allowances based on other payments that a family would
make in order to earn that income. As implemented below, AGI is just the sum
of labor income and asset income, and federal income taxes paid are approximated
by a simplified version of the federal tax schedule based on that income. Due to
the timing of the filing of taxes and financial aid applications, the EFC is based on
income from two years prior to the filing. Below, we use the EFC Guide for the 2018
- 2019 academic year and thus income tax schedules from 2016. Marginal tax rates
under this schedule range from 10 percent at very low levels of income to 39.6 percent
at the highest income levels. Other allowances are made for State and Other Taxes,
Social Security Taxes, Employment Expenses, and Income Protection. Each of these
other allowances is as specified in the EFC Guide, with a state tax allowance of 4.5
percent chosen to reflect the middle of the distribution of state tax rates.8
    The Contribution from Assets is zero if assets do not exceed the Asset Protection
Allowance specified in the EFC Guide and 12 percent of any excess of assets over that
allowance otherwise. These two components are added together in Equation (3) to
obtain AAI. (The parameters j and k are equal to 1 in practice but will be altered in
   8
     In 2016, payroll taxes of 7.65 percent were levied on pre-tax labor income up to a maximum
taxable earnings of $118,500, with a 1.45 percent tax solely for Medicare on income above that limit.
We assume that the earnings come from employment, rather than self-employment, and thus impose
only the employee's share of the payroll tax.



                                                 5
the simulations below when comparing welfare across different financial aid formulas.
Likewise, the parameter F in the next equation is zero in practice.) Given AAI, the
EFC is calculated (in 2018 - 2019) as:

                EF C = 0.22 · M in (16, 400, M ax (AAI, -3, 409)) +
                            0.25 · M ax (0, M in (AAI, 20, 500) - 16, 400) +
                            0.29 · M ax (0, M in (AAI, 24, 700) - 20, 500) +
                                                                                                (4)
                            0.34 · M ax (0, M in (AAI, 28, 900) - 24, 700) +
                            0.40 · M ax (0, M in (AAI, 33, 100) - 28, 900) +
                            0.47 · M ax (0, AAI - 33, 100) + F
    The EFC is a piecewise-linear spline in AAI with marginal conversion rates that
increase progressively from 22 to 47 percent.9 Two aspects of these formulas are
noteworthy. First, the top marginal conversion rate of 0.47 is reached at a fairly low
level of AAI, or $33,100. Second, while the marginal conversion rates of 12 percent
in Equation (2) and 22 to 47 percent in Equation (4) have stayed the same over
the years, the various nominal amounts in Equation (4) and the dollar values in
the allowances in Equations (1) and (2) have increased over time for inflation. The
modeling framework below fixes these dollar values in real terms based on the 2018 -
2019 formula.10
    Figure 1 shows a contour plot of assets and earnings (labor income) that generate
given EFCs, ranging from $1,000 up to $73,250, which is the full cost of attendance
used in the simulations below. For illustrative purposes, these calculations use the
allowances for a married couple with a 2:1 ratio of earnings between the spouses, one
child in college, and the age of the older parent being 47 years when the child matric-
   9
      The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 (Public Law 116-260), changed the the terminology
for this quantity from "Expected Family Contribution" to "Student Aid Index," or SAI, beginning
with the 2023-2024 academic year, to underscore that the calculation is an index of ability to pay
rather than a measure of what the family will wind up paying. As noted in National Association of
Student Financial Aid Administrators (2021), the legislation made some other simplifications to the
formula, but none of these changes are critical for the analysis below.
   10
      The analysis below also incorporates the Simplified Needs Analysis in the Federal Methodology.
A dependent student qualifies for this formula if anyone in the household receives means-tested
assistance, such as Medicaid or Supplemental Security Income. An asset limit of $2,000 ($3,000)
is used for single (married) parents in the modeling framework below. For families that meet
this criterion, the EFC is zero (bypassing Equation (4)) if income is less than $25,000, and the
contribution from assets is zero (bypassing Equation (2)) if income is between $25,000 and $50,000.



                                                 6
ulates. The figure shows that the EFC is monotonically increasing in both assets and
earnings. The intercepts on the horizontal (vertical) axis show the earnings (asset)
levels associated with the contour's EFC assuming that the family's asset (earnings)
level is zero. The EFC remains at zero for combinations of earnings and assets toward
the lower left corner of the figure that do not exceed the various allowances. At a
college using the Federal Methodology to allocate aid, any EFC that falls below the
costs of attendance would make the student eligible for financial aid, potentially up
to the difference between those costs and the EFC if the institution committed to
meet full demonstrated need. For the highest values of earnings and assets toward
the upper right corner of the figure, the EFCs exceed the costs of attendance even at
the most expensive colleges, resulting in no financial aid.11
    Figure 2 presents the implied marginal tax rates on earnings inherent in the EFC
amounts in Figure 1. The slope of each curve is the incremental change in the EFC
for an incremental change in earnings, holding the asset level constant at the value
specified in the legend. At low levels of earnings and assets, at which the EFC is
zero, the implied marginal tax rates are also zero. Once EFCs become positive, the
implied marginal tax rate on earnings can be as high as 40 percent. The key factors
driving the implied marginal tax rate are the marginal conversion rates of AAI to
EFC in Equation (4), which rise with earnings up to 0.47, and the income sensitivity
of the allowances in Equation (1). The latter include state income taxes (assumed to
be proportional to income), payroll taxes (which fall from 7.65 to 1.45 percent at the
maximum taxable earnings level), and federal income taxes (which are progressive
and thus rise with earnings). At higher earnings levels, where the allowances might
have a combined sensitivity to income of about 40 percent, the slopes of the curves
would be 0.47 · (1 - 0.4) = 0.282, or about 28 percent. Higher or lower rates may
occur at lower earnings levels for which the the income sensitivity of the allowances
may be lower but the marginal conversion rates are also lower.12
  11
      The EFC is divided by the number of children in college, so with more children in college (and
adjusting for the impact of more children on the income allowance) there would be the possibility
of financial aid even at these earnings and asset levels.
   12
      These implied marginal tax rates are in addition to the marginal income tax rates from the
payroll tax, federal income taxes, and state income taxes, implying potentially high combined tax
rates on labor income during the years in which parents have children in college. This possibility
is noted but not explored in Feldstein (1995). Using cross-sectional regressions of actual financial
aid awards, Dick and Edlin (1997) estimate lower income-sensitivity of financial aid than these
theoretical predictions, noting that actual awards are typically not as progressive as the formulas
imply.


                                                 7
    Figure 3 shows the implied marginal tax rates on assets inherent in the EFC
formula. Analogous to Figure 2, each curve in Figure 3 holds earnings constant at
the value specified in the legend and then calculates the incremental change in the
EFC for an incremental change in assets. Over most of the figure, the implied marginal
tax rate on assets is about 6.6 percent. This "asset tax" comes from two sources. The
first is in Equations (2) and (4), in which 12 percent of assets are available and are
converted at rates up to 47 percent: 0.47 · 0.12 = 0.0564.13 The second is in Equations
(1) and (4), in which the assets generate income, net of taxes on that income at the
federal and state levels, and then are converted at rates up to 47 percent. With a 3
percent rate of return and a 30 percent combined marginal income tax rate on asset
income, this would yield an additional 0.47 · 0.03 · (1 - 0.3) = 0.0099. Combining
these two components yields 6.6 percent.14
    The implied marginal tax rate of 6.6 percent applies in each successive year of
college attendance to the remaining assets. Thus, a dollar of assets at the start of
college is reduced by 0.066 [1 + (1 - 0.066) + (1 - 0.066)2 + (1 - 0.066)3 ] = 0.239, or
about 24 percent over four years in college. Thus, the financial aid formula levies a
substantial tax on assets over a broad range of earnings and asset combinations.15
    These implied marginal tax rates on assets are the impetus for the empirical
literature that has estimated whether households respond to the asset tax by saving
less. The literature starts with Feldstein (1995), who estimated a reduction of about
50 percent in asset accumulation due to the financial aid tax. His estimation sample
was a cross-section of 161 households in the Survey of Consumer Finances 1986. Long
(2004) argues that a household's estimate of the implicit tax on assets that would
discourage saving is more complicated than suggested in Feldstein (1995), noting that
it depends on factors such as the likelihood of children going to college, the expected
cost of college (since the marginal tax rate is zero if the EFC exceeds the cost of
attendance), and the possibility that the college does not meet all need, in which case
an additional dollar of assets will reduce unmet need rather than financial aid. His
  13
     The Institutional Methodology assesses assets at rates between 3 and 5 percent. See National
Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators (2017).
  14
     That the curves in Figures 2 and 3 are nearly linear and parallel indicates why the contours in
Figure 1 are also nearly parallel, with a slope given by the ratio of the slope of the earnings curves
to that of the asset curves.
  15
     These estimates for the asset tax are broadly consistent with those of Dick and Edlin (1997),
who estimated marginal asset tax rates of up to 30 percent using cross-sectional data from the 1987
National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey.



                                                  8
methodology generates smaller taxes at the margin and no correlation between those
marginal tax rates and asset accumulation. Later studies by Monks (2004) using the
National Longitudinal Study of Youth and Reyes (2008) using the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics find weak evidence consistent with lower asset accumulation, but
at magnitudes much less than Feldstein (1995).16
    The implied marginal tax rates on both earnings and assets in Figures 2 and 3
are also the source of the insurance value of financial aid. As was noted by Eaton
and Rosen (1980), even a simple proportional income tax in which the proceeds
are redistributed as a lump sum will raise welfare when income is uncertain. As
with the prior literature on the disincentive effects of the asset tax, the degree of
insurance in the financial aid formula depends on whether the college commits to
provide financial aid equal to the difference between the costs of attendance and the
EFC. This is assumed in the analysis below and is true of the most well funded colleges
and universities, for which the analysis in general is most applicable because these
institutions often have the highest cost of attendance and the most generous financial
aid programs. However, this issue is not as critical for the insurance value of financial
aid as it is for the disincentives of the asset tax. Even if there may be some income
or asset ranges over which an institution may not boost financial aid dollar-for-dollar
with demonstrated need, generating lower marginal tax rates than in Figures 2 and
3, the insurance provided on the inframarginal need is still present. We demonstrate
this point in our sensitivity analysis by presenting results under the assumption that
the college provides aid equal to only 80 or 90 percent of the difference between the
costs of attendance and the EFC.
  16
     The implicit tax on earnings in the financial aid formula was noted by Case and McPherson
(1986) but has received less consideration to date as a source of economic distortions. Handwerker
(2011) uses the Health and Retirement Study to show that parents delay retirement while paying
for a child's college education. She finds little evidence that paying for a child's education has any
impact on work intensity for those who are working. In more recent work, Braga and Malkova (2020)
show that mothers of college-age children decreased their annual hours of work after the start of a
generous merit aid program, while fathers did not adjust their labor supply. The response comes
from reductions in hours rather than changes in employment status, and there is no adjustment for
fathers or for mothers of children who did not attend college. Note, however, that because this is a
merit aid program, the response is an income effect rather than a reaction to the financial aid tax
studied here.




                                                  9
3     Stochastic Life-Cycle Model of Consumption and
      Labor Supply
This section presents a stochastic, life-cycle model of consumption and labor supply
in which the traditional retirement motive for saving is augmented by a precautionary
motive to save against income uncertainty and a potential need to pre-fund a child's
college education. We begin by specifying the model fully, followed by a discussion of
the solution method and welfare comparisons, and conclude with a justification for
the parameters chosen.


3.1    Model Specification
The basic structure of the model is that in each period of life, s, the family chooses
values of consumption, Cs , and labor, Ls , as functions of the two state variables in
the model, assets, As , and labor income from fulltime work, Ys . The family's value
function in period t, Vt (At , Yt ), is defined as:


                                                T
                               max
              Vt (At , Yt )                 E          s-t (u (Cs ) + v (Ls ))   (5a)
                               {Cs , Ls }       s=t

                               C 1-
                  u (C ) =                                                       (5b)
                               1-
                                       1-µ
                             L-L
                   v (L) =                                                       (5c)
                               1-µ
                      ^s = Ys Ls
                      Y                                                          (5d)
                                LF
                                 ^s - h Y
                      X s = As + Y      ^s - zs As , Y
                                                     ^s                          (5e)
                                                 ^s + r (Xs - Cs )
                   As+1 = (1 + r) (Xs - Cs ) - g Y                                (5f)
                     As  0, s                                                    (5g)
                   Lmin
                    s    Ls  Lmax
                              s   , s                                            (5h)

    The value function is equal to the sum of the expected utility of consumption and
leisure in each period from the current period t to the final period T , discounted by



                                             10
a factor of  each period.17 The discount factor governs the utility tradeoff across
periods ­ values closer to 1 reflect greater patience. The utility of consumption
each period shown in Equation (5b) is assumed to take the Constant Relative Risk
Aversion (CRRA) form, where  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. With
a utility function such as CRRA that has a convex marginal utility function (i.e.
u (C ) > 0), there is a precautionary motive for saving, and greater uncertainty in
the earnings process will induce greater saving.18 In Equation (5c), leisure is defined
as the difference between a time endowment, L, and the amount of labor supplied, L.
The parameter  governs the relative weight placed on the utilities of consumption
and leisure each period. The functional form for the utility of leisure is the same as
for consumption, with curvature parameter, µ.
    Equation (5d) defines labor income, Y   ^s , as a function of fulltime income, Ys , and
the labor choice, Ls , scaled by an amount, LF , such that if the family worked exactly,
                                                                        Ls
LF , its labor income would be Ys . We can think of the ratio L          F  as the fraction
                                                                Ys
of a fulltime year worked or, alternatively, of the ratio L      F   as an annual wage at
which the family is compensated for each unit of labor, Ls . Equation (5e) defines the
concept of "cash on hand" that is available to finance consumption and income taxes
each period. To obtain cash on hand, Xs , assets are augmented by labor income but
reduced by payroll taxes, h(Y  ^s ), and costs of college attendance, zs As , Y ^s , which
may depend on assets and labor income through the financial aid formula described
in Equations (1) to (4).19 The term, zs As , Y    ^s , can also incorporate the impact on
cash on hand of loans taken out to fund educational expenses.20
   17
      In addition to the additive separability of consumption and leisure, the specifications for the
value function and the within-period utility make three simplifying assumptions. First, there is no
adjustment to the argument of the utility function for the size of the household, even after the child
has left for college. Second, there is no mortality risk and thus no accidental bequests. Third, there
is no planned bequest motive.
   18
      The use of the CRRA utility function is standard in both the empirical and theoretical literature
on precautionary saving. CRRA utility means that a consumer remains equally willing to engage
in gambles over a constant proportion of current wealth as wealth increases. An alternative, and
perhaps more realistic assumption, might be that the consumer will accept larger proportional
risks as wealth increases. See Kimball (1990) for a discussion and derivation of the key results for
precautionary saving.
   19
      The payroll tax includes coverage for disability insurance, but the risk of disability is not modeled
here. See Chandra and Samwick (2009) for a life cycle model that incorporates the risk of disability.
   20
      We do not include the income tax deduction for tuition and fees, for which families can claim
a deduction of the lesser of tuition and fees or $4,000 ($2,000) if their modified AGI is less than
$130,000 ($160,000), respectively, for those married filing jointly (or half those thresholds for single
filers). Hoxby and Bulman (2016) find no evidence that the post-secondary tax deduction affects



                                                    11
    Equation (5f) shows how assets accumulate from one period to the next. Cash on
hand is used to finance both consumption and the income taxes, g Y   ^s + r (Xs - Cs ) ,
that are due based on capital income and labor income. To avoid the complexity of
an additional state and choice variable, the portfolio decision is restricted to a single
riskless asset paying a return, r, each period. Thus, the amount of saving is Xs - Cs ,
and capital income is just r (Xs - Cs ). The family's taxes are calculated based on
the 2016 tax schedule for a married couple with one child who does not itemize
deductions and receives all capital income as interest or dividends rather than capital
gains. Payroll taxes are assumed to be paid as the labor income is earned, prior to the
consumption decision each period. Since income taxes depend on capital income and
thus the outcome of the consumption decision during the period, they are assumed
to be paid at the end of the period.
    The last two elements of Equation (5) are the constraints on the optimal choices.
Equation (5g) is the liquidity constraint, which requires assets, As , to be positive in
each period. Other than a student loan which we discuss below, the family cannot
borrow against future income to finance current consumption. This is a simplifica-
tion that nonetheless acknowledges the credit constraints that prevent families from
borrowing too heavily against future income outside of a secured or collateralized
relationship.21 Equation (5h) imposes minimum, Lmin s   > 0, and maximum, Lmax  s   < L,
                                                                   F      min     max
constraints on labor supply. In retirement, we normalize Ls = L = Ls = Ls .
    The processes that describe the uncertainty in and evolution of fulltime income
are as follows.
    Before retirement:



                                  ln (Ys ) = ln (Ps ) + us                                 (6a)
                               ln (Ps+1 ) = s + ln (Ps )                                   (6b)
                                    us+1 =  · us + s+1                                     (6c)
                                    s+1  i.i.d. N 0,  2                                    (6d)

   At retirement:
college-going behavior or other aspects of college financing.
  21
     See Hurst and Willen (2007) for an analysis of consumption with a richer modeling of credit
constraints.



                                              12
                                                 s
                                           1
                   Ys+1 = (1 - ) · f                t q (Pt )    +  · f (q (Ys ))                (7)
                                          35 t=s-34

       After retirement:
                                            Ys+1 = Ys                                            (8)

     Prior to retirement, the natural log of fulltime income is equal to the natural log of
permanent income, Ps , plus a shock to income, us , that follows an AR(1) process. As
discussed in Section 3.4.2 below, permanent income follows an estimated age-earnings
relationship and may be augmented by an annual rate of s in year s. The innovations
to that AR(1) process are assumed to be independently and identically drawn from
a normal distribution with mean zero and variance  2 .22 In this model, the parents
retire at a planned date that is known from the beginning of the working life. By
assumption, there is also no impact of labor supply, Ls , on any current or future value
of fulltime income.
     As shown in Equation (7), at retirement, income is calculated as a weighted aver-
age of the Social Security benefit, f (·), applied to two earnings measures. The first is
an approximation of the average of the last 35 years of permanent income, Pt , where
the weights, t , account for the growth in the national average wage, and the function,
q (·), accounts for the upper limit of the Social Security maximum taxable earnings.
This term is deterministic, transmitting none of the uncertainty in pre-retirement
earnings into retirement. The second measure applies the Social Security benefit for-
mula to fulltime income in the year prior to retirement, Ys . This term transmits the
cumulative AR(1) shock, us , during the working years into retirement. Income in the
year of retirement is a weighted average, with weight , of these two terms.23 Due to
the assumption of a single asset, As , there is no tax-advantaged saving for retirement,
such as from an employer-provided pension. After retirement, income (not derived
from savings) is constant in real terms, as shown in Equation (8).
  22
     In the simulations, the mean of the shock to the level (not log) of income is normalized to be
one in all periods.
  23
     The estimation of this parameter is described in Section 3.4.2 below. These modeling choices
for income are designed to avoid additional state variables, like average income, that would allow a
more exact calculation of Social Security benefits at the cost of additional complexity in the model.
A richer model could include the risk of involuntary retirement due to health or other reasons and
a choice over the retirement age based on economic factors.




                                                 13
3.2    Overview of Solution Method
The solution method for stochastic optimization problems with multiple state and
control variables is discussed in detail in Carroll (2019). As a dynamic programming
problem, Equation (5a) can be written recursively for any period t as:

                              max
           Vt (At , Yt )                 u (Ct ) + v (Lt ) + Et [Vt+1 (At+1 , Yt+1 )]    (9)
                            {Ct , Lt }
    The optimization proceeds backwards through time, from period T to the first pe-
riod, generating a series of rules for consumption and leisure that determine optimal
consumption and leisure as a function of the state variables in that period. In periods
before retirement that have both a labor supply choice and a consumption choice, the
period-by-period solution to Equation (9) can be found by solving a system of two
first order conditions (one for Ct and one for Lt ) and the constraints in Equations (5g)
to (5h). Thus, it is a system of 5 equations in 5 variables (the two choice variables
plus the three Lagrange multipliers). To simplify the solution, we break each within-
period problem into two sub-period problems, with the leisure choice occurring in
the first sub-period, after the income shock is realized, and the consumption choice
occurring in the second sub-period. A full derivation of the solution, including ad-
ditional simplifications made to the optimization problem, is presented in Appendix
A.
    The first-order condition for the labor supply choice in the first sub-period is (see
Appendix Equation (A.6)):


                                  Yt            ^t - z Y At , Y
                                                              ^t - g           ^t
           v (Lt ) + u (Ct )                1-h Y     t                        Y        (10)
                                  LF
            = µmax - µmin

    The first term is the marginal utility of an additional unit of labor supplied,
with v (Lt ) < 0. At an interior optimum, this disutility must be equal in magni-
tude to the gain in utility that occurs in the second sub-period due to the higher
optimal consumption made possible by this additional unit of labor supplied. This
utility gain has three components ­ the marginal utility of another dollar of cash
on hand to start the second sub-period, u (C  ), where C  is the optimal consump-


                                                 14
                                                      Yt
tion level; the pre-tax "wage" from fulltime work, L   F ; and one minus the marginal

tax rates on labor income due to the payroll tax, financial aid formula, and income
tax, 1 - h Y    ^t - zt Y      ^t - g Y
                          At , Y        ^t . Note that the term, zt    Y        ^t , indi-
                                                                           At , Y
cates that there is a financial aid tax on earning income while the child is in college.
The higher is this financial aid tax, the lower the value of Lt . If there is no interior
optimum at which the left-hand side of Equation (10) is zero, then labor supply will
be at its maximum or minimum and the left hand side will be equal to the non-zero
Lagrange multiplier on whichever constraint is binding, µmax or -µmin .
    The first-order condition for the consumption choice in the second sub-period is
(see Appendix Equation (A.8)):



           u (Ct ) =  (1 + r (1 - g (Yt ))) ·                                        (11)
                                                            Yt+1
                    Et u Ct+1            A
                                    1 - zt            
                                           +1 At+1 , Lt+1               +
                                                            LF

    At an interior optimum (i.e. one in which the liquidity constraint in Equation
(5g) does not bind and thus the Lagrange multiplier  = 0), the marginal util-
ity of consumption in period t is equal to the discounted expected marginal util-
ity of consumption in period t + 1, accounting for the effects of both the after-
tax interest rate in period t and the financial aid tax on assets in period t + 1,
                         Yt+1
       A
  1 - zt +1 At+1 , Lt+1   LF
                                 , where L is the optimal labor supply choice. The
higher is the financial aid tax, the lower is this term, and thus the higher is the value
of Ct at which the first-order condition will hold. If instead the liquidity constraint is
binding and  > 0, the marginal utility of consumption will be higher, as consumption
is constrained by cash-on-hand to be below the value such that its marginal utility is
equal to the discounted expected marginal utility of consumption in the next period.
    The solution begins in the last period of life, T , when the problem is trivial
because the family simply consumes all of its assets and after-tax income, yielding
an optimal value for CT as a function of the state variables, AT and YT . Equations
(11) and (10) are then applied in each successively prior sub-period to obtain the
optimal consumption and labor supply functions of the relevant state variables until
the beginning of the life cycle. Once the optimal consumption and labor supply rules
have been obtained, the model can be simulated forward by specifying initial values
of the state variables, drawing random shocks to earnings, and applying the labor

                                           15
supply and consumption rules to generate distributions of asset balances, income,
EFCs, and other outcomes in each successive period.


3.3     Welfare Comparisons
In the simulations below, the model is evaluated using the distributions generated
based on 1,000 independent random draws of the age-earnings profile.24 The key out-
come of the model is the expected value of V1 (A1 , Y1 ), computed as the average value
of this term across the 1,000 age-earnings profiles and a starting asset value of zero
at the beginning of the work life. This expected value is a metric by which different
financial aid systems can be compared, as those with higher values of E [V1 (A1 , Y1 )]
are the ones in which the family is better off.
    We consider variations to the financial aid formula based on the parameters
{j, k, F } in Equations (3) and (4) above:

   · j : The fraction of the Contribution from Assets (CA) in the Adjusted Available
     Income (AAI) formula that is applied.

   · k : The fraction of Available Income (AI) in the AAI formula that is applied.

   · F : An additional surcharge, in dollars, that is added as a fixed fee to the EFC,
     unrelated to AAI.

    In the current formula, {j, k, F } = {1, 1, 0}. We define the expected (indirect)
utility function,
                         W (j, k, F )  E [V1 (A1 , Y1 ) |j, k, F ]               (12)

and the expected average costs of attendance as z (j, k, F ). Note that when {j, k, F } =
{0, 0, z (1, 1, 0)}, the amount of financial aid is constant at the average amount of
financial aid realized under the current formula. We refer to this set of parameters as
"Revenue Equivalent" to the current formula.
    Our standard comparison sets j = k = 0, and we solve for  such that:
  24
    The closest antecedent to this approach in the financial aid literature is the model of Dick,
Edlin and Emch (2003), who estimate preference parameters for education and saving to determine
the asset reductions due to the financial aid system and simulate the asset and welfare changes
that would result from changes to that system. The saving framework in that paper is based on a
non-stochastic life-cycle model and thus cannot measure the insurance value of financial aid.




                                               16
                          W (1, 1, 0) = W (0, 0, z (1, 1, 0) -  )                   (13)

    In this comparison, the income- and asset-contingent components of the financial
aid formula are removed and replaced with a lump-sum discount. There is no financial
aid tax on saving or labor supply, but neither is there any insurance provided against
low assets or income. In this context,  is a compensating variation, in that adding
this amount to the average financial aid under the current formula (i.e. subtracting it
from the cost of attending in Equation (13)) restores the family to its expected utility
under the current formula. If  > 0, then the compensating variation is positive ­
the family needs to be compensated for having j = k = 0. This compensation is paid
by the college in the form of higher average financial aid costs. We refer to this set
of parameters as "Utility Equivalent" to the current formula.
    In the analyses below, we also consider variations in the formula in which only CA
is eliminated, j = 0. This removes the financial aid tax on saving while retaining the
formula's implicit tax on income (including income from assets). We then set either
F > 0 or k > 1 to restore the family's value of W and compare average financial aid
to the current formula. An alternative financial aid formula is preferable if it achieves
the same expected utility for the family at a lower average financial aid cost to the
college.


3.4     Model Parameterization
In this subsection, we discuss our baseline parameters in Equations (5) - (8), with
sensitivity analysis presented in Section 4 below.

3.4.1   Life Cycle Framework and College Costs

We assume that economic life lasts 60 periods, with retirement in the 40th period,
corresponding roughly to an adult life of ages 25 to 85 and retirement at age 65.
Initial assets, A1 , are zero. The child is born in the fourth period of economic life
and starts college in the 22nd period. (For robustness, we consider a family in which
the couple is 10 years older when they become parents.) The costs of attendance,
which serve as the maximum value of the EFC, are $73,250, which approximates the
total costs of attendance at highly selective institutions in 2018 - 2019, the year we



                                            17
use for our EFC formula.25 In Equation (3), j = k = 1, and in Equation (4), F = 0,
in the baseline, to implement the EFC formula as specified. In addition to financial
aid offered through the EFC formula, the family is assumed to be able to take out a
loan of $10,000 per year of college at the riskfree rate of r = 3% to be repaid over a
period of 20 years.

3.4.2    Earnings Process

The earnings process in Equation (6) combines a deterministic profile for permanent
(fulltime) income and a persistent stochastic shock. For the deterministic profile,
we utilize a cross-section of the American Community Survey (ACS) from 2017 and,
following Murphy and Welch (1990), estimate fourth-order polynomials in age for
the logarithm of earnings by education group. The advantages of the ACS are that
earnings are topcoded at the relatively high value of $2 million, education categories
can be distinguished beyond college completion, and the sample size is large.26 The
regression coefficients are shown in Table 1 for five different educational groups ­ Less
than High School, High School Diploma, Some College, (Four-Year) College Degree,
and Advanced Degree. The sample is couples with at least one member working
fulltime (at least 40 weeks per year and 35 or more hours per week) and between
the ages of 25 to 64, and the education group pertains to that spouse or the more
educated spouse if both are working. If both spouses are working fulltime, between
the ages of 25 to 64, and equally educated, the couple's age is that of the older spouse.
The age-earning profiles, corresponding to Ps in Equation (6b), are graphed in Figure
4. To allow for additional heterogeneity in earnings, we add a high-growth version of
the Advanced Degree profile that augments earnings growth by an additional 1% per
year (i.e., we set s in Equation (6b) to 0.01). In the simulations of the model, results
are presented for each of these six groups distinguished by their average earnings
profiles.
    The stochastic elements of the earnings process are an AR(1) coefficient of  = 0.95
and a standard deviation of the annual earnings shock of  = 0.15. These parameters
  25
     Costs of attendance include tuition, fees, room and board, books and supplies, and estimates
of travel and other expenses for residential students. Among the Top 10 National Universities as
ranked by US News and World Report , costs of attendance that year ranged from a low of $70,010
at Princeton University to a high of $77,331 at the University of Chicago. For robustness, we also
consider an in-state student at a top public university, facing costs of attendance of $35,000.
  26
     See Gibson and Gibson (2017) for a similar use of the ACS.



                                               18
are standard in the microeconomic literature on consumption and savings and date
back to the pioneering work by Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1994). Using a measure
of income that includes after-tax labor earnings for both members of a couple plus
unemployment insurance, they find  = 0.95 for the three education groups (Less
than 12, 12 to 15, or More than 16 years) in their analysis and roughly  = 0.15
for the middle group, with variance decreasing with education. They also include an
additional transitory shock, which we exclude here under the conservative assumption
that much of the transitory shock is measurement error.
    Subsequent literature on empirical earnings processes has used larger datasets
and considered more complex stochastic components. An important recent example
is Guvenen et al. (2015), who use a 10% sample of the Social Security Administration's
Master Earnings File to study male earnings from 1978 to 2010. Their estimate of
the AR(1) coefficient in the analogous model to Equation (6) is  = 0.962, with a
standard deviation of  = 0.174 (their Table III, Column (7)). Another example is
DeBacker et al. (2013), who use a panel of tax returns from 1987 to 2009 and can thus
examine pre-tax and after-tax household income in addition to male labor earnings.
As our modeling framework focuses on couples and deducts payroll and income taxes
separately, the closest analogue is pre-tax household income, for which they estimate
parameters of  = 0.967 and  = 0.164.27 Thus, the stochastic elements of the AR(1)
earnings process are consistent with subsequent literature.28
    The final element of the earnings process is the calculation of retirement income.
Recall from Equation (7) that income in the year of retirement is a weighted average
of two approximations of the Social Security benefit formula. The first applies the
  27
      Note that the counterpart to pre-tax household income in our model is Y     ^s , whereas the 
parameter corresponds to fulltime income, Ys . In the simulated data from the model, discussed
below, we observe that the cross-sectional standard deviation of Ys is higher than that of Y ^s at all
ages. Families consume less leisure when they have low income, partially offsetting negative shocks
to fulltime earnings. Thus, using the estimated standard deviation on pre-tax household income
likely understates the variation in fulltime income.
   28
      Much of the recent literature in this area has studied the ways in which the standard AR(1)
process with normally distributed innovations to log-earnings does not fit the data. For example,
Guvenen et al. (2015) show that the distribution of earnings growth rates has negative skewness
and, most importantly, substantial kurtosis relative to the normal distribution. Continued work
in Guvenen et al. (2019) focuses on the variation across individuals in the fraction of a working
lifetime spent non-employed and how to incorporate that variation, and its persistence, into an
income process. While these factors are not modeled here, it is important to note that other studies
that have considered them, such as Golosov, Troshkin and Tsyvinski (2016), have found that the
case for redistributive taxation based on insuring against shocks that display negative skewness and
excess kurtosis is stronger than under the more restrictive model used here.


                                                 19
formula to the history of permanent income, approximating the benefit level for some-
one earning the average income at each age. The second applies the formula to the
immediate pre-retirement value of fulltime income. The weighting parameter, , de-
termines what the share of the final pre-retirement shock is transmitted to retirement
income. Since the earnings in the model refer to a couple, we divide the couple's earn-
ings 2:1 for the higher-earning spouse when calculating retirement benefits, matching
the sample average in the ACS data used to generate the profiles. We assume that
the national average wage used in the benefit calculation grows at 1 percent per year.
The benefit for the lower-earning spouse is constrained to be at least as large as the
dependent spouse benefit of 50% of the benefit of the higher-earning spouse.29 For
robustness, we also consider the same total income in a one-earner couple.
    The simulations of the model discussed below yield, ex post, full earnings histories
and thus the ability to calculate actual Social Security benefits for each of the 1,000
random draws of the age-earnings profile. To determine the value of , we regress
the couple's benefits applied to that earnings draw on the the benefit formula applied
to pre-retirement fulltime income, Ys (i.e. the second term in Equation (7)). A fixed
effects (by education level) regression yields an estimated sensitivity of 0.35, which
                                                                   1
we use as our estimate of . This sensitivity is larger than just 35  , any single year's
weight in the average indexed earnings calculation, because fulltime income in the
last year of work contains information about many prior shocks (and thus many prior
years of income) in the AR(1) process. Median replacement rates in the simulated
data are declining with the level of the couple's education, from 71 percent for the
lowest educational group, to 61 percent for the College Degree group, to 32 percent
for the highest educational group.

3.4.3      Utility Function

We choose a baseline value of the coefficient of relative risk aversion,  , of 3. This
value is both common in the microeconomic consumption literature (see, for example,
Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1994)) and consistent with a recent meta-analysis of 169
published studies by Havr´ anek (2015) that estimated the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (the inverse of the coefficient of relative risk aversion) to be around 1/3
when correcting for reporting bias. Using income and wealth data from the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF),
 29
      The division of income within the couple also plays a small role in the calculation of the EFC.

                                                  20
Cagetti (2003) shows that median wealth holdings by age and education are consistent
with risk aversion parameters that are higher than 3, and for some groups, higher
than 4. Since a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3 is higher than estimates
found through direct elicitation of the preference parameters from experiments over
hypothetical lotteries, we consider lower values for risk aversion in the sensitivity
analysis in Section 4.30
    We normalize fulltime work to be LF = 40, representing hours per week for one
fulltime worker, even when L refers to the couple's labor supply which might include
a second earner. In the model with variable labor supply, we set Lmin   s    = 35 and
  max
Ls = 45 in Equation (5h), allowing for labor supply to change by ±12.5% in each
period. The curvature of the utility function for leisure, µ, is set to 3, matching
the value for  . This parameter is related to the Frisch elasticity of labor supply,
 = L   v
        v
          . In our formulation,  = L-   L
                                          L
                                             µ
                                              1
                                                .31 With values of L = 168 total hours
per week and evaluating  at L = LF = 40, a value of µ = 3 corresponds to a value
of  of about 1.32
    The discount factor is a primary determinant of the family's saving choices. We
use wealth and income data from the SCF 2016 to calibrate the values of this param-
eter. Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board in cooperation with the Department of
the Treasury, the SCF is a triennial survey of U.S. families that collects comprehen-
sive data on assets, liabilities, income, and demographic characteristics. We use the
SCF data on assets, liabilities, and income by age and education group to construct
empirical moments of the wealth-to-income distribution and estimate the values of 
that best match simulated moments to their empirical counterparts.
    Specifically, we impose the same sample restrictions and distinguish the same five
education levels in the SCF as in the ACS. For each education group, we obtain the
ratio of average wealth to average labor income (including self-employment income)
in four age ranges: 25 to 34, 35 to 44, 45 to 54, and 55 to 64. Following Carroll and
Samwick (1997), we define wealth as net worth excluding housing equity and the value
of personally owned businesses and construct these variables using the formulas in
  30
       For example, Andersen et al. (2008) estimate a value of 0.74.
  31
       In the macroeconomic literature on consumption and labor supply, the more typical formulation
                                         1+ 1
                                            
of the disutility of labor is v (L) = - L
                                        1+ 1
                                             .
                                           
  32
     This value is intermediate between the micro- and macro- estimated elasticities found in the
literature. See Reichling and Whalen (2012) for a review and Peterman (2016) for a discussion of
the differences across estimates.


                                                  21
Bricker et al. (2017). We then simulate our life-cycle model under baseline parameters
for a family without college expenses and with labor supply constrained to be LF = 40.
We calculate the ratio of average assets to average labor income in the model's 5th,
15th, 25th, and 35th periods, corresponding to the midpoint of the age ranges noted
above. For each earnings profile, we find the value of  that minimizes the sum
of squared deviations between the four simulated ratios in the model and the four
empirical ratios from the SCF.
    The results are shown in Table 2 and in Figure 5 for each of the five education
groups. In the table, each pair of numbers shows the empirical and simulated ratios
of average assets to average earnings for a given education group at each age. In
the figure, the dots are the empirical moments and the curve shows the simulated
moments from the model. The estimated values of  increase monotonically with
education, from a low of 0.930 for the households without a high school diploma
to 0.992 for the families with advanced degrees. A value of  = (1 + r)-1  0.97
corresponds to a family who would keep consumption level over time in the absence
of precautionary, retirement, or college motives for saving (if income growth were
level and taxes were zero).
    The result that more educated families exhibit greater patience, and thus a more
rapidly rising asset-to-income profile, is standard in the literature. The Goodness of
Fit statistic is the sum of squared deviations of the mean ratios at the four age groups
being minimized. As is also evident from the figure, this statistic improves markedly
with education level, suggesting that the modeling framework is more appropriate for
more educated families.33
    We treat , which governs the tradeoff between consumption and leisure within a
period, as a parameter to be calibrated. For each set of values of the other parameters
in the model, we choose  so that the average value of labor supply during the working
years (for a family not facing any college costs) is equal to LF . For the sixth group,
the Advanced Degree group with 1% higher annual permanent income growth, we use
the same value of  as for the Advanced Degree group and calibrate a separate value
of . To get couples with higher earnings profiles to work no more on average than
couples with lower earnings profiles,  falls steadily with education. The calibrated
values of  are shown in the last row of Table 2.
  33
    For example, the model's assumption of a life expectancy of 85 years might be more accurate
for more educated families, as education and life expectancy are positively correlated.



                                              22
4      Model Results
4.1     Consumption and Labor Supply
Figure 6 summarizes the age profiles of average earnings, consumption, assets, and
college costs for a family facing the earnings process for a college graduate and the
baseline parameters described above. The top panel holds labor supply fixed at LF ,
and the bottom panel allows labor supply to be chosen optimally between Lmin      s  and
Lmax
  s    in each pre-retirement period. In both cases, consumption is smoothed from
working years into retirement ­ consumption is below earnings before retirement and
then above retirement benefits thereafter. Asset accumulation makes this possible,
as assets rise to a peak of roughly 7 times pre-retirement earnings on the eve of
retirement. Assets are spent over the years in which the child is in college and then
again, to zero, in the retirement period. Average consumption rises as retirement
approaches, due to precautionary saving motives that decline over the working years.
Average consumption decreases only slightly during the college years.34
    In the bottom panel, all of the profiles are affected by the ability of the couple to
vary its labor supply. The flexibility to increase labor supply later in the working life
in response to adverse earnings draws early in the working life allows the family to
have higher consumption in those early years. With higher early consumption, the
family accumulates fewer assets prior to the college years and prior to retirement. By
itself, lower asset accumulation will lower the EFC the family pays for the child to
attend college. The EFC is also lowered by the ability of the couple to reduce its labor
supply during the years when labor income will be included in the EFC calculation.
This reduction in labor supply is evident in the age-earnings profile in the bottom
panel of Figure 6 and is presented in more detail in Table 3. The table shows average
labor supply, relative to LF = 40, for each age-earnings profile in the periods before,
during, and after the college years.
    The top panel shows the results using the current financial aid formula, and the
bottom panel shows the results using the "Revenue Equivalent" parameters, in which
tuition is simply discounted by an amount equal to the average financial aid under
  34
    The smoothness of consumption around the years of college attendance is consistent with the
evidence in Souleles (2000), who shows in the Consumer Expenditure Survey that households' non-
education consumption does not decrease over the academic year in proportion to college expendi-
tures in the fall. That is, at least over short horizons, the household is able to smooth consumption.



                                                 23
the current formula. Note that the earnings draws of fulltime income, {Ys }, are the
same in both panels. The bottom panel shows that when the cost of college is not
linked to income or assets, the couples facing all of the earnings profiles work less
during the college years than in the years prior to college. For the more educated
families, labor supply continues to decline after the college years, while for the less
educated families, labor supply is somewhat higher after the college years but not
quite as high as during the pre-college years. Note from Figure 4 that the decline in
average earnings near retirement is less pronounced for these three groups.
    The top panel shows several differences in average labor supply relative to the
bottom panel. First, there is less labor supply during college, when earnings are
subject to the financial aid tax on income, with higher earnings profiles generally
cutting back the most. The percentage of families constrained by Lmin = 35 during
the college years (not shown) varies between 42 to 81 percent across the earnings
profiles. Second, labor supply after college is higher than in the bottom panel and
higher than during the college years. The changes are again generally larger for
higher earnings profiles. Third, there is less labor supplied prior to the college years
under the current formula. This is due both to the financial aid tax on assets, which
taxes the savings from additional labor prior to college, and to the reduction in the
precautionary motive to supply labor prior to college.


4.2    The Financial Aid Tax
Much of the original literature on the financial aid tax focused on issues of horizon-
tal equity. Quoting Edlin (1993), "Two families with identical earnings paths pay
dramatically different amounts for college if one saves more than the other." Table 4
compares average assets and EFCs for our baseline parameters to two alternatives.
Across the three parameterizations, the families receive the same draws of fulltime
income, Ys , but choose their labor supply and saving according to their preferences.
    The first two columns show the average EFC and assets for the baseline param-
eters. The first alternative, shown in the next two columns, is a less patient family,
with  = 0.93 matching that of the lowest education group. Such families discount
the future more heavily relative to the present, and so have higher consumption and
lower labor supply (higher leisure) early in the working life, both resulting in lower
asset accumulation by the time the child enters college. Using the family with a Col-


                                          24
lege Degree as an example, the Less Patient family accumulates about $235,000 less
in assets and receives about $18,500 more in financial aid per year.
    Though not the explicit focus of the early literature on the financial aid tax,
a less industrious family with a higher preference for leisure will also pay less for
college. The second alternative is such a family, with  calibrated to an average labor
supply of 38 rather than 40. With 5 percent fewer hours worked, this family has
lower consumption both before and after retirement, and thus saves less than the
baseline family. Using the family with a College Degree as an example again, the
Less Industrious family accumulates about $81,600 less in assets and receives about
$5,600 more in financial aid per year.35


4.3     Insurance Value
This subsection calculates the insurance value of financial aid by solving the model
described in Section 3 under the current financial aid formula and an alternative in
which financial aid does not depend on income or assets. Instead, the college changes
the cost of attendance by raising or lowering tuition for all students but giving no other
aid. This change effectively converts the potentially distortionary taxes on income
and assets in the financial aid formula into revenue-equivalent lump-sum taxes. In
the absence of income uncertainty, such a change would make the family better off.
However, when the family faces income uncertainty, the welfare losses due to the
foregone insurance value of financial aid will counteract and may even outweigh the
welfare gains due to the loss of distortions to supply labor and accumulate assets
under this alternative formula.
    Recall from Equation (13) that we quantify this welfare loss by solving for the
amount,  , such that by adjusting the average college cost, zs (As , Ys ), by  , the
family achieves the same expected utility, E [V1 (A1 , Y1 )], with this lump-sum college
cost that it obtained under the current formula. Positive (negative) adjustments to
the lump sum indicate that the family is better (worse) off under the current formula.
A positive (negative) adjustment to the lump sum requires the college to offer more
(less) aid on average to keep the family as well off as under the current formula.
  35
    In both alternatives, multiplying that additional aid by 4 and dividing by the incremental
assets, the implicit tax over four years is approximately 30 percent of the incremental assets. This
magnitude is consistent with the calculations underlying Figure 3 but not directly comparable,
because the alternatives in Table 4 do not hold income constant.



                                                25
    Table 5 shows the average EFC, average financial aid, and additional aid required
to achieve the same utility as the current formula under our baseline parameters. The
top panel shows these outcomes when the family faces earnings uncertainty with a
standard deviation of the shock equal to 15 percent. Average financial aid ranges from
$8,070 for the highest education group to $71,547 for the lowest education group.
    For all earnings profiles, the compensating variation is positive, indicating that the
family would need to be compensated for receiving aid through lump-sum discounts
rather than the current formula. The magnitude of this compensation rises from
$1,386 for the lowest education group to $15,203 for the College Degree earnings
profile and $19,063 for the highest education group.36 These additional aid amounts
represent discounts in the cost of college of 29 to 81 percent, with the percentage
decreasing with the education level. For the family with the College Degree earnings
profile, the compensating variation represents a reduction in the EFC of 39.6 percent
and an increase in financial aid of 43.6 percent. Put differently, a dollar of financial aid
is worth $1.44 in lump-sum discounts to tuition, because the financial aid is targeted
to realizations of low income and assets when its marginal value is higher.
    By way of comparison, the bottom panel provides the analogous outcomes when
earnings uncertainty is removed by setting  = 0. Note first that the average EFC
is lower without earnings uncertainty in all but the top age-earnings profile. With
earnings uncertainty and a progressive financial aid formula, fortunate earnings real-
izations are associated with more incremental EFC than unfortunate earnings real-
izations lose incremental EFC. Conversely, the average EFC is higher without uncer-
tainty for that top profile because, in this case, there is no financial aid at this average
earnings profile. Adding uncertainty does nothing to increase the EFC when earnings
realizations are fortunate but does result in lower EFCs when earnings realizations
are unfortunate.
    With no insurance value of financial aid, the additional aid required to compensate
for the loss of the income- and asset-contingent elements of the financial aid formula
is either zero or negative. For the family with the College Degree earnings profile,
the compensating variation of is now -$6,330, meaning that the family would be
willing to pay an additional 26.1 percent in EFC, or equivalently, forego 12.9 percent
  36
    With 1000 draws of the earnings paths for each education group, the standard error of the
estimate of the mean EFC (in thousands of dollars) ranges from 0.115 for the lowest education
group to 0.639 for the College Degree earnings profile to 0.438 for the highest education group.



                                              26
of financial aid, to avoid the implicit taxes on income and assets in the current
formula. For the top education group, the compensating variation is necessarily zero
because the financial aid is zero, and thus implicit taxes on both assets and income
are zero at the margin. For the lowest education groups, with high discounting and no
earnings uncertainty, pre-college asset accumulation is zero and labor supply is nearly
constrained by the lower bound even under the lump-sum discounts, generating a
negligible compensating variation.
    The positive compensating variations shown in the top panel with earnings un-
certainty are net of the welfare costs of the disincentives illustrated in the bottom
panel. Figure 7 stacks the results from Table 5 to illustrate the difference between the
gross and net insurance value of financial aid. The red bars are the zero or negative
amounts of additional aid when the families face no uncertainty. The blue bars are
the additional aid amounts of aid when the families face earnings uncertainty. Their
height represents the insurance value of financial aid net of the welfare loss of behav-
ioral distortions shown by the red bars. The insurance value gross of these distortions
is approximately the combined height of the blue and red bars together.37
    The baseline results in Table 5 and Figure 7 use the change in the amount of
financial aid to measure the insurance value. Figure 8 shows the impact of this
insurance value on the average consumption profile of the family under the baseline
parameters. The green curve shows the same average consumption profile from the
bottom panel of Figure 6, re-scaled vertically to highlight its variation over time. As
shown in Table 5, financial aid is $34,876 on average. The orange curve pertains
to the alternative in which financial aid is $34,876 regardless of income and assets.
The present value of lifetime resources, and therefore consumption, is the same in
this "Revenue Equivalent" alternative. That the latter starts out lower and ends
higher is due in part to the need for additional precautionary saving in the absence
of the insurance provided by the financial aid formula. With that insurance under
the current system, the family can spend more early in life when consumption is
relatively low. The effect on asset accumulation is notable: families accumulate
about 22 percent less under the current system on the eve of matriculation compared
  37
    The partition into gross and net is approximate, because the welfare loss due solely to these
distortions when earnings uncertainty is zero will understate the analogous welfare loss when earnings
are uncertain, as the family works and saves more due to precautionary reasons. With more labor
supply and saving, the distortions are larger, and thus Figure 7 likely understates the gross insurance
value.



                                                  27
to the "Revenue Equivalent" alternative.38 The lower asset accumulation results in
lower consumption later in life. Thus, the current formula better allows the family to
smooth consumption over time.
    The blue curve in Figure 8 is the average consumption profile that obtains when
the additional $15,203 of financial aid (shown in Table 5) is provided to allow the
family to achieve the same lifetime expected utility as under the current financial
aid formula. The promise of this additional aid allows the family to raise consump-
tion early in life under this "Utility Equivalent" alternative relative to the "Revenue
Equivalent" alternative, but not to the extent as under the current formula.39 There
is still a greater need for precautionary saving, and the absence of the insurance from
the financial aid formula makes it more costly in terms of financial aid to achieve the
same level of expected utility.
    A notable feature of the baseline results in Table 5 is that the compensating vari-
ation is high relative to the average amount of aid for the top three earnings profiles.
For example, for the High Growth, Advanced Degree profile, removing a financial aid
formula that provides $8,070 on average would require additional compensation of
$19,063, or 236 percent of the aid. The percentages are also high, at 94.9 and 43.6
percent, for the Advanced Degree and College Degree profiles. The explanation is
that the financial aid formula provides very well targeted insurance to these families.
To illustrate, we computed the correlation (across the 1,000 draws of the earnings
process) between the value of lifetime expected utility in the "Revenue Equivalent"
scenario, in which there is only a lump-sum discount, and the amount of financial aid
under the current formula. The correlations are negative and increasing in absolute
value with the earnings profile, ranging from -0.37 for the lowest earnings profile to
-0.89, -0.94, and -0.88 for the top three profiles. As resources increase across earnings
profiles, the average amount of aid falls, but the targeting of that aid to the least
fortunate realizations improves substantially.
  38
     This reduction is due to both incentives, in the form of the implicit tax on assets and income,
and insurance, with a lessened need to save for precautionary reasons. This figure is the closest
analogue, for the earnings profile in question, to the reduction in assets that Feldstein (1995) and
the subsequent literature sought to measure.
  39
     In present value terms, the "Utility Equivalent" consumption profile is about 1% higher than
the "Revenue Equivalent" profile.




                                                28
4.4     Robustness
Table 6 presents a sensitivity analysis of the compensating variation as the key base-
line parameters are changed one at a time. For each parameter change, we recalibrate
the preference parameters,  and , (if needed) to ensure fulltime work on average
over the working life. In all cases, the earnings profile is for the family with a College
Degree. The first row of the table repeats the baseline results from Table 5 for a fam-
ily facing earnings uncertainty with  = 0.15. The next four rows consider changes in
parameters that affect the amount of risk in the age-earnings profile. Changing these
parameters should have a noticeable impact on the insurance value of financial aid.
The compensating variation decreases markedly, from $15,203 to $2,446, when the
standard deviation of the of the earnings shock falls to  = 0.10 and to -$4, 548 with
a standard deviation of  = 0.05. Linearly interpolating between the two, a standard
deviation of earnings shocks of about 8.25 percent is required for the insurance value
to fully offset the negative welfare consequences of the distortionary taxes on income
and assets in the financial aid formula, conditional on the other parameters. The
next two rows change the persistence of the earnings shock, raising it with an AR(1)
parameter of  = 0.99 and lowering it with  = 0.90. With higher persistence, the
compensating variation increases to $23,896, and with lower persistence, it falls to
$4,827.
    The next four rows change preference parameters in the utility function. We can
make the family less risk averse and more willing to substitute consumption and
leisure intertemporally in response to changes in the budget constraint by reducing
the curvature of the utility functions. Setting  = µ = 2 and then  = µ = 1
reduces the compensating variation to $7,285 and $208, respectively. As expected,
less risk averse families derive less value from the insurance and greater harm from the
disincentives in the financial aid formula. We can make the family less responsive to
future changes in the budget constraint by reducing the discount factor,  from 0.984
to 0.930. Doing so reduces the compensating variation to $10,940. Even with a myopic
or very impatient family, with  lowered to 0.8, the EFC and compensating variation
fall in dollar terms, but the latter is about 46 percent of the former, comparable to
(and even higher than) the ratio in the baseline case.40
    The next two rows change the extent to which the family can vary its labor
  40
    The robustness of the findings to even large changes in  also suggests that the imprecision in
the estimation of discount factor does not greatly affect our results.


                                               29
supply in a given period. Fixing the labor supply at LF = 40 raises the compensating
variation to $22,642. Doubling the range from ±5 (or 12.5%) to ±10 (or 25%) lowers
the compensating variation to $10,332. As shown in Table 3, the ability to vary labor
supply, even while holding the expected value at LF = 40, is a means of insuring
against earnings risk. The more it can be done, the less is the incremental value
of the insurance provided by the financial aid formula. Similarly, high initial assets
help insure consumption against earnings risk. As shown in the next row, with initial
assets of $300,000, the EFC rises and the compensating variation falls, to $45,062 and
$10,055, respectively.
    The remaining rows of the table change the pass through of earnings uncertainty
to retirement income (the parameter ) or aspects of the financial aid environment
like the fraction of need met, the costs of attendance, the age of the parents relative
to the child, the distribution of earnings within the couple, and the amount of the
loans available. When the college does not meet 100% of need based on the EFC
formula, the compensating variation falls due to the lessened insurance, but only to
$14,121 with 80% of need met, a lower proportion of the EFC and a higher propor-
tion of financial aid relative to the baseline. The assumption that colleges meet full
demonstrated need is therefore not essential to our main results.
    When tuition is lowered to $35,000, closer to what an in-state student's family
would pay at a top public university, the average EFC falls from $38,374 to $29,002.
Financial aid is only $5,998 on average. However, the compensating variation is
$9,849, or 34% of the average EFC, a fraction comparable to the baseline case. That
this additional aid is more than 50% again as large as average financial aid shows
that the aid has become much more targeted, as in the case of the highest earnings
profile under the baseline parameters, and thus still quite valuable as insurance.
    When the parents are an additional decade older than the child, they have higher
income and assets at matriculation and thus pay more for college. However, the com-
pensating variation is also higher, as the financial aid formula can provide insurance
against an additional decade of earnings uncertainty. None of the other parameters
have a large effect on the EFC or the compensating variation. Overall, Table 6 shows
that the compensating variation is appropriately sensitive to assumptions about the
family's risk aversion, the degree of risk faced, and other sources of insurance but
generally robust to other changes in the budget constraint.



                                          30
5      Removing and Replacing the Asset Tax
The model outcomes in Section 4 compare the current formula to an alternative in
which neither income nor assets affect the cost of college. Conceptually, the insur-
ance value of financial aid derives from the implicit taxes on both assets and income.
However, the policy interest in the financial aid formula has focused primarily on
the implicit tax on assets. In this section, we consider variations in the financial aid
formula that eliminate only the Contribution from Assets by setting j = 0 in Equa-
tion (3), thus making Available Income the only component of Adjusted Available
Income.41
    We begin by showing in Table 7 how the average EFC, average asset accumula-
tion on the eve of matriculation, and the compensating variation change when the
Contribution from Assets is eliminated. For each such outcome, the column headed
"j = 0" gives the dollar amount in thousands and the column headed "% Baseline"
indicates what percentage that dollar amount is of the corresponding dollar amount
in the baseline results shown in Tables 4 and 5.
    The first two columns show the reductions in the average EFC. For the College
Degree earnings profile, the new EFC of $21,600 is 56.3 percent of the baseline value
of $38,374. The residual 43.7 percent of that baseline value is attributable to the
Contribution from Assets. For lower earnings profiles, the percentage of the baseline
EFC rises, as asset accumulation is lower and thus the Contribution from Assets
accounts for less of the average EFC. For higher earnings profiles, the percentage of
the baseline EFC also rises, despite higher asset accumulation, as a greater percentage
of the families pay the maximum EFC of $73,250.42
    Eliminating the Contribution from Assets has two effects on pre-matriculation
asset accumulation, shown in the next two columns. The first is the higher return to
saving, which tends to increase asset accumulation.43 The second is the lower cost
  41
     With j = 0, assets only impact the EFC through the inclusion of asset income in Available
Income.
  42
     The percentage receiving no aid in the baseline rises from 12.9 percent for the College Degree
earnings profile to 41.6 and 70.7 percent for the Advanced Degree and High Growth Advanced
Degree profiles, respectively.
  43
     The asset tax applies with less intensity at the extremes of the distribution, either because the
family's resources are more often sufficiently high that it receives no aid (and thus no marginal
reduction in aid for higher assets) or because its resources are so low that the slope of the AAI-to-
EFC relationship in Equation (4) is not at its maximum or is identically zero through the Simplified
Needs Analysis in the Federal Methodology. Across all earnings profiles, the assumption that the



                                                 31
of college (shown in the first two columns), which would decrease the need for asset
accumulation. The first two rows show that for the highest earnings profiles, these
two effects roughly offset. For lower earnings profiles, the former outweighs the latter,
and asset accumulation rises by 10 to 28 percent relative to the baseline.
    The final two columns show the additional aid required to compensate for the loss
of the income-contingent components of the financial aid formula. The percentages of
baseline are similar to, and generally slightly higher than, the corresponding percent-
ages for the average EFC. For the College Degree earnings profile, financial aid would
have to be $9,500 higher if delivered as a lump sum, reducing the average EFC of
$21,600 by 44 percent. Thus, the insurance value of financial aid is still positive even
if the Contribution from Assets were eliminated or, equivalently, if a family managed
to save only in types of assets that are not covered by the financial aid formula (e.g.
retirement accounts).
    The family is better off when "j = 0," because college costs fall dramatically.
To conduct more interesting welfare comparisons regarding the financial aid tax on
assets, we remove the Contribution from Assets by setting j = 0 and solve for the
dollar value of a fixed fee ­ F in Equation (3) ­ that restores the family to its expected
utility under the current formula. That is, F solves:

                                     W (1, 1, 0) = W (0, 1, F )                                     (14)

   We can then compare z (0, 1, F ) to z (1, 1, 0) to ascertain whether the college must
pay more or less on average to achieve this expected utility level for the family. The
results are presented in Table 8, with the fixed fees, F , shown in the first column.44
The fee rises with the earnings profile before falling somewhat for the highest earnings
profile, where the asset tax plays a diminished role due to the frequency with which
these families receive no financial aid.
   The next two columns show that for every earnings profile, the average EFC
under the Fixed Fee formula is lower than under the current formula. For the College
Degree earnings profile, for example, the family's expected utility is maintained when
the average EFC is $33,197, or $5,178 below its average under the current formula.
college meets all demonstrated need is relevant here, as relaxing that assumption would mean that
the disincentives would apply less consistently and induce less dissaving.
  44
     Because the fixed fee is different for each earnings profile, the alternative is not a single formula
that could be implemented without knowing the parents' education level.



                                                   32
Thus, the college must provide this family with 14.8 percent more aid than under the
current formula. That average aid must increase indicates that, conditioning on the
net insurance value provided by the implicit tax on income, the net insurance value
of the Contribution from Assets is positive. It would lower expected utility to replace
the Contribution from Assets with a fixed fee that enabled the college to offer only
the same amount of aid on average.
    As an alternative to imposing a fixed fee, we again set j = 0 but maintain the
families' expected utilities by raising k > 1. This alternative formula eliminates the
insurance value and disincentives associated with the Contribution from Assets, while
increasing the insurance value and disincentives associated with Available Income. We
search for the value of k that, for each earnings profile, solves:

                                     W (1, 1, 0) = W (0, k, 0)                                     (15)

    We again compare the average EFC in the two cases. The results are shown in
Table 9. The first column shows the values of k that equalize expected utilities. They
range from 1.231 to 1.842 and, like the fixed fees in Table 8, rise with the earnings
profile before falling back for the highest profile. For the lowest two earnings profiles,
the differences in average financial aid are positive but small. For the next three
earnings profiles, the additional aid is negative. For example, for the family with
the College Degree earnings profile, the same expected utility can be achieved with
j = 0, k = 1.776 as with j = 1, k = 1 with $1,774 less given in financial aid on average.
Starting at the baseline parameters, the family would forsake the net insurance value
provided by the Contribution from Assets for additional net insurance value provided
by Available Income. This is not true for the family with the highest earnings profile,
for whom the disincentives from the asset tax are less relevant.45
    Eliminating the Contribution from Assets is a prominent feature of proposals to
simplify the financial aid system as implemented by the FAFSA.46 Table 9 indicates
that if such a simplification were paired with an increase in the income sensitivity,
  45
     As a third alternative, focusing on the highest earnings profile, we also considered eliminating the
asset tax while raising tuition. We found that, within the simulated population, even an uncapped
tuition would not raise enough revenue to restore (i.e. lower) expected utility back to its level under
the baseline parameters. As tuition is raised, the proportion of the population paying the full amount
declines too rapidly.
  46
     See, for example, the Congressional testimony by Scott-Clayton (2020) and references cited
therein.



                                                   33
it would leave the families with the least education as well off and those with higher
education potentially better off. To implement the different sensitivities in the first
column would require changing the slopes and endpoints of the segments in the piece-
wise linear spline in Equation (4).47


6      Discussion
The early literature on the financial aid tax in Case and McPherson (1986), Feldstein
(1995) and Edlin (1993) highlights the possibility that implicit taxes on labor supply
and especially saving would distort behavior and thus lower welfare for families with
children anticipating their college years. Our model incorporates those distortions and
shows the negative impact on welfare in the absence of earnings uncertainty. When
earnings uncertainty is introduced at levels consistent with empirical studies, the
compensating variation turns positive. The distortions are still present ­ their harmful
impacts on welfare are just substantially outweighed by the insurance value they
provide. The insurance value of financial aid is large and positive, when considering
the inclusion of both income and assets in the formula, when considering income by
itself, and when considering the incremental effect of assets conditional on income.
     This last finding, shown most clearly in Table 8, demonstrates that a family's asset
accumulation on the eve of matriculation contains incremental information about
whether the family has been relatively lucky over its pre-college earnings draws, even
conditioning on the current draw of earnings during the college years. Knowing this
information, and redistributing from lucky to unlucky scenarios, improves welfare by
more than enough to offset the welfare loss due to the disincentive effects of implicitly
taxing the return to saving.
     The source of the welfare gain in our model is that in scenarios in which earnings
realizations have been low, the current financial aid formula reduces the cost of at-
tending college whereas the alternatives do not. Such estimates of the insurance value
of financial aid will be sensitive to how we model other choices that might alleviate
the burden of a high tuition payment in the face of low assets and income. Two
choices are already included ­ increasing labor supply and taking out loans. Another
  47
    Another approach to simplification would be to increase the asset limits in the Simplified Needs
Analysis, so that fewer families qualify, and then increase another parameter, like j or k , to offset
the change in expected utility.



                                                 34
would be to attend a college that costs less but (as must be the case in equilibrium)
delivers lower benefits. To the extent that those lower benefits are lower earnings
in the future, the timing of the cash flows mimics that of borrowing. Consumption
falls less today but income to support future consumption (here thought of as the
collective income of all members of the family) is lower.48
     There are several possible directions for further research, most of which would
expand the complexity of the model beyond the framework of two choice variables and
two state variables used here. First, we do not consider the real growth in the cost of
attending college or the uncertainty surrounding it, even though this cost growth and
uncertainty are prominent in policy discussions regarding access to higher education.
Incorporating this growth and uncertainty would likely increase the insurance value
of financial aid, since the EFC that comes from the Federal Methodology does not
depend explicitly on college costs except as a maximum.
     Second, as noted above, not all assets are included in the measure of assets used
in the financial aid formula. Retirement accounts are excluded from both the Federal
and Institutional Methodologies, and home equity is also excluded from the Federal
Methodology. A more general model of saving decisions in the presence of financial
aid would include a state variable, say M , to represent excluded assets and a choice
variable, say m, to reflect net saving in these excluded assets. The family's problem
would then be to maximize the same objective function as in Equation (5) by choosing
all three of C (At , Yt , Mt ), L (At , Yt , Mt ), and m (At , Yt , Mt ) each period. This is a
considerably more complicated problem to solve numerically. Similarly, we do not
consider the growing industry of tax-advantaged college saving vehicles, like 529 plans,
that make saving for college relatively cheaper than in our model.
     Third, we do not consider parents' payments for college in a more general context
of intergenerational transfers to children. In such a framework, payments for college
could be replaced by direct payments of cash if the value proposition in college be-
comes less favorable. They could also be replaced by larger bequests, accumulated
over a longer period and thus less of a drag on consumption during the working life.
     Fourth, the risk to the providers of financial aid of offering this insurance has not
  48
    In the model (as in reality), the loan opportunity exists in both the current formula and the
alternatives and, perhaps as a result, the sensitivity analysis in Table 6 indicates that it has only
a small impact on the compensating variation. If the borrowing opportunity is to better resemble
sacrificing future earnings by going to a lower-cost school, it would be available only in the alternative
formulas.



                                                   35
been modeled in the analysis, but such insurance costs are likely to be small. Providers
like governments and colleges offer financial aid based on this formula to a large
population of students ­ those from families who have been lucky and those who have
not. To the extent that the earnings uncertainty these families face is idiosyncratic in
nature, the aggregation of aid awards across this population diversifies away the risk.
To the extent that there are more systemic shocks to the families' income, the long
time horizons for governments and colleges allow them some opportunity to smooth
these fluctuations over time.
    Fifth, as suggested by Dick and Edlin (1997), assets are reflecting lifetime income
­ information beyond what is available in current income. For a given level of current
income, a low level of assets indicates that prior income shocks were sufficiently low
that the family found it optimal to consume most of its income. Including assets in the
financial aid formula allows the formula to partially insure against those prior shocks
as well. Future work can consider how welfare might be improved by introducing
a measure of lifetime average earnings into the financial aid formula, allowing the
sensitivities to assets and current income to be lessened.
    Finally, there are other applications of the incentives-insurance tradeoff that can
be made in education finance. Since the passage of the College Cost Reduction and
Access Act in 2007 (Public Law 110-84), federal student loans have had income-based
repayment options, through which borrowers can repay their loans as a percentage
of their income. In recent work, Matsuda and Mazur (2020) model income-based
repayment in the presence of dropout risk that depends on unobservable effort and
show that such repayment options significantly increase welfare.


7    Conclusion
Prior literature has conjectured, and provided mixed empirical evidence, that the
implicit tax on assets in the financial aid formula creates a distortion in saving be-
havior. The literature has not considered as extensively that there is also an implicit
tax on labor earnings in the formula. Our analysis is the first to recognize that these
implicit taxes are merely one component of a standard incentives-insurance tradeoff.
Using a stochastic, life-cycle model of consumption and labor supply in which fami-
lies have precautionary, retirement, and college motives for saving, we show that in a
model without earnings uncertainty, the implicit taxes can have modest negative con-

                                          36
sequences for lifetime expected utility. When families face earnings uncertainty, the
insurance value of a financial aid formula based on the current formula is substantial.
    Across a range of parameterizations, we calculate that financial aid would have
to increase by enough to reduce the net cost of attendance by 30 to 80 percent to
compensate families for the loss of the income- and asset-contingent elements of the
current formula. For parents facing the earnings process representative of college
graduates, a dollar of financial aid delivered through the current formula is worth
$1.44 in lump-sum tuition discounts, due precisely to the targeting of the financial
aid to scenarios in which the family has low income or assets and thus a greater
marginal value of additional resources.
    Replacing just the "financial aid tax" on assets with a lump sum would also reduce
welfare. To keep the family with college-educated parents as well off with the lump
sum, average financial aid would have to increase by about 15 percent. The net
insurance value from this "financial aid tax" is positive at the margin. However, for
some families with earnings profiles such that the saving disincentives of the asset
tax may be acute, the net insurance value from the implicit tax on assets is less than
the net insurance value from the implicit tax on income at the margin. Increasing
the sensitivity of the financial aid formula to income and reducing it to assets could
increase welfare.
    Without considering earnings uncertainty, the welfare losses due to the disin-
centives in the financial aid tax appear to be the economic costs of the explicitly
redistributive financial aid formula. The formula transfers resources from those with
(predictably) higher assets and income to those with (predictably) lower assets and
income. However, when reasonable amounts of earnings uncertainty are added to the
model, the progressive nature of the implicit taxes confers the additional benefits of
insurance against that earnings uncertainty. That is, in addition to the justification
for the implicit taxes on assets and income based on a desire to redistribute across ex
ante different groups, there is a justification based on a desire to redistribute within
an ex ante identical group based on ex post realizations of an uncertain earnings
process.49 For reasonable parameterizations, the insurance value of means-tested fi-
nancial aid more than offsets the disincentive costs of means-tested financial aid. Put
  49
     Colas, Findeisen and Sachs (2021) also show that optimal financial aid is declining in parental
income even without a redistributive motive. Unlike the model here, which focuses on the insurance
value of financial aid to the parents, they focus on how the price-sensitivity and the lifetime (positive)
fiscal externality of college-going decline with income.


                                                   37
differently, governments and institutions that provide financial aid according to this
formula are able to give less aid than they would have to otherwise in order to keep
the family of the college student equally well off.




                                         38
                                Figure 1: EFC Levels by Assets and Earnings


                 1000


                  800

                                   40
                  600                                 60           73
 Assets (000s)




                                             50

                  400
                                  20

                  200       1     10
                                                         30
                    0
                        0          50         100            150        200   250
                                                Earnings (000s)


Source: Calculations based on the EFC Formula in 2018 - 2019.




                                                    39
                     Figure 2: EFC by Earnings for Specified Asset Levels (000s)




                70        Assets = 500
                          Assets = 300
                60        Assets = 100
                          Assets = 0
                50
   EFC (000s)




                40
                30
                20
                10
                 0
                      0          50         100           150      200         250
                                             Earnings (000s)


Source: Calculations based on the EFC Formula in 2018 - 2019.




                                                 40
                     Figure 3: EFC by Assets for Specified Earnings Levels (000s)




                70         Earnings = 100
                           Earnings = 40
                60         Earnings = 20
                           Earnings = 0
                50
   EFC (000s)




                40
                30
                20
                10
                 0
                      0           200       400           600       800        1000
                                              Assets (000s)


Source: Calculations based on the EFC Formula in 2018 - 2019.




                                                 41
                      Figure 4: Expanded Age-Earnings Profiles by Education: Couples


                    300
                               High Growth Adv Deg
                               Advanced Degree
                    250        College Degree
                               Some College
                    200        High School Diploma
                               Less than High School
  Earnings (000s)




                    150

                    100

                     50

                      0
                          25     30       35       40    45   50    55     60     65
                                                        Age


Source: Estimates based on the American Community Survey 2017.




                                                        42
   Figure 5: Simulated and Empirical Wealth-to-Income Moments by Education

                                           8
                                           6
                                                    Less than High School             High School Diploma              Some College
     Ratio of Avg Wealth to Avg Earnings
                                           4
                                           2
                                           0




                                               25     35     45     55      65   25     35        45   55   65   25   35    45    55   65

                                                       College Degree                  Advanced Degree
                                           8
                                           6
                                           4
                                           2
                                           0




                                               25     35     45     55      65   25     35        45   55   65
                                                                                             Age


Source: Empirical moments (dots) are calculated using the Survey of Consumer Finances 2016.
Simulated moments (curves) are from the model under baseline parameters. See Table 2 for the
underlying data.




                                                                                             43
                   Figure 6: Average Earnings, Consumption, and Assets by Age
                                                    Fixed Labor Supply

                 600             Consumption
                                 Earnings
                                 Assets
                 500
                                 EFC

                 400
Dollars (000s)




                 300


                 200


                 100


                  0
                       25   30   35    40      45     50     55    60    65   70   75   80   85
                                                             Age


                                                Variable Labor Supply
                 600
                                 Consumption
                                 Earnings
                 500             Assets
                                 EFC

                 400
Dollars (000s)




                 300


                 200


                 100


                  0
                       25   30   35    40      45     50     55    60    65   70   75   80   85
                                                             Age




                                                        44
                                  Figure 7: Insurance Value, Gross and Net, by Earnings Profile

                                                                                                19.063
                20
                                            Baseline                                17.613
                                            No Uncertainty
                                                                          15.203
  Compensating Variation (000s)
                           10




                                                               8.112


                                                  4.306

                                    1.386
           0




                                                               -0.262




                                                                          -6.330
                -10




                                                                                    -10.233




                                    < HS        High Sch     Some Coll   College   Adv Deg    Adv, High



Source: Insurance values calculated from the model under baseline parameters. Net insurance
value is the height of the blue bars. Gross insurance value is approximated by the combined height
of the blue and red bars.




                                                                    45
                            Figure 8: Average Consumption by Financial Aid Formula and Age

                       80


                       75
  Consumption (000s)




                       70


                       65


                       60


                       55                                                        Current Formula
                                                                                 Revenue Equivalent
                                                                                 Utility Equivalent
                       50
                            25    30   35    40   45   50        55    60   65   70   75    80    85
                                                                 Age



Source: Consumption profiles simulated by the model under baseline parameters. "Revenue
Equivalent" applies the average financial aid under the Current Formula as a lump sum. "Utility
Equivalent" augments that lump sum by enough to restore expected utility to that under the
Current Formula.




                                                            46
 Table 1: Cross-Sectional Log Earnings Regressions by Education for Couples
               Less than    High School     Some       College     Advanced
              High School     Diploma      College     Degree       Degree
Constant          12.50        11.01        10.83       7.360        6.913
                 (1.274)      (0.679)      (0.497)     (0.539)      (0.716)

Age                  -0.218          -0.0693        -0.0563        0.309          0.334
                    (0.122)         (0.0652)       (0.0479)       (0.0521)       (0.0678)

Age2 (/10)          0.0812           0.0339         0.0375         -0.0904        -0.0855
                   (0.0427)         (0.0228)       (0.0169)       (0.0184)       (0.0235)

Age3 (/100)         -0.0124         -0.00532        -0.00668      0.0130         0.0104
                   (0.00647)       (0.00346)       (0.00257)     (0.00281)      (0.00355)

Age4 (/1000)       0.000674         0.000263       0.000363       -0.000760     -0.000519
                  (0.000359)       (0.000192)     (0.000143)     (0.000157)    (0.000196)
Observations         26504            85381         134450         123547        102852
R2                   0.010            0.020          0.034          0.047         0.039
Standard errors in parentheses
Source: 2017 American Community Survey 1-Year PUMS Files
Sample includes all couples with at least one member age 25-64 and working fulltime.
Education and age pertain to the age-eligible member working fulltime with more education.




                                             47
                              Table 2: Calibrated Utility Function Parameters
                           Less than      High School       Some College Advanced              High Growth
                          High School      Diploma         College Degree Degree               Adv Degree
     Age 25 - 34
       Empirical              0.398           0.506         0.410      0.793       0.435            --­
       Simulated              0.402           0.394         0.336      0.512       0.482            --­
     Age 35 - 44
       Empirical              0.430           1.872         0.833      1.659       2.079            --­
       Simulated              0.850           1.143         1.259      2.007       2.139            --­
     Age 45 - 54
       Empirical              0.709           2.183         2.133      4.225       4.274            --­
       Simulated              1.240           2.057         2.548      3.879       4.292            --­




48
     Age 55 - 64
       Empirical              2.329           2.704         4.617      6.295       6.940            --­
       Simulated              1.612           3.177         4.127      6.434       6.890            --­
                              0.930           0.952         0.961      0.984       0.992            0.992
     Goodness of Fit          0.973           0.783         0.599      0.339       0.009
                             54.646          32.974        21.722     12.099       8.476            4.413
     Source: Empirical moments are from the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances
     Sample includes all couples with at least one member age 25-64 and working fulltime.
     Education and age pertain to the age-eligible member working fulltime with more education.
     Simulated moments are the ratio of average assets to average earnings, by age and education.
                 Table 3: Labor Supply Variation Over the Life Cycle
                                                     Years Relative to Child's College
Earnings Profile                                    Before        During          After
                                                       Current Financial Aid Formula
High Growth, Adv Degree                              42.47         37.96         38.59
Advanced Degree                                      42.77         36.04         38.53
College Degree                                       41.77         35.67         39.48
Some College                                         40.34         36.76         40.88
High School Diploma                                  40.12         37.28         40.95
Less than High School                                40.20         38.93         40.38

                                                    Revenue Equivalent Tuition Discount
High Growth, Adv Degree                              42.82        39.68          37.87
Advanced Degree                                      43.28        39.24          37.25
College Degree                                       42.68        39.64          37.74
Some College                                         41.27        39.73          39.26
High School Diploma                                  40.60        39.37          40.02
Less than High School                                40.27        39.52          40.21
Source: Model simulations under baseline parameters.
Revenue Equivalent Tuition Discount holds financial aid constant while removing
the income- and asset-contingent elements of the financial aid formula.
Each cell is average labor supply, where 40 represents fulltime work.




                                               49
            Table 4: The Financial Aid Tax, by Earnings Profile

                                                           Less               Less
                                     Baseline          Patient          Industrious
Earnings Profile                   EFC    Assets    EFC      Assets    EFC      Assets

High Growth, Adv Degree            65.2   781.8     49.1     136.8     61.2     597.3
Advanced Degree                    54.7   655.1     29.5        93.9   49.1     496.0
College Degree                     38.4   397.8     19.9        62.8   34.1     316.2
Some College                       13.4   114.7      9.3        35.1   13.0     104.2
High School Diploma                6.2     58.5      4.7        22.5    6.2      56.9
Less than High School              1.7     15.3      1.7        15.3    1.9      19.1

Source: Model simulations under baseline parameters and alternatives.

Each cell is average EFC or Assets at matriculation in Thousands of Dollars.

"Less Patient" lowers  to 0.930.

"Less Industrious" calibrates  to labor supply of 38, not 40.




                                          50
  Table 5: Compensating Variations by Earnings Profile, Baseline Parameters

                                Average     Average     Additional   Percent   Percent
Parameters                        EFC          Aid         Aid       of EFC    of Aid

                                            Baseline Earnings Uncertainty
High Growth, Adv Degree          65.180       8.070       19.063      -29.2     236.2
Advanced Degree                  54.686      18.564       17.613      -32.2     94.9
College Degree                   38.374      34.876       15.203      -39.6     43.6
Some College                     13.393      59.857       8.112       -60.6     13.6
High School Diploma               6.199      67.051       4.306       -69.5      6.4
Less than High School             1.703      71.547       1.386       -81.4      1.9

                                                 No Earnings Uncertainty
High Growth, Adv Degree          73.250       0.000       0.000        0.0      NA
Advanced Degree                  43.425      29.825      -10.233      23.6      -34.3
College Degree                   24.248      49.002       -6.330      26.1      -12.9
Some College                      7.089      66.161       -0.262       3.7      -0.4
High School Diploma               3.261      69.989       0.000        0.0       0.0
Less than High School             0.593      72.657       0.000        0.0       0.0

Source: Model simulations for baseline parameters.

Top panel sets  = 0.15. Bottom panel sets  = 0.

EFC and Aid are in Thousands of Dollars.




                                            51
                              Table 6: Compensating Variations, Sensitivity Checks
                                                                      Financial Additional     Percent    Percent
     Parameters                                           EFC            Aid      Aid          of EFC     of Aid
     Baseline Parameters                       38.374                  34.876      15.203        -39.6       43.6
     Decrease  from 0.15 to 0.10               44.087                  29.163       2.446         -5.5        8.4
     Decrease  from 0.15 to 0.05               48.296                  24.954      -4.548          9.4      -18.2
     Increase  from 0.95 to 0.99               35.382                  37.868      23.896        -67.5       63.1
     Decrease  from 0.95 to 0.90               42.318                  30.932       4.827        -11.4       15.6
     Decrease  and µ from 3 to 2               36.288                  36.962       7.285        -20.1       19.7
     Decrease  and µ from 3 to 1               31.592                  41.658       0.208         -0.7        0.5
     Decrease  from 0.984 to 0.930             19.816                  53.434      10.940        -55.2      20.5




52
     Decrease  from 0.984 to 0.800             17.644                  55.606       8.179        -46.4      14.7
                             F
     Fix labor supply at L = 40                41.188                  32.062      22.642        -55.0       70.6
     Widen labor supply range from ± 5 to ± 10 36.178                  37.072      10.332        -28.6       27.9
     Increase initial assets from 0 to $300k   45.062                  28.188      10.055        -22.3       35.7
     Increase  from 0.35 to 0.70               37.409                  35.841      15.163        -40.5       42.3
     Decrease  from 0.35 to 0                  38.792                  34.458      15.447        -39.8       44.8
     Financial aid covers only 90% of need     43.000                  30.250      14.763        -34.3       48.8
     Financial aid covers only 80% of need     47.454                  25.796      14.121        -29.8       54.7
     Decrease tuition from $73.25k to $35k     29.002                   5.998       9.849        -34.0      164.2
     Become a parent 10 Years Later            47.704                  25.546      18.952        -39.7       74.2
     Switch to one-earner couple               39.057                  34.193      16.123        -41.3      47.2
     Increase annual loan from $10k to $30k    40.580                  32.670      15.095        -37.2      46.2
     Source: Model simulations for Households with College Degrees.
      and  are recalibrated as needed to match wealth-to-income and ensure fulltime work for each alternative.
     EFC and Aid are in Thousands of Dollars.
           Table 7: Results with Asset Tax Removed, by Earnings Profile

                                         Average                  Average         Compensating
                                          EFC                     Assets               Variation
Earnings Profile                 j=0       % Baseline     j=0       % Baseline   j=0     % Baseline

High Growth, Adv Degree           52.2        80.0        785.6       100.5      16.9        88.8
Advanced Degree                   32.5        59.4        659.6       100.7      12.3        70.1
College Degree                    21.6        56.3        436.7       109.8      9.5         62.8
Some College                       9.0        67.1        147.2       128.4      5.4         66.7
High School Diploma                4.3        68.7         73.5       125.6      2.9         66.4
Less than High School              1.3        77.2         17.5       114.1      1.1         77.0

Source: Model simulations for baseline parameters.

"j = 0" indicates that the Contribution from Assets is set equal to zero.

Each cell is Thousands of Dollars or Percent of the Amount in Table 4 or 5.




                                               53
          Table 8: Replacing Contribution from Assets with Fixed Fee

                                 Fixed     Average    Baseline    Additional    Percent
Earnings Profile                  Fee       EFC         EFC             Aid     of Aid

Adv Degree, High Growth         14.255     61.784      65.180           3.396    42.1
Advanced Degree                 17.748     49.260      54.686           5.426    29.2
College Degree                  11.527     33.197      38.374           5.178    14.8
Some College                     1.847     10.865      13.393           2.529     4.2
High School Diploma              0.520      4.786       6.199           1.413     2.1
Less than High School            0.070      1.385       1.703           0.318     0.4

Source: Model simulations under baseline parameters and alternatives.

EFC and Aid are in Thousands of Dollars.




                                            54
  Table 9: Replacing Contribution from Assets with Higher Income Sensitivity

                                New Income        Average    Baseline   Additional   Percent
Earnings Profile                 Sensitivity       EFC         EFC         Aid       of Aid

Adv Degree, High Growth             1.466         64.015      65.180      1.165       14.4
Advanced Degree                     1.842         55.166      54.686      -0.480      -2.6
College Degree                      1.776         40.148      38.374      -1.774      -5.1
Some College                        1.390         13.641      13.393      -0.248      -0.4
High School Diploma                 1.312          5.961       6.199      0.238        0.4
Less than High School               1.231          1.701       1.703      0.002        0.0

Source: Model simulations under baseline parameters and alternatives.

EFC and Aid are in Thousands of Dollars.




                                             55
Appendix A                Detailed Solution Method
This appendix derives the first-order conditions for the family's optimization problem
introduced in Section 3.2. The two sub-period problems in period t are defined as
follows. In the first sub-period, the family chooses labor supply, Lt , according to:



                                   max
               V Lt (At , Yt )            v (Lt ) + V Ct (Xt , Yt )                  (A.1a)
                                    Lt

                         ^t = Yt    Lt
                         Y                                                           (A.1b)
                                    LF
                         Xt          ^t - h Y
                              = At + Y      ^t - zt At , Y
                                                         ^t - g Y
                                                                ^t                    (A.1c)
                       Lmin
                        t    Lt  Lmax
                                  t                                                  (A.1d)

   In the second sub-period, the family chooses consumption, Ct , according to:



                                   max
               V Ct (Xt , Yt )            u (Ct ) + Et [V Lt+1 (At+1 , Yt+1 )]       (A.2a)
                                     Ct
                       At+1 = (1 + r (1 - g (Yt ))) (Xt - Ct )                       (A.2b)
                       At+1  0                                                        (A.2c)

    In Equations (A.1) and (A.2), V Lt (At , Yt ) and V Ct (Xt , Yt ) are the value functions
for the labor and consumption sub-period problems, respectively. The main change
from the original formulation of the problem in Equation (5) is in the way income
taxes are calculated, which must be approximated when there are two sub-periods.
In the first sub-period, income taxes are collected on labor income assuming that
capital income, which is determined in the second sub-period, is zero. This is the
term, g Y ^t , in Equation (A.1c). The income tax function is progressive in labor
income, i.e. both g  0 and g  0. This approximation means that, with capital
income set to zero in the first sub-period, the marginal tax rate on labor income
may be understated. In the second sub-period, income taxes are collected on capital
income, r(Xt - Ct ), at a rate of g (Yt ), as shown in Equation (A.2b). The income
tax on capital income is set equal to the marginal income tax rate based on fulltime


                                              56
income, Yt , multiplied by the amount of capital income. The approximations mean
that the marginal tax rate is constant at g (Yt ), rather than progressive, and uses the
state variable, Yt , rather than the prior sub-period's choice variable, Y^t , as the base.
                                                                ^t as an additional state
This latter simplification is required in order to avoid adding Y
variable in the second sub-period.
    In this new formulation of the family's problem, the first-order condition for the
labor supply choice in the first sub-period is:


                  V Ct (Xt , Yt )   Yt          ^t - z Y At , Y
                                                              ^t - g              ^t
     v (Lt ) +                              1-h Y     t                           Y          (A.3)
                     Xt             LF
      = µmax - µmin

    The first-order condition for the consumption choice in the second sub-period is:


                                                 V Lt+1 (At+1 , Yt+1 )
       u (Ct ) -  (1 + r (1 - g (Yt ))) Et                             +          =0         (A.4)
                                                      At+1

    The first term in the first-order condition is the marginal utility of an additional
dollar of consumption in period t. The second term is the discounted value of saving
that dollar to be used in period t + 1. The dollar grows by the after-tax interest
rate and has a marginal value of V Lt+1     (At+1 ,Yt+1 )
                                           At+1
                                                          at that time. This marginal value is
uncertain because of the shock to income received in period t + 1. In this expression,
r · g (Yt ) is the marginal tax on another dollar of saving. The marginal utility of
a dollar of assets at time t + 1 is discounted back to period t utility by a factor of
 . The difference between the marginal utility of consumption and the discounted,
expected marginal utility of assets in the next period is zero at the optimal level of
consumption.
    We can use the Envelope Theorem to obtain analytical expressions for the V CX         t (Xt ,Yt )
                                                                                              t
      V Lt+1 (At+1 ,Yt+1 )
and         At+1
                           terms that appear in these first-order conditions. Applying the
Envelope Theorem to Equation (A.2a) yields an expression for V CX           t (Xt ,Yt )
                                                                                t
                                                                                        :


     V Ct (Xt , Yt )                             V Lt+1 (At+1 , Yt+1 )
                     =  (1 + r (1 - g (Yt ))) Et                       +                     (A.5)
        Xt                                            At+1



                                                57
   which is equal to u (Ct ) by Equation (A.4). This substitution can be made in
Equation (A.3) to get a new first-order condition for the labor supply choice:


                               Yt          ^t - z Y At , Y
                                                         ^t - g           ^t
           v (Lt ) + u (Ct )           1-h Y     t                        Y    (A.6)
                               LF
           = µmax - µmin

   This is Equation (10). Applying the Envelope Theorem to Equation (A.1a) yields
an expression for V LA
                     t (At ,Yt )
                         t
                                 :


                V Lt (At , Yt )   V Ct (Xt , Yt ) Xt
                                =                ·                             (A.7)
                   At                Xt            At
                                                                 Yt
                                = u (Ct ) 1 - zt
                                               A
                                                 At , Lt
                                                                 LF

    Advancing this equation to period t + 1 and substituting it into Equation (A.4)
yields a new first-order condition for the consumption choice:



           u (Ct ) =  (1 + r (1 - g (Yt ))) ·                                  (A.8)
                                                             Yt+1
                    Et u Ct+1            A
                                    1 - zt            
                                           +1 At+1 , Lt+1                 +
                                                             LF

    This is Equation (11). When the family is in retirement, the only choice each
period is for optimal consumption, and there is no remaining uncertainty in the
income process. For all retirement periods prior to the last period of life, optimal
consumption (when the liquidity constraint does not hold with equality) is given by
a first-order condition analogous to Equation (A.8):



              u (Ct ) =  (1 + r (1 - g (Yt + r (Xt - Ct )))) ·                 (A.9)
                                  A                      
                             1 - zt +1 (At+1 , Yt+1 ) u Ct+1 (At+1 , Yt+1 )


   Note that the absence of income uncertainty means that there is no expectations
operator around the marginal utility of consumption next period. Further, there is


                                           58
no need to approximate the income tax function in retirement periods. Finally, in
the application of the model considered above, college expenses are assumed to occur
                                            A
before retirement in the model, so the 1 - zt +1 (At+1 , Yt+1 ) term is always 1 during
                 50
retirement years.
  50
    When the liquidity constraint that At+1 cannot be negative is binding, then consumption in
period t is given by Xt - g1+
                           (Yt )
                             r .




                                             59
References
Andersen, Steffen, Glenn W Harrison, Morten I Lau, and E Elisabet Rut-
 str¨
    om. 2008. "Eliciting Risk and Time Preferences." Econometrica, 76(3): 583­618.

Athreya, Kartik, Deven Reilly, and Nicole Simpson. 2014. "Young Unskilled
 Women and the Earned Income Tax Credit: Insurance Without Disincentives?"
 Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 14-11R.

Barrow, Lisa, and Ofer Malamud. 2015. "Is College a Worthwhile Investment?"
 Annual Review of Economics, 7(1): 519­555.

Braga, Breno, and Olga Malkova. 2020. "Hope for the Family: The Effects of
 College Costs on Maternal Labor Supply." IZA 12958.

Bricker, Jesse, Lisa J Dettling, Alice Henriques, Joanne W Hsu, Lindsay
 Jacobs, Kevin B Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson,
 and Richard A Windle. 2017. "Changes in US Family Finances from 2013 to
 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances." Federal Reserve Bulletin,
 103(3): 1­42.

Cagetti, Marco. 2003. "Wealth Accumulation Over the Life Cycle and Precaution-
 ary Savings." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 21(3): 339­353.

Carneiro, Pedro, James J Heckman, and Edward J Vytlacil. 2011. "Estimat-
 ing Marginal Returns to Education." American Economic Review, 101(6): 2754­81.

Carroll, Christopher D. 2019. "Solution Methods for Microeconomic Dynamic
 Stochastic Optimization Problems." http:// www.econ2.jhu.edu/ people/ ccarroll/
 SolvingMicroDSOPs.pdf .

Carroll, Christopher D, and Andrew A Samwick. 1997. "The Nature of Pre-
 cautionary Wealth." Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(1): 41­71.

Case, Karl E, and Michael S McPherson. 1986. "Does Need-Based Student Aid
 Discourage Saving for College?"

Chandra, Amitabh, and Andrew A Samwick. 2009. "Disability Risk and the
 Value of Disability Insurance." In Health at Older Ages: The Causes and Conse-
 quences of Declining Disability among the Elderly. 295­336. University of Chicago
 Press.

Colas, Mark, Sebastian Findeisen, and Dominik Sachs. 2021. "Optimal Need-
 Based Financial Aid." Journal of Political Economy, Forthcoming.




                                       60
DeBacker, Jason, Bradley Heim, Vasia Panousi, Shanthi Ramnath, and
 Ivan Vidangos. 2013. "Rising Inequality: Transitory or Persistent? New Evi-
 dence from a Panel of US Tax Returns." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
 2013(1): 67­142.

Dick, Andrew W, Aaron S Edlin, and Eric R Emch. 2003. "The Savings
 Impact of College Financial Aid." Contributions in Economic Analysis & Policy,
 2(1).

Dick, Andrew W, and Aaron S Edlin. 1997. "The Implicit Taxes from College
 Financial Aid." Journal of Public Economics, 65(3): 295­322.

Eaton, Jonathan, and Harvey S Rosen. 1980. "Taxation, Human Capital, and
 Uncertainty." The American Economic Review, 70(4): 705­715.

Edlin, Aaron S. 1993. "Is College Financial Aid Equitable and Efficient?" The
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(2): 143­158.

Engen, Eric M, and Jonathan Gruber. 2001. "Unemployment Insurance and
 Precautionary Saving." Journal of Monetary Economics, 47(3): 545­579.

Feldstein, Martin. 1995. "College Scholarship Rules and Private Saving." American
  Economic Review, 85(3): 552­566.

Fidelity Investments. 2018. "2018 College Savings Indicator: Executive Sum-
  mary of Key Findings." https:// www.fidelity.com/ bin-public/ 060 www fidelity
  com/ documents/ PR/ CSI-2018-Executive-Summary.pdf .

Gibson, David S, and Erin P Gibson. 2017. "Age-Earning Profiles: Refinement
 and Applications." The Rehabilitation Professional, 25(1): 13­34.

Golosov, Mikhail, Maxim Troshkin, and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2016. "Redistribu-
 tion and Social Insurance." American Economic Review, 106(2): 359­86.

Grant, Charles, Christos Koulovatianos, Alexander Michaelides, and
 Mario Padula. 2010. "Evidence on the Insurance Effect of Redistributive Taxa-
 tion." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(4): 965­973.

Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2015. "What
 Do Data on Millions of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?"
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 20913.

Guvenen, Fatih, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2019. "What
 Do Data on Millions of U.S. Workers Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Dy-
 namics?" https:// fguvenendotcom.files.wordpress.com/ 2019/ 02/ gkos 2017 rev3
 submit.pdf .

                                       61
Handwerker, Elizabeth Weber. 2011. "Delaying Retirement to Pay for College."
 ILR Review, 64(5): 921­948.

Havr´
    anek, Tom´  a s. 2015. "Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The Importance
 of Method Choices and Selective Reporting." Journal of the European Economic
 Association, 13(6): 1180­1204.

Hoxby, Caroline M, and George B Bulman. 2016. "The Effects of the Tax
 Deduction for Postsecondary Tuition: Implications for Structuring Tax-based Aid."
 Economics of Education Review, 51: 23­60.

Hoynes, Hilary W, and Erzo FP Luttmer. 2011. "The Insurance Value of State
 Tax-and-Transfer Programs." Journal of Public Economics, 95(11-12): 1466­1484.

Hubbard, R Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P Zeldes. 1994. "The
 Importance of Precautionary Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate Sav-
 ing." Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40: 59­125.

Hubbard, R Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P Zeldes. 1995. "Precau-
 tionary Saving and Social Insurance." Journal of Political Economy, 103(2): 360­
 399.

Hurst, Erik, and Paul Willen. 2007. "Social Security and Unsecured Debt." Jour-
 nal of Public Economics, 91(7-8): 1273­1297.

Kimball, Miles S. 1990. "Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large."
 Econometrica, 58(1): 53­73.

Long, Mark. 2004. "The Impact of Asset-tested College Financial Aid on Household
  Savings." Journal of Public Economics, 88(1-2): 63­88.

Matsuda, Kazushige, and Karol Mazur. 2020. "College Education and Income
 Contingent Loans in Equilibrium: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation." https:
 // papers.ssrn.com/ sol3/ papers.cfm? abstract id=3590541 .

Monks, James. 2004. "An Empirical Examination of the Impact of College Financial
 Aid on Family Savings." National Tax Journal, 57(2): 189­207.

Murphy, Kevin M., and Finis Welch. 1990. "Empirical Age-Earnings Profiles."
 Journal of Labor Economics, 8(2): 202­229.

National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators. 2017. "Need
 Analysis: Federal and Institutional Methodology." https:// www.nasfaa.org/
 uploads/ documents/ NASFAA Authorized Training Need Analysis SSG 171D.
 pdf .



                                       62
National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators. 2021.
 "NASFAA Deep Dive: Changes to Federal Methodology, Other Student Aid
 Changes From Spending Bill." https:// www.nasfaa.org/ news-item/ 24269/
 NASFAA Deep-Dive Changes to Federal Methodology Other Student Aid
 Changes From Spending Bill .

Onink, Troy. 2014. "How Assets Hurt College Aid Eligibility on FAFSA
 and CSS Profile." https:// www.forbes.com/ sites/ troyonink/ 2014/ 02/ 14/
 how-assets-hurt-college-aid-eligibility-on-fafsa-and-css-profile/ #5915e97723ec .

Peterman, William B. 2016. "Reconciling Micro and Macro Estimates of the Frisch
 Labor Supply Elasticity." Economic Inquiry, 54(1): 100­120.

Reichling, Felix, and Charles Whalen. 2012. "Review of Estimates of the Frisch
 Elasticity of Labor Supply." Congressional Budget Office Working Paper 2012-13.

Reyes, Jessica Wolpaw. 2008. "College Financial Aid Rules and the Allocation of
 Savings." Education Economics, 16(2): 167­189.

Rostam-Afschar, Davud, and Jiaxiong Yao. 2014. "Progressive Taxation
 and Precautionary Saving Over the Life Cycle." http:// davud.rostam-afschar.de/
 downloads/ RAY2014.pdf .

Scott-Clayton, Judith. 2020. "Finishing FAFSA Simplification: What It Means
  for the Future of College Access and Completion." Testimony to the U.S. Senate
  Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (September 17), https:
  // www.help.senate.gov/ imo/ media/ doc/ Scott-Clayton4.pdf .

Souleles, Nicholas S. 2000. "College Tuition and Household Savings and Consump-
  tion." Journal of Public Economics, 77(2): 185­207.

Stepner, Michael. 2019. "The Insurance Value of Redistributive Taxes and Trans-
  fers." https:// michaelstepner.com/ jmp/ .

U.S. Census Bureau. 2019. "PINC-03. Educational Attainment-People 25 Years
 Old and Over, by Total Money Earnings, Work Experience, Age, Race, His-
 panic Origin, and Sex." https:// www.census.gov/ data/ tables/ time-series/ demo/
 income-poverty/ cps-pinc/ pinc-03.html .

Varian, Hal R. 1980. "Redistributive Taxation as Social Insurance." Journal of
 Public Economics, 14(1): 49­68.




                                       63
