                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE NEXUS OF ELITES AND WAR MOBILIZATION

                                           Ying Bai
                                          Ruixue Jia
                                        Jiaojiao Yang

                                     Working Paper 28667
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28667


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We appreciate the comments from Eli Berman, Felipe Valencia Caicedo, Jeremiah Dittmar,
James Fenske, James Fearon, Matt Jackson, Joachim Voth, and seminar participants at Case
Western Reserve, LSE, Michigan, NYU, Stanford, UCSD, and Virtual Economic History
Seminar. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ying Bai, Ruixue Jia, and Jiaojiao Yang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Nexus of Elites and War Mobilization
Ying Bai, Ruixue Jia, and Jiaojiao Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 28667
April 2021
JEL No. D74,H11,L14,N45,O11

                                          ABSTRACT

How do elites mobilize commoners to participate in a war? How does war mobilization affect
elite power after the war? We argue that these two questions are interconnected, as elites mobilize
war often because war benefits them. We demonstrate these relationships using the setting of the
organization of the Hunan Army ­ an army organized by one Hunanese scholargeneral that
suppressed the deadliest civil war in history, the Taiping Rebellion (1850­1864). We construct
comprehensive datasets to depict the elites in the scholar-general's pre-war network as well as the
distribution of political power before and after the war. By examining how pre-war elite
connections affected where soldiers who were killed came from, and subsequent shifts in the
post-war distribution of political power toward the home counties of these very elites, we
highlight a two-way nexus of elites and war mobilization: (i) elites used their personal network
for mobilization; and (ii) network-induced mobilization elevated regional elites to the national
political stage, where they influenced the fortunes of the country after the war.

Ying Bai                                         Jiaojiao Yang
Department of Economics,                         Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong              1155133785@link.cuhk.edu.hk
Shatin, Hong Kong
rickybai@gmail.com

Ruixue Jia
School of Global Policy and Strategy
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0519
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
rxjia@ucsd.edu
                    Do not let me hear you talking together / About titles and promotions
                   For a single general's reputation / Is made out of ten thousand corpses.
                                                                                  -- Cao Song (828­903)


          The battle-plain is the harvest-field of the aristocracy, watered with the blood of the people.
                                                                         -- Richard Cobden (1804­1865)



1     Introduction

Elites play a critical role in mobilizing citizens to participate in conflicts that range from within-
state ethnic conflicts to inter-state wars. Two important questions arise: How do they achieve
mobilization? How does war mobilization affect the elite power after the war? For the first
question, there is a burgeoning literature in which scholars have examined the roles of the media
and propaganda (e.g., Yanagizawa-Drott 2014, Adena et al. 2015), social capital (e.g., Satyanath,
Voigtländer and Voth 2017, Passarelli and Tabellini 2017), and leadership/role models (Acemoglu
and Jackson 2015, Dippel and Heblich 2021, Rogall 2021) in war mobilization. In contrast, the
second question about how war mobilization affects post-war elite power has been less studied. In
this paper, we address these two questions as interrelated, as elites mobilize citizens in times of
war often because war benefits the elites. Empirically, we demonstrate a two-way nexus of elites
and war mobilization: Elites use their personal network for war mobilization, and war mobilization
consequently increases elite power after the war by elevating regional elites to the national political
stage.

     Although we are not aware of any systematic studies on the nexus between elites and war
mobilization, we believe that both relationships are relevant to understanding the mobilization and
consequences of war in varied contexts. For instance, conflict scholars have noted that elites draw
on kin and social networks to recruit participants in conflicts. Based on interviews of participants
in the Rwanda genocide, Fujii (2009) concludes, "It was social ties, not ethnic membership, that
patterned the process of recruitment and targeting".             Similar observations exist in regard to the
organization of the rondas campesinas in Peru and armed organizations in Kashmir (see a review

Recent studies on the genocide mobilization include those of Rogall (2021) on the role of armed groups, and Heldring
(2021) on the interplay of pre-colonial state and government policy.


                                                         1
by Wood (2008) for additional cases). Despite such observations, there has been sparse quantitative
investigation, likely due to the difficulty of measuring personal network in a conflict setting.

     Moreover, it is a time-honored observation that elites can benefit from war mobilization.
Observing the arms race among European powers in the decade before World War I, Gustave de
Molinari forecasted, "A State of War continues to be profitable both to the governing class as a
whole, and to those officials who administer and officer the army" (Molinari 1904). Although an
extensive literature in the social sciences has documented the cost of war, who benefits from war
has been less studied. Understanding how war mobilization shapes elite power not only helps to
reveal who benefits from war but also sheds light on how war ultimately affects the state, which has
been studied in the literature on war and state capacity, with evidence based mainly on European
history (e.g., Tilly 1985, Besley and Persson 2010, Dincecco and Mauricio Prado 2012).

     It is challenging to elucidate the relationships among elite networks, war mobilization, and
post-war elite power. First, the measurement of each is non-trivial. Second, there may be omitted
variables that are correlated with elite networks that affect war mobilization. Moreover, it is not easy
to separate the roles of elite networks and war mobilization in determining post-war elite power.
We leverage a context in which we can address these measurement and identification challenges.
Our setting is the organization of the army that suppressed the Taiping Rebellion, a civil war waged
in China from 1850 to 1864 between the peasant rebels of the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and the
Qing dynasty (1644­1911). This war is known as one of the deadliest civil wars in human history.
To put it into perspective, the Taiping Rebellion coincided with the U.S. Civil War (1861­1865)
in its final years, and its death toll ­ at least 20 million deaths ­ was more than 30 times higher
than that of the U.S. Civil War (Platt 2012). One of the most striking aspects of this war is that
the Taipings were defeated by a relatively small army, known as the Hunan Army, commanded by
one scholar-general from Hunan Province, Zeng Guofan. The Hunan Army was organized from
existing militia that had fought with the Taipings during the period 1850­1852. After Zeng took
power in 1853, he turned to his personal network to recruit soldiers from commoners in Hunan
province. The organization of the Hunan Army has attracted much attention from historians, who
provide rich information on the recruitment process of the Army (e.g., Wang 1881, Luo 1939, Kuhn
1970).

During its prime time, the Army had approximately 130,000 soldiers. This size appears small relative to the civilian
deaths because most of the civilian deaths were not caused by fighting between the Taipings and the state. Instead,
many unarmed civilians were killed by either party of the war. Famine- and plague-triggered deaths were among the
major causes of civilian deaths.



                                                         2
     This context provides an ideal setting to investigate the links among elite networks, war mobi-
lization, and post-war elite power. First, there exists a well-defined elite network institutionalized
by the Civil Service Exam system. As the primary elite recruitment channel that produces the bu-
reaucrats for the country, the system provides the opportunity for elites to forge a political alliance
based on the exam (involving the link between the examiners and examinees and that between exam-
inees). In addition, kinship, including marriages, has always provided an important link among the
elites. We digitalize a large number of historical archives and construct a database that covers Zeng
and 2,460 other elites (with 164 from Hunan) in his network, which gives us variation in pre-war
connections with Zeng across 1,646 counties. Second, we can proxy war mobilization by the death
of individual soldiers, the costliest form of war contribution. This information was recorded partly
because the soldiers' family members were paid compensation. We digitize the records for 34,328
deaths with soldier names, their origin counties (a subset of 75 counties in Hunan), and the year
and the battle in which they died. Finally, we are able to measure elite power based on the rich
information on the bureaucracy. We are interested in the distribution of power that has the potential
to influence a nation. To this end, we build a database on national-level (vice minister-level and
above) offices during the period 1820­1910, which enables us to study the consequences of war
mobilization on elite power in both the short and long runs.

     To study how the elite network affects war mobilization, we employ a difference-in-differences
strategy by exploiting county-level variation across 75 Hunan counties in elite connections and time
variation in Zeng Guofan's appointment. As noted above, the existing militia had fought with the
Taipings before Zeng took power in 1853. Based on soldier death records, we know the number of
soldier deaths by county and by year from 1850 to 1864. Thus, we compare counties with more
elite connections with those with fewer or no connections before and after Zeng took power. Our
baseline network focuses on exam connections and blood relationships, which are not subject to
individual choice. We measure elite connections of a county by the sum of direct and indirect
connections inversely weighted by distance to Zeng and use the unweighted sum of connections as
an alternative measure. We find that counties with one more elite connection with Zeng experienced
23% more soldier deaths, or over 6,600 more soldier deaths during the period 1854­64. This effect
of elite connections occurred only after Zeng took power to organize his own army, implying no
systematic differences across counties before the Army became organized.

     Soldier deaths reflect both recruitment and death rates (which may be driven by strategic
deployment or soldiers' own dedication to war participation). Three heterogeneous patterns shed
light on these two interpretations. We find that the relationship between elite connections and soldier

                                                  3
deaths is weaker in counties with more alternative mobility opportunities (measured by entry-level
quotas in the Civil Service Exam system), consistent with the importance of the recruitment channel.
We also find that the connections-death relationship is even stronger for more important battles
(those around cities), suggesting potential strategic employment. At the same time, the positive
connections-death relationship holds regardless of the type of battles, which further reveals the
importance of the recruitment interpretation. In addition, we find a significantly larger impact
of elite connections on deaths for the soldiers from the same clan as the elites, consistent with
the historical narratives that elites used clan relationships for recruitment. We conduct robustness
checks on elite networks and soldier deaths in several ways, including using alternative definitions
of elite network, utilizing placebo networks (which capture a county's general political importance)
based on exam timing, and examining the social status of the soldiers.

     We then turn to studying the impact of network-induced war mobilization on elite power after
the war. An important challenge, however, is how to differentiate the role of network-induced war
mobilization from that of network. To address this challenge, we use information on all 1,646
counties across the country. The non-Hunan counties also enjoyed different degrees of connections
in Zeng's network but did not experience soldier deaths in the Hunan Army, which provides us
with a comparison group to examine the impact of connections (without war mobilization) over
time. Empirically, we use connections×Hunan an instrument for soldier deaths during the period
1854­64 (i.e., after Zeng took power) and examine how the predicted soldier deaths of a county
are associated with national-level offices held by that county during the period 1820­1910. In
addition, to further check whether the instrument has any direct impact beyond war mobilization,
we leverage the multiple sources of connections to conduct over-identification tests, which enable
us to show the direct impact of different sources of connections.

     We find that one direct elite connection with Zeng in a county is associated with approximately
256 more soldier deaths during the period 1854­1864, which increased the annual number of
national-level offices held by that county by 0.048 (52% of the mean). These estimates imply that
1,000 soldier deaths of a county increased the number of national-level offices held by individuals
from that county by over 200%. Year-by-year estimates show that no such an association existed
between soldier deaths and elite power before the war. The over-identification tests further confirm
that when using one component of elite connections to predict soldier deaths, the other component
is not correlated with national-level offices. These results reveal that war mobilization provides an
opportunity for the connected elites in Hunan that consequently increased their power. By further
investigating who benefited in a county, we find that those in Zeng's personal network certainly

                                                 4
benefited. In addition, the benefits apply to some not in the network, suggesting that war created
new elites in the home counties of those in the network. Thus, we observe that the impact, while
exhibiting fluctuations, lasted until the end of the dynasty.

      We also conduct checks on elite networks and soldier deaths for our finding on network-induced
war mobilization and power. Again, we confirm that our finding is specific to the actual network
rather than placebo networks that reflect a county's general political importance. We show that
soldier deaths before Zeng took power do not exhibit a similar pattern to those that occurred after
he took power. Moreover, our finding also holds if we restrict comparison provinces to different
subgroups.

      In terms of Tilly (1985)'s famous aphorism ­ "war made the state, and the state made war," our
evidence suggests that elites mobilized war and war benefited elites. To the best of our knowledge,
our study is the first to highlight the two-way nexus of elites and war mobilization. Our two main
findings ­ how elites mobilize war and how war mobilization affects the elites ­ are interconnected,
and there is feedback between elite power and war mobilization. This interconnection is useful
to understanding war mobilization. Our setting shares similarities with those of a few studies
that highlight the roles of leaders in war. For instance, Dippel and Heblich (2021) document that
leaders of the failed German revolution of 1848­1849 were expelled to the United States and became
antislavery campaigners who helped mobilize Union Army volunteers. Cagé et al. (2020) show
that individuals who served under Philippe Pétain during the pivotal WWI battle of Verdun played
a role in mobilizing Nazi collaborators during the Pétain-led Vichy regime. Most of the elites in our
setting, however, did not directly fight the battles, implying that leadership and role models are less
essential in our setting. Instead, historical narratives suggest that elites used their personal network
in recruitment to screen soldiers and build trust.             More importantly, our evidence on how war
mobilization benefited the elites implies that war mobilization provide incentives compatible with
the self-interest of the elites. As noted by Myerson (2008), how to credibly motivate elites to help
the ruler win and maintain power is a central issue in politics. Rewarding elites with power after the
war works as a social contract that gives elites incentive to become involved in war mobilization.

      Rewarding elites with power also has important consequences for state capacity. We know that
the rise of the regional elites further weakened the Qing state after the war, which was considered to

This interpretation of personal networks shares similarities with the importance of social capital (e.g., Satyanath,
Voigtländer and Voth 2017, Passarelli and Tabellini 2017). Broadly speaking, our study is also related to König et al.
(2017) on networks and conflict, who studies how the network structure affects the intensity of the conflict. Our focus
is to understand the connections among pre-war elite network, war mobilization, and post-war elite power, where we
use the most intuitive measure of networks.


                                                          5
be a contributor to the eventual downfall of the state in 1911 and foreshadowed the Warlord Era in
1916­1928 (McCord 1993). This observation adds a new perspective to the literature on how war
affects state capacity. The current literature focuses on the importance of taxation capacity shaped
by war (e.g., Besley and Persson 2010, Dincecco and Mauricio Prado 2012, Rodriguez-France
2016, Ch et al. 2018). Our study suggests that knowing how elite power changes (in comparison
with the state) can be useful to understanding how civil war shapes the state.

      Our study adds to a general literature on conflict, to which we hope to offer two contributions
(see Blattman and Miguel (2010) and Ray and Esteban (2017) for overviews). First, most of the
studies on recruitment focus on non-state armed groups, assuming that the state has no difficulty
in coercing citizens to participate in war. Our study shows that when the state is weak, even state
recruitment reflects the underlying social structure. Second, we show that a small group benefits at
the cost of many others, which appears to be common in conflict settings. The fact that elites enjoy
the benefits of war while commoners bear the costs is one explanation for the central puzzle about
war: Wars are costly but nevertheless occur (Fearon 1995).

      It is worth noting an intriguing observation by historians (e.g., McCord 1993, Platt 2007):
Political figures from Hunan started to play leading roles in major political events during the
century after the war. During the 1860s to the 1890s, the Self-Strengthening Movement was led by
individuals who appear in our network data, Zeng Guofan, Zuo Zongtang, and Li Hongzhang. In
the reform and revolution era during the 1890s to the 1920s, of the fewer than a dozen top leaders,
Tan Sitong, Huang Xing, Song Jiaoren, and Cai E were all from Hunan. During the 1920s to
the 1950s, the top two leaders of the Communist Party, Mao Zedong and Liu Shaoqi, were from
Hunan. Our finding on how war mobilization helps to elevate some local elites to the apex of
national political life and whose influence could endure for multiple generations is consistent with
this observation.
To finance the Army, the state introduced a new trade tax known as likin. Deng (2020) finds that regions with more
Taiping battles experienced a larger increase in likin. Our study suggests that only looking at tax revenues might miss
important changes in the power structure of a society.
Li Hongzhang did not, however, come from Hunan though. He became a protege of Zeng because his father and Zeng
succeeded in the same exam, an important type of link in our network data.




                                                          6
2     Context and Historical Narratives

First, we describe the historical context of the Taiping Rebellion and the Hunan Army in Section
2.1. Then, we provide a summary of historical narratives on the importance of elite networks in
organizing the Army and the rise of Hunan elites after the war in Section 2.2.


2.1    The Taiping Rebellion and the Hunan Army

The Taiping Rebellion began in the southwestern province of Guangxi in 1850. Its causes share
similarities with those of several major rebellions in Eurasia in early modern times, as described in
Goldstone (1991): Overpopulation, misgovernment, and ethnic competition all contributed to the
tensions in mid-19th century China. Under the famine conditions of 1849­1850, tensions exploded
frequently into open warfare. The leader of the Taipings was Hong Xiuquan, a man who attended
the Civil Service Exam four times but was unable to succeed. Transformed by illness and inspired
by Christian missionary tracts, he started the God Worship Society in 1844, which was renamed
the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and became a regime that claimed dominion over all the empire.

      The Taipings launched a crusade northward toward the rich provinces. The rebels were much
more effective than the poorly organized and corrupt Qing armies. During the period 1850-1852,
the Taipings fought battles in Hunan (neighboring Guangxi) and Hubei and conquered several
prefectures. In March 1853, they conquered Nanjing (an important city in the lower Yangtze River)
and declared the city its Heavenly Capital.

      Realizing that the official armies could not contain the Taipings, the Qing government asked
Zeng Guofan, a Hunanese scholar who had served in the central government and had wide influence
in his home province, to organize an army to fight the Taipings. Underlying the choice of Zeng was
the background of local militarization in the mid-19th century. Local militias emerged in several
southern provinces in this era and represented the initially spontaneous militarization of the local
elites who sought to protect their communities and their property, as the state was too weak to
provide such public good. The militias in Hunan already were well known and were employed to
fight with the Taipings in Guangxi and Hunan during the period 1850­1852.

      The Hunan Army was organized from the existing militias. Commanded by Zeng, a scholar
without any military experience, the Army was often defeated by the Taipings in the beginning.
During the period 1853­1864, the Hunan Army and the Taipings fought more than 694 battles


                                                 7
across 11 provinces. In the summer of 1864, the Hunan Army finally conquered the Heavenly
Capital, Nanjing, which ended the war.


2.2    Historical Narratives

Scholars have noted that personal networks played a critical role in organizing the Hunan Army.
Luo (1939) provides the most detailed account of the organization of the Army, which is the primary
source for other historians. According to Luo, the reliance on social networks is the most salient
feature of the Army. As interpreted by Kuhn (1970), because the state was weak, the recruitment
and command structure of the Hunan Army was a reflection of certain governing principles of the
social structure in general: elite connections formed from the Civil Service Exam as well as kinship
on the top and clan ties at the bottom.

      Why did social networks matter? Although elites in Zeng's network played an active role
in recruiting soldiers, most of these elites did not fight the battles. Thus, attracting soldiers by
role models was less likely in this setting. Instead, historical discussion suggests that information
and trust were relevant. On the demand side, network provides information for screening the
soldiers. As explained in Kuhn (1978): "The Hunan Army ultimately swelled to a strength of
some 132,000 men...not large by the standards of the day, exemplifies Zeng's emphasis of quality
over numbers...Hunan Army units were distinguished for strict attention to details of recruitment,
training, discipline and indoctrination in Confucian principles." Zeng himself wrote about the
principle for screening soldiers in 1855: "Young, strong, simple-minded peasants are the most
preferred...Carefree wanderers should be avoided." On the supply side, social networks facilitate
trust. Soldiers were promised a monthly salary of four taels, twice that of the official troops, and
the soldier's family was promised 50 taels, about twice the yearly income of an unskilled labor,
if he died in battles. Sometimes, the elite also emphasized that fighting the war provided a good
career path for commoners (Luo 1939). Trust is needed for such promises to be believable.

      Historians also have noted that the success of the Hunan Army "launched the career of its
leaders and secured fame for the Hunanese throughout the Empire" (Platt 2007). As stated by
(Kuhn 1970), due to this war, the fortunes and personal interconnections of the Hunan gentry were
to "shape the fortunes of the empire over the next generation."




                                                 8
3     Data and Measurement

3.1     Measuring Elite Networks

The Qing government, following precedent, relied on the Civil Service Exam system to recruit
bureaucrats. As a result, the Civil Service Exam system served as the primary venue for social
mobility and elite network formation. In addition, similar to other societies, kinship also was an
important source of links. Below, we define elite networks and describe our elite network data and
how we aggregate individual-level data to the county level.


Sources of Links.        Our network data comprise three types of links: (1) those from the Civil Service
Exams, including examiner-examinee and quasi-classmate relationships; (2) kinship, including
blood and marriage relationships; and (3) other friends. We present the data construction process
in Appendix A.1.

      There are two important relationships specific to the exam system, particularly via the
provincial-level and metropolitan (i.e., national-level) exams that produced bureaucrats for the
state. The first is examiner-examinee link. After each exam, the new graduates paid respect to
the court-commissioned examiners (who were already high-level officials but whose identity was
not disclosed until a few days before the exam), whom they considered their lifelong masters, and
entered into "a firm master-disciple pledge to assist each other to weather the storms of political
life" (Miyazaki 1981). The graduates called themselves disciples (men-sheng) of the examiners. In
this way, Zeng was a disciple of Mu Zhang-e, who helped Zeng's career in the 1840s. In the words
of Miyazaki, "The graduate felt very grateful for being appreciated by the court-commissioned
examiner, who, free to determine who was qualified, had selected him among many competitors".
The other link is quasi-classmates formed via the exam. The graduates who succeeded from the
exam referred to each other as "quasi-classmates" (tong-nian, meaning "the same year"). For ex-
ample, Zeng Guofan and Li Wen-an (Li Hongzhang's father) were quasi-classmates. Again, these
quasi-classmate links are political, as they are expected to support each other in politics. Because
the exams were carefully recorded, we digitize the exam record archives to capture these relation-
ships. The data also allow us to observe indirect links with Zeng. For instance, his examiner, Mu

The exam has three levels: prefecture, provincial, and national. Because passing the prefecture-level exam alone did not
hold promise of a political career, we do not include prefecture-level links. It also is well known that the master-disciple
and quasi-classmate links in the elite circle applied only to the provincial- and national-level exams.



                                                             9
Zhang-e, had disciples from other national-level exams. These disciples were linked with Zeng
indirectly via Mu. We use information on all of the exams that took place during the three decades
before the war (1820­1849) to construct the exam links. Our data sources are Jiang, Jing and Chen
(2010) and Zhu and Xie (1980).

     The second source of link was based on kinship. Blood relationships, such as brothers and
sons, are certainly important, but marriage also provides the opportunity to connect with important
families. For instance, Zeng and Guo Songtao were in-laws. Guo was already an important local
elite before the war and became a national-level statesman after the war. Guo Songtao and Zuo
Zongtang (who later also become an important national-level politician) also were in-laws. We
obtain this information from Zeng Guofan's Family Tree (Cheng 1997).

     The third source refers to the individuals covered in The Chronicle of Figures in the Hunan
Army (Mei 1997) who can be considered as friends of Zeng and who helped him in war mobilization.


Defining Elite Network and County-level Connections.           Because some of the links were not
subject to personal choices (e.g., exam links) whereas others (e.g., marriages) were, we take this
into consideration by defining elite networks in two ways, which we term baseline networks and
expanded networks.

     Our baseline networks include only exam links and blood relationships and are plotted in
Figure 1A. These relationships could not be chosen by an individual and were thus exogenous to
the war. In the figure, each big circle consists of successful individuals from one exam (which took
place once every three years). The black dots indicate the individuals from Hunan. On average,
only around 200 individuals succeeded in a national-level exam cohort, with three to eight from
Hunan. All of these individuals were eligible for official positions and, hence, belonged to the elite
class. Our baseline network covers 2,419 elites, 131 from Hunan.

     Our expanded networks add marriage relationships and friends to the baseline network, as
shown in Figure 1B. This definition covers 2,460 elites, 164 from Hunan. This alternative measure
uses all of the available information but with the caveat that marriages and friends were subject
to personal choices. Thus, we focus on the baseline network and use the expanded networks for
robustness for our discussion below.

     To measure a county's connections in the elite network, we need to transform the network
                                                                                             Nc   1
above to a county-level variable. Our baseline measure for a county's connections is         n=1 dc,n ,

where N refers to the number of elites originally from a county, and d indicates the steps to be

                                                 10
linked with Zeng. Table 1 presents the summary statistics for this variable. We also employ an
unweighted measure by counting the number of connected elites from a county.

     There is wide variation across counties in the elite network. To see this variation, we plot the
spatial distribution of county-level (directly and indirectly) connected elites across the country and
within the Hunan province in Figures 2(a)-(b). As shown, there is wide variation even within the
Hunan province: 36 of all 75 counties had some connections in Zeng's personal networks, among
which seven counties had more than five connections.


County-level Connections vs. Other Characteristics. A county's elite connections may be
correlated with its other characteristics. We are concerned about whether our connection measure
reflects a county's economic development, political importance, and its relationship with the
Taipings. We collect ten variables that can be grouped into these three broad categories.

    · (i) geography-economic factors: log area, whether the county has a main river, log calorie
      suitability, log population in 1820, and log urban population in 1850. These variables capture
      a county's productivity and economic advantages.
    · (ii) political importance: whether the county is a prefecture capital or not, log quotas for the
      entry-level Civil Service Exam pre-Taiping, and log number of pre-Taiping Jinshi (i.e., who
      succeeded in the national-level exams).
    · (iii) Taiping-related factors: whether the county was on the route of the Taipings to Nanjing
      and log distance to Nanjing.

     We explain how we construct these variables and our data sources in Appendix A.2. We
examine the correlations between our baseline measure of connections and these characteristics for
both Hunan counties and all counties and report the findings in Appendix A.3. Two patterns are
clear. First, county-level elite connections are not strongly correlated with geographical variables,
economic factors, or the Taiping routes. Second, elite connections are positively associated with
a county's political importance, proxied by being a prefecture capital and the number of Jinshi.
Intuitively, politically more important counties tend to have more elites, in general, which correlates
with our connections measure even though we focus on a specific network. This pattern begs the
question of whether our results capture the general eliteness of a county, which we address in our
analyses.




                                                  11
3.2    Measuring War Mobilization

We use soldier deaths to proxy war mobilization and consider the interpretations of recruitment
and death rates in our later analyses. Specifically, we digitize the records of deaths of 34,328
soldiers with their names and origin counties from Provincial Gazetteers of Hunan (Zeng 1885).
In Appendix A.4, we explain the data source for this variable and give an example to illustrate
the information in the original archives. For 29,490 of these records, we also know the year and
location (battle) of the soldiers' deaths.

      Using the individual-level information, we construct a county-year panel of soldier deaths
during the period 1850­1864 for all 75 counties in Hunan. The individual-level data provide some
additional information on clan relationship (reflected by surnames) and social status (i.e., exam
degree or not), which we use to address possible measurement error in our analyses.


3.3    Measuring Elite Power

To measure the distribution of political power before and after war, we construct a database on
national-level offices and officials during the period 1820­1910, based on The Chronicle of Officials
in the Qing Dynasty (Qian 2005). Much like previous dynasties, the Qing used an official rank
system. The system had nine numbered ranks, each subdivided into upper and lower levels. Our
focus are those with a rank of three and above (i.e., vice minister-level and above), which we refer
to as national-level offices, as these officials' power went beyond provincial affairs. Our data cover
28,899 national-level offices held by 2,971 officials on an annual basis. On average, 221 officials
held 318 offices for a given year. Of the officials, 67% were of Han ethnicity and held 65.6% of all
positions (whereas the Han accounted for over 99% of the population). We focus on the offices held
by the Han because the Manchu officials had a different career track, and all came from Manchuria,
where there are less systematic historical data.

      We present an example of the records and plot the yearly distribution of national-level offices
(Appendix A.5), which shows fairly stable numbers of positions and officials over time. Using this
position-level information, we construct a county-year panel of national-level offices during the
period 1820­1910 for all 1,646 counties.




                                                   12
4     How Did Elite Networks Affect Soldier Deaths?

4.1    Motivational Evidence and Research Design

Did elite networks affect where soldiers who died came from? As motivational evidence, we plot
the number of soldier deaths by year and by two groups of counties within Hunan: 36 counties
with elite connections vs. the other 39 counties without connections (defined by our baseline
network). As shown in Figure 3, before Zeng took power in 1853, the numbers of soldier deaths in
non-connected and connected counties appear to be in parallel. In contrast, after Zeng took power,
the number rose to a higher level for connected counties, which persisted until the end of the war
in 1864. On average, the yearly soldier deaths pre- and post-1853 were 6.6 and 13, respectively,
for non-connected counties, but 4.7 and 53.1, respectively, for connected counties, suggesting the
importance of Zeng's network in war mobilization proxied by soldier deaths.

      Based on this pattern, we use a difference-in-differences strategy by exploiting county-level
variation across Hunan in elite connections and time-variation in Zeng's appointment in 1853. The
data cover 75 counties during the priod 1850­1964, and the specification is as follows:
       (ln)SoldierDeathc,t = EliteConnectionsc × Post1853t + c + t + Xc × Post1853t
                               +  pref × t +        c,t ,                                             (1)
where SoldierDeathc,t refers to the number of soldier deaths in county c and year t. We measure
                                        Nc   1
EliteConnectionsc in two ways: (i)      n=1 dc,n   where we discount the importance of links by distance;
and (ii) Nc , where we do not weight the links.

      We control for county-level characteristics that vary little over time and the factors that affect
all counties over time by including county-level fixed effects (c ) and year fixed effects (t ). In
addition, we gradually control for the ten county-level characteristics introduced above and their
interaction with post dummy (Xc × Post1853t ) and prefecture-by-year fixed effects (pref × t ). All
standard errors are clustered at the county level.

      To facilitate interpretation of the coefficients, we use ln (Soldier deaths+1) as the dependent
variable in our main estimates and present Poisson estimates to confirm that the log transformation
itself is not critical for our estimations.




                                                      13
4.2    The Impact of Elite Networks on Soldier Deaths

Average and Year-by-Year Effects. We find that soldier deaths in counties with more connections
with Zeng increased significantly after Zeng took power. In Column (1) of Table 2, we control only
for county and year fixed effects and obtain an estimate of 0.214. In Column (2), we add prefecture-
by-year fixed effects, and the estimate changes to 0.162. In Columns (3)­(5), we gradually add
county-level characteristics and their interactions with the post dummy and obtain estimates around
0.239. We present the Poisson regression estimate in Column (6), which is 0.224, close to that
in Column (5). In addition, Columns (7)­(9) present the results using an unweighted connection
measure, which provides an estimate of 0.172. The standard deviations for the weighted and
unweighted measures are 2.53 and 3.71, respectively. The estimates for the one-standard-deviation
change for the two measures are thus comparable: 0.605 and 0.638, respectively.

      Based on our preferred estimate in Column (5), one more elite directly connected with Zeng
increases the number of soldier deaths by 23.9%. To put this number into perspective, a 23.9%
increase in the number of soldier deaths implies 8.1 soldier deaths in one county-year, or 6,683
more soldiers during the period 1854­64 for the 75 counties.

      A key assumption for our difference-in-differences strategy is that counties were not systemat-
ically different before Zeng took power. To validate this assumption, we present the results year by
year in Appendix B.1 and a visualization of the estimates in Figure 4. As shown, elite connections
to Zeng were not correlated with soldier deaths before 1853, implying that the counties did not
exhibit different trends before Zeng took power. After Zeng took power, however, we observe a
large positive effect of elite connections that persisted until the end of the war.


Recruitment and Deployment.          Because deaths are the costliest type of contribution to war, it
is meaningful to study soldier deaths as the outcome of war mobilization. Nevertheless, soldier
deaths are an outcome of war recruitment, and the death rate, the latter of which can be affected by
strategic deployment or soldiers' own dedication. Below, we conduct two heterogeneous analyses
to check the relevance of the two interpretations.

      First, we exploit variation in the primary mobility channel, proxied by the entry-level exam
quota for a county. If a county enjoyed a higher entry-level quota, we expect the impact of elite
networks in recruitment to be smaller. This is, indeed, what we find. As seen in Columns (1)­
(3) of Table 3, one standard deviation in quotas per capita (0.241) decreases the impact of elite



                                                  14
connections by 0.942, or 52% of the main effect of elite connections (1.793).

      Second, we exploit variation in the importance of battles. We assume that the battles around
cities were more important ex ante and examine whether the impact of elite networks on soldier
deaths is higher for the more important battles. Two patterns seen in Columns (4)­(6) are notable.
First, the impact is even larger for more important battles, which is consistent with possible strategic
deployment. Second, the impact of elite networks holds regardless of battle types. This further
confirms the importance of the recruitment interpretation, as elite network increases soldier deaths,
regardless of deployment incentives. Thus, we conclude that, although some deaths could come
from strategic deployment, soldier deaths certainly reflect the importance of recruitment.


4.3      Additional Checks

Elite Networks. Measurement error in elite networks is likely. In addition, elite networks may
be related to other unobserved county characteristics. Here, we present three results to show that
such concerns are unlikely to be critical. First, our finding holds if we expand our definition of
elite networks to the expanded networks. As reported in Columns (1)­(4) of Appendix B.2, the
estimates are slightly smaller than those from our baseline definition. Moreover, because those
who passed the national-level exam were promised a political career, we expect the links formed
there to be more important politically. Indeed, as reported in Columns (5)­(8), the estimates based
on the national-level exam network are more than two times higher than those from our baseline
network.

      Second, we cannot observe personal connections at the very bottom. For instance, the elites
could employ clan connections for mobilization (Luo 1938). We proxy clan relationship by the
surnames of the elites and the soldiers. Specifically, we assume that the elite-soldier belonged to the
same clan if they came from the same county and shared the same surname. We find a significantly
larger impact of elite connections for the soldiers from the same clan as the elites. Columns (1)­(3)
in Table 4 present the results for 75 counties × 15 years × number of surnames (for each county).
As shown, the impact of elite connections on the deaths of soldiers from the same clan is at least
four times higher than that for a different clan. Thus, clan relationships mattered. Similar to the
discussion of the historical narratives, clan relationships provided information and helped to build
trust.
This finding is consistent with the importance of perceived social mobility (proxied by quota per capita) in political
stability, as studied by Bai and Jia (2016).


                                                         15
      Third, we find that a county's elite connections are positively associated with its political
importance, as discussed in Appendix A.3. By controlling for political importance measures and
their interactions with the post dummy in Table 2, we show that our estimates are not driven by
a county's political importance. To further validate the relevance of the networks that we have
identified, we leverage the timing of the exams to construct the placebo networks. Specifically,
we construct placebo networks by assuming that Zeng passed the 1836 or 1840 national-level
exam, rather than the actual one (1838). Under such assumptions, his national-level exam networks
would look different (as shown by the maps in Appendix B.3), even though the placebo networks
would be correlated with the actual network and a county's general eliteness. We find that the
placebo national-level exam connections did not exhibit similar findings once the actual one was
considered, as reported in Columns (4)­(6) of Table 4. Thus, our findings are driven by the specific
elite networks that we identified, rather than by a county's general political eliteness.


Soldier Deaths.     We address measurement error in soldier deaths in two ways. First, in the death
records, 14% did not report death year. Thus, it may be possible that elite connections are correlated
with more precise information on deaths. As a check, we examine the relationship between elite
connections and the probability of missing years by counties. As shown in Appendix B.4, there is
no correlation between elite connections and missing information, suggesting that such a concern
is not critical.

      Second, 93 of the individuals in the soldier death records held exam degrees. When checking
the correlation of such deaths and commoner deaths, we find a strong correlation (with a R-squared
of 0.44). When examining how connections affect the deaths of the two groups, we also find
comparable standardized coefficients, as shown in Appendix B.5. Because it is difficult to make
mistakes on the degree holders, this result further suggests that our finding is unlikely to be explained
by misreporting of soldier deaths.



5     How Did Network-induced Soldier Deaths Shape Elite Power?

5.1    Motivational Evidence and Research Design

How did war mobilization affect elite power after the war? In particular, we want to know the impact
of network-induced soldier deaths documented above on elite power. The concern, however, is that


                                                   16
elite networks might affect war via channels beyond war mobilization. To address this concern,
we use information on both Hunan and non-Hunan counties. The non-Hunan counties enjoyed
different degrees of network connections but did not produce soldiers for the Hunan Army. Thus,
elite power in non-Hunan counties gives us a sense of the role of elite networks in shaping elite
power without war mobilization.

      As motivational evidence, we plot the annual number of national-level offices held by four
groups of counties ­ the connected and unconnected counties in Hunan and the connected and
unconnected counties in other provinces, as seen in 5. Two patterns are apparent: First, the number
of national-level offices held by individuals from connected counties in Hunan clearly increased in
the later stage of the war and after the war. Second, there is no similar increase for connected counties
in non-Hunan provinces, even though connected counties generally accounted for more national-
level offices. These patterns suggest that, without war moralization, the association between elite
connections and elite power was fairly stable over time.

      Based on this evidence, we use Hunan × EliteConnectc to instrument soldier deaths after Zeng
took power (i.e., during the period 1854­1864), while controlling for possible time-varying impacts
of EliteConnectc and Hunan. The first-stage and second-stage specifications are as follows:



SoldierDeathsc,1854-64 × Post1853t =1 Hunan × EliteConnectc × Post1853t + 2 Hunan × Post1853t
                                         + 3 EliteConnectc × Post1853t + c + t + Xc × Post1853t +            c,t ,

                                                                                                       (2)
and
       NatlOfficec,t =IV SoldierDeathc,1854-64 × P ost1853t + 2 Hunan × Post1853t
                       + 3 EliteConnectc × Post1853t + c + t +  Xc × Post1853t +               c,t .   (3)
where NatlOfficec,t indicates the number of national-level offices an connected county c held in
year t. SoldierDeathsc,1854-64 refers to the total number of soldier deaths in county c in the decade
after Zeng took power. As above, we include county fixed effects c and year fixed effects t as
well as all of the county-level controls in equation (1). Again, all the standard errors are clustered
at the county level.

      In addition, we leverage different sources of elite connections and conduct over-identification
tests, whereby we can check whether one component of elite connections has any direct impact
on elite power when using the other component (interacting with Hunan and ×P ost1853t ) as an


                                                   17
instrument.


5.2    The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths on Elite Power

IV and OLS Estimates.       We present the instrument variable (IV) estimate and compare it with
OLS estimate in Table 5. Columns (1)­(2) confirm the motivational patterns in Figure 5: One
direct elite connection in a Hunan county is associated with 0.044 more national-level offices after
1853, or around 47% of the county-year mean (0.093); in contrast, no such an association exists
for counties in other provinces. Column (3) presents the reduced-form estimate, which is roughly
equivalent to the difference between the estimates in Columns (1) and (2). Column (4) presents
the first-stage estimate: One direct elite connection in a Hunan county increases soldier deaths
during the period 1854­1864 by 256. The F -statistic of 249.2 indicates that the first-stage estimate
is strong. The reduced-form and first-stage estimates imply an IV estimate of 0.189 (Column
(5)), meaning that 1,000 more soldier deaths are associated with 0.189 more national-level offices,
almost double the mean. As a comparison, we present the OLS estimate in Column (6), where the
coefficient on 1,000 soldier deaths is 0.239, not significantly different from our IV estimate.

      As suggestive evidence to check whether connections matter through war mobilization, we run
a horse race between soldier deaths and Hunan × EliteConnectc in the OLS specification (Column
(7)). The comparison between the results in Columns (4) and (7) is suggestive: Once we control
for soldier deaths, the impact of Hunan × EliteConnectc no longer varies over time, suggesting that
connections matter due to war mobilization.

      As a further check on whether Hunan × EliteConnectc might have additional impacts on power
beyond the channel of war mobilization, we rely on the multiple sources of links in the elite network
and divide them into two components: the national-level exam connections and the rest. If one
component has an additional impact on power beyond the channel of mobilization, we would expect
to see a significant coefficient of this component when using the other as an instrument. This is
not the case, as shown in Table 6, which again confirms that Hunan × EliteConnectc affects power
via war mobilization. In other words, war mobilization provides an opportunity for those who are
connected in Hunan, which consequently elevates their power.


Who Benefited? Having documented that the counties with more pre-war elite connections in
Zeng's personal network produced more national-level officials thanks to war mobilization, we now


                                                 18
investigate who in these counties benefited. We are interested in knowing whether the benefits
concern a fixed group (e.g., those in the network) or go beyond such a group, which is useful
for shedding light on the long-run implications. If only a fixed group benefited, we expect their
influence to decline over time. In contrast, if the benefits also applied to additional individuals
from their home counties, the power impact is likely to persist.

      We conduct two analyses. First, we study the dynamic pattern and present the year-by-year IV
estimates during the period 1821­1910, using 1820 as the reference year (Figure 6). The dynamic
pattern confirms that pre-trends are absent and that mobilization-power relationship appears in the
later stage of the war and after the war. The 90-year panel also allows us to see the post-war
dynamics in the long run. While we observe a persistent power impact for several decades, the
power impact also exhibits fluctuations. In Appendix C.1, we take a closer look at the fluctuations
and find that they are driven by individuals of different cohorts (rather than by the same group of
individuals). This finding implies that the power impact concerns multiple cohorts, which explains
its relevance in the long run.

      As another way of examining this question, we decompose the individuals who hold national-
level offices into those inside and outside the network (Table 7). Indeed, those in the network
benefited: Per 1,000 network-induced soldier deaths increased the number of national-level offices
held by those inside the network 3.2-fold. In addition, some not in the elite network also benefited:
Per 1,000 network-induced soldier deaths increased the number of national-level offices held by
those outside the network 1.7-fold. Together with the previously noted dynamic patterns, this
result suggests the effects of war mobilization on elite power in two senses: First, war mobilization
benefited those in the elite network. Second, war mobilization created new elites not in the elite
network, and these new ones were more likely to come from the home counties of those in the
pre-war elite network.


5.3    Additional Checks

Elite Networks. As in the analysis of how elite networks affect soldier deaths, we employ the
same placebo networks (i.e., assuming that Zeng passed the previous and the next national-level
exams) to illustrate that our findings on elite power are specific to the role of actual networks. For
simplicity, we focus on the reduced-form estimates. As shown in Column (1) of Appendix C.2,
the interaction of the Hunan and national-level exam connections exhibits a similar pattern as our
main finding when using all baseline connections. In contrast, although the placebo national-level

                                                 19
exam connections are correlated with the actual national-level exam connections, they do not have
the same effects as do the actual connections (Columns (2)­(4)). Again, these results confirm that
our finding is specific to personal networks rather than a general eliteness of a county.


Soldier Deaths. Soldier deaths before 1854 were not driven by the elite network that we have
characterized and, thus, do not reflect war mobilization by the elites in the network. If we find that
soldier deaths before 1854 are not associated with an increase in elite power, our finding on the
mobilization-power link would be strengthened. This is the case, as shown in Appendix C.3.


Comparison Provinces. The connected elites came from all 18 provinces in the Qing dynasty.
Our finding holds even if we focus on a subgroup of provinces, as reported in Appendix C.4. We
first restrict the comparison provinces to the five provinces along the Taiping route (Columns (1)­
(2)). Then, we use Hunan's three neighboring provinces out of the five provinces along the Taiping
route as the comparison and find similar first- and second-stage results (Columns (3)­(4)). Finally,
we focus on the two provinces in the Huai River region (Anhui and Jiangsu) as the comparison
provinces. Influenced by the Hunan Army, elites in this region established the Huai Army, which
collaborated with the Hunan Army in some battles.           It is possible that the elites from the Huai
region also benefited like those from Hunan. Such a provincial-level influence, however, should
not affect our county-level research design. Indeed, we still obtain a similar pattern when using
these two provinces as the comparison provinces (Columns (5)­(6)).



6    Conclusion

Our study highlights the nexus of elites and war mobilization: Elites use their personal network for
mobilization, and network-induced mobilization further elevates elite power after the war. The first
finding joins the existing efforts to open the black box of war mobilization. The second offers a
new perspective to link war mobilization and elite power, which underscores that war mobilization
can shape the state via the power structure. Equally important, the two findings can be interrelated
in the same framework, which suggests a feedback between elite power and war mobilization.

     As one of the most important wars in Chinese history, many historical narratives exist on

We do not study the Huai Army because it was formed with the support of the Xiang Army and the data is less
systematic than the Xiang Army.


                                                    20
the Taiping Rebellion. By constructing systematic data from over a dozen historical sources and
employing different empirical strategies, we are able to bring these perspectives together to develop
insights into elites and war mobilization. The Taiping Rebellion shares similarities with many other
civil wars. For instance, the soldiers of both sides were peasants who were very much alike. The
leaders of the Hunan Army were incumbent elites in the Qing government. The Taiping Heavenly
Kingdom was founded by enterprising individuals, such as Hong Xiuquan, who attempted to find
an alternative way to become an elite after repeatedly failing the Civil Service Exam. It would
appear not to be an exaggeration to say that such a deadly war, like many others, was fought for the
sake of the elites. Thus, our key insight ­ elites mobilized war and war benefited elites ­ is relevant
to understanding war and conflicts in other contexts.



References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, and Matthew O. Jackson (2015), "History, Expectations, and Leadership in the Evolution of
    Social Norms," Review of Economic Studies, 82(2): 423­456.
[2] Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya (2015), "Radio
    and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4): 1885­1939.
[3] Bai, Ying, and Ruixue Jia (2016), "Elite Recruitment and Political Stability: the Impact of the Abolition of China's
    Civil Service Exam", Econometrica, 84(2): 677­733.
[4] Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson (2010), "State capacity, Conflict, and Development", Econometrica, 78(1):
    1­34.
[5] Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel (2010), "Civil War," Journal of Economic literature, 48(1): 3­57.
[6] Cagé, Julia, Anna Dagorret, Pauline A. Grosjean, and Saumitra Jha (2020), "Heroes and Villains: The Effects of
    Combat Heroism on Autocratic Values and Nazi Collaboration in France," Working Paper.
[7] Ch, Rafael, Jacob Shapiro, Abbey Steele, and Juan F. Vargas (2018), "Endogenous Taxation in Ongoing Internal
    Conflict: The Case of Colombia," American Political Science Review, 112(4): 996­1015.
[8] Cheng, Kuang-Yu, and Sheng-Mo Hsu (1980), Historical Atlas of China (Zhongguo Lishi Ditu), Taiwan: Chinese
    Culture University Press.
[9] Cheng, Xiaojun (1997), Zeng Guofan's Family Tree (Zeng Guofan Jiazu ). Liaoning Guji Press.
[10] Deng, Hanzhi (2020), "The Merit of Misfortune: Taiping rebellion and the Rise of Indirect Taxation in Modern
    China, 1850s­1900s," Working Paper, LSE.
[11] Dincecco, Mark, and Mauricio Prado (2012) "Warfare, Fiscal capacity, and Performance," Journal of Economic
    Growth 17(3): 171­203.
[12] Dippel, Christian, and Stephan Heblich (2021), "Leadership in Social Networks: Evidence from the Forty-
    Eighters in the Civil War," American Economic Review, 111(2): 472­505
[13] Fearon, James (1995), "Rationalist Explanations for War," International Organization, 49(3): 379­379.
[14] Fujii, Lee Ann (2009), Killing Neighbors: Webs of Violence in Rwanda. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.


                                                          21
[15] Galor, Oded and Ömer Özak (2016), "The Agricultural Origins of Time Preference," American Economic Review,
    106(10): 3064­3103.
[16] Ge, Jianxiong (Ed.) (2000), Zhongguo renkoushi (China Population History), Shanghai: Fudan University Press.
[17] Goldstone, Jack A. (1991), Revolution and Rebellion in the Early Modern World: Population Change and State
    Breakdown in England, France, Turkey, and China, 1600­1850. University of California Press.
[18] Harvard Yenching Insitute (2007), CHGIS, Version 4, Cambridge.
[19] Heldring, Leander (2021), "The Origins of Violence in Rwanda," Review of Economic Studies, 88(2): 730­763.
[20] Jiang, Yasha, Li Jing, Shenqi Chen (2010), China's Imperial Civil Service Exam Records (Zhongguo Kejulu
    Xubian). China National Microfilming Center for Library Resources.
[21] König, Michael D., Dominic Rohner, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2017), "Networks in Conflict:
    Theory and Evidence from the Great War of Africa", Econometrica, 85(4): 1093­1132.
[22] Kuhn, Philip A. (1970), Rebellion and its Enemies in Late Imperial China: Militarization and Social Structure,
    1796-1864. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
[23] Kuhn, Philip A. (1978), "The Taiping Rebellion", The Cambridge History of China, Vol. 10, Edited by John
    Fairbank, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[24] Kun, Gang et al. (Ed.), (1899), Qinding da Qing huidian shili (Imperially Established Institutes and Laws of the
    Great Qing Dynasty), Being: Zhonghua shu ju (reprinted in 1991).
[25] Luo, Ergang (1939), Xiangjun Xinzhi (A New History of the Hunan Army). Shanghai: Shanghai shudian, reprinted
    in 1996.
[26] McCord, Edward Allen (1993), The Power of the Gun: The Emergence of Modern Chinese Warlordism. Berkeley:
    University of California Press.
[27] Mei, Yingjie (1997), The Chronicle of Figures in the Hunan Army (Xiangjun Renwu Nianpu). Yuelu Press:
    Changsha.
[28] Myerson, Roger (2008), "The Autocrat's Credibility Problem and Foundations of the Constitutional State,"
    American Political Science Review: 125­139.
[29] Miyazaki, Ichisada (1981), China's Examination Hell: The Civil Service Examinations of Imperial China. Yale
    University Press.
[30] Molinari, Gustave (1904), The Society of Tomorrow: A Forecast of Its Political and Economic Organisation. GP
    Putnam's sons, orignally published in 1899.
[31] Passarelli, Francesco, and Guido Tabellini (2017), "Emotions and Political Unrest," Journal of Political Economy,
    125 (3): 903­946.
[32] Platt, Stephen R. (2007), Provincial Patriots: The Hunanese and Modern China. Harvard University Press.
[33] Platt, Stephen R (2012), Autumn in the Heavenly Kingdom: China, the West, and the Epic story of the Taiping
    Civil War. Knopf.
[34] Qian, Shifu (2005), (The Chronicle of Officials in the Qing Dynasty (Qingdai zhiguan nianbiao). Being:
    Zhonghua shuju.
[35] Ray, Debraj, and Joan Esteban (2017), "Conflict and Development," Annual Review of Economics, 9: 263­293.
[36] Rogall, Thorsten (2021), "Mobilizing the Masses for Genocide," American Economic Review, 111(1): 41­72.
[37] Rodriguez-Franco, Diana (2016), "Internal Wars, Taxation, and State Building," American Sociological Review
    81(1): 190­213.


                                                         22
[38] Satyanath, Shanker, Nico Voigtlönder, and Hans-Joachim Voth (2017), "Bowling for Fascism: Social Capital and
    the Rise of the Nazi Party," Journal of Political Economy, 125(2): 478­526.
[39] Skinner, G. W., Zumou Yue, and Mark Henderson (2008), ChinaW-Cities, County Seats and Yamen Units
    (1820­1893), https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/JCT5NE, Harvard Dataverse, V2.
[40] Tilly, Charles (1985), "War-Making and State-Making as Organized Crime," in Bringing the State Back In, edited
    by Evans, Rueschemeyer and Skocpol: 169­191.
[41] Wang, Kaiyun (1881), Xiangjun zhi (A Treatise of the Hunan Army). Changsha: Yuelu shushe, reprinted in 1983.
[42] Wood, Elisabeth Jean (2008), "The Social Processes of Civil War: The Wartime Transformation of Social
    Networks," Annual Review of Political Science, 11: 539­561.
[43] Yanagizawa-Drott, David (2014), "Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1947­1994.
[44] Zeng, Guoquan (1885), Hunan Gazetteer. In the Continuation to the Siku Quanshu, edited by Editorial Committee
    of the Continuation to the Siku Quanshu, 2002, Shanghai: Shanghai Classics Publishing House.
[45] Zhu, Baojiong, and Peilin Xie (Ed.) (1980), Official Directory of Ming-Qing Imperial Exam Graduates (Ming
    Qing jinshi timing beilu suoyin), Shanghai: Shanghai guji.




                                                        23
                                                                 Figure 1A. Elite Network Definition: Baseline Networks
24




     Note. This figure plots the elites in our baseline networks, defined by exam relationships and blood relationships. Each big circle consists the graduates from one exam. The black dots indicate the
     individuals from Hunan. Those are not linked are not in our baseline networks but in our expanded networks.
                                                                   Figure 1B. Elite Network Definition: Expanded Networks
25




     Note. This figure plots the elites in our expanded networks, i.e., adding marriages and friends to the baseline networks.
                                                              Figure 2. Spatial Distribution of County-level Elite Connections
26




     Note. The two maps illustrate a wide variation in the number of elites connected with Zeng Guofan across counties in Hunan and the whole country. For simplicity, the number of connections is unweighted.
                                                 Figure 3. Motivational Evidence on Elite Networks and Soldier Deaths: Raw Data
27




     Note. This figure plots the number of soldier deaths by year in unconnected and connected counties (i.e., those with at least one elite in our baseline elite network.) The blue indicates the year Zeng was
     assigned to organize an army from existing militias.
                                                Figure 4. The Impact of Elite Connections on Soldier Deaths: Year-by-Year Estimates
28




     Note. This figure plots year-by-year estimates, using 1853 as the reference year. It shows that elite connections increased soldier deaths after Zeng took power in 1853.
                                       Figure 5. Motivational Evidence for the IV Design: National-level Offices by Connection-Province
29




     Note. This figure plots the number of national-level offices in four groups of counties. It shows that (1) connected counties in Hunan obtained more power in the later stage of the war and after the war, and
     (2) the role of connections in non-Hunan provinces was relatively stable over time.
                             Figure 6. The Dynamics Impacts of Network-induced Soldier Deaths on # National-level Offices: IV Estimates
30




     Note. This figure shows that counties with more network-induced soldier deaths obtained more national-level positions during the last few years of the war and after the war.
                                                                                  Table 1. Summary Statistics


            Sample                                                                 A. Hunan counties, 1850­1864                              B: All counties, 1820­1910
                                                                                  Source    Obs. Mean        S.D.                         Source      Obs.     Mean     S.D.

            Number of soldier deaths, by year                                        A           1,125      26.21      145.75
            Number of soldier deaths during 1854-64                                                                                          A           149,786       27.51      462.82

            Elite connections, Baseline networks (weighted)                    B, C, D, E        1,125       1.23        2.53          B, C, D, E        149,786        0.68        2.02

            Number of national-level offices                                                                                                 K           149,786        0.09        0.54
31




            ln Area                                                                 F            1,125       7.84        0.48               F            149,786        7.40        0.89
            ln Population                                                           A            1,125      12.08        0.66               L            149,786       12.08        1.02
            ln Calories suitability                                                 G            1,125      11.12        0.50               G            149,786       10.48        1.44
            Main river dummy                                                        F            1,125       0.40        0.49               F            149,786        0.42        0.49
            Prefecture capital                                                      H            1,125       0.28        0.51               H            149,786        0.14        0.35
            ln Urban population                                                     H            1,125       8.53        1.48               H            149,786        7.70        2.76
            ln Number of Jinshi                                                    B, F          1,125       1.11        1.07              B, F          149,786        1.46        1.23
            ln Quotas for the entry-level exam                                      I            1,125       2.63        0.36               I            149,786        2.50        0.84
            ln Distance to Nanjing                                                  F            1,125       6.75        0.15               F            149,786        6.64        0.67
            Along the route of Taipings during 1850-53                              J            1,125       0.12        0.33               J            149,786        0.04        0.19

     Note. A. Zeng (1885); B. Zhu and Xie (1980); C. Jiang, Jing and Chen (2010); D.Cheng (1997); E. Mei (1997); F. CHGIS (2007); G. Galor and Özak (2016); H. Skinner, Yue and Henderson (2008); I.
     Kun (1899); J. Cheng and Hsu (1980); K. Qian (2005); L. Ge (2000).
                                                       Table 2. The Impact of Elite Connections on Soldier Deaths: DID Estimates
                                                                         Sample: Hunan counties, 1850­1864


                                                               (1)             (2)           (3)                 (4)               (5)            (6)                   (7)         (8)                  (9)
       Dependent variable:                                                              ln (Deaths +1)                                          Deaths                  ln (Deaths +1)                 Deaths
       Method                                                                               Linear                                              Poisson                     Linear                     Poisson

           Nc   1
           n=1 dc,n ×Post                                 0.214***         0.162**         0.199***          0.246***         0.239***          0.224**
                                                           (0.058)         (0.068)          (0.070)           (0.074)          (0.074)          (0.111)
       Nc ×Post                                                                                                                                                     0.146***         0.172***          0.179**
                                                                                                                                                                     (0.042)          (0.054)          (0.082)
32




       County FE                                               Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                    Y                Y                Y
       Year FE                                                 Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                    Y                Y                Y
       Pref. FE×Year FE                                                         Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                                     Y                Y
       Geography-economic var.×Post                                                              Y                Y                Y                Y                                     Y                Y
       Political var.×Post                                                                                        Y                Y                Y                                     Y                Y
       Taiping var.×Post                                                                                                           Y                Y                                     Y                Y
       Observations                                          1,125           1,125            1,125             1,125            1,125            1,125               1,125             1,125            1,125
       R-squared                                             0.187           0.488            0.501             0.524            0.532                                0.187             0.532
       Number of counties                                      75              75               75                75               75               75                  75                75               75

     Note. The table shows that elite connections increased soldier deaths of a county. The sample includes all 75 Hunan counties during 1850­1864. In the Poisson regression, 257 observations are either
     singletons or separated by a fixed effect.
     Control variables include (i) Geography-economic factors: ln area, ln population, ln calorie suitability, and whether the county has a main river; (ii) Political importance: whether the county is a prefecture
     capital, ln quotas for the entry-level Civil Service Exam pre-Taiping, and ln number of pre-Taiping Jinshi (who succeeded in the national-level exam); (iii) Taiping-related factors: whether the county was
     on the route of the Taipings to Nanjing, and ln distance to Nanjing. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant
     at 10%.
                                           Table 3. The Impact of Elite Connections on Soldier Deaths: Recruitment and Deployment
                                                    Sample: Hunan counties, 1850­1864; Dependent variable: ln(Deaths+1)


                                                                                          (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)             (5)              (6)

                               Nc   1
                               n=1 dc,n ×Post                                        1.747***          0.379**         1.793**             0.039**          0.031**
                                                                                       (0.582)         (0.179)          (0.699)            (0.015)          (0.014)
                               Nc   1
                               n=1 dc,n ×Post×Quotas              per capita         -3.456***                         -3.613**
                                                                                       (1.218)                          (1.691)
                               Nc   1
                               n=1 dc,n ×Post×Jinshi            per capita                              -0.669*          0.086
                                                                                                        (0.354)         (0.470)
                               Nc   1
                               n=1 dc,n ×Post×ln          Population                  -0.776**           0.081          -0.818*
                                                                                       (0.322)          (0.120)         (0.434)
                               Nc   1
                               n=1 dc,n ×Battle        around city                                                                                           0.002           0.004
33




                                                                                                                                                            (0.003)         (0.003)
                               Nc   1
                               n=1 dc,n     ×Post×Battle around city                                                                                       0.015***         0.014**
                                                                                                                                                            (0.005)         (0.006)

                            County FE                                                      Y                Y               Y                   Y               Y               Y
                            Year FE                                                        Y                Y               Y                   Y               Y               Y
                            Pref FE×Year FE                                                Y                Y               Y                   Y               Y               Y
                            Controls×Post                                                  Y                Y               Y                   Y               Y
                            Battle FE                                                                                                           Y               Y               Y
                            County FE×Year FE                                                                                                                                   Y
                            Observations                                                1,125            1,125           1,125              52,050          52,050           52,050
                            R-squared                                                   0.539            0.534           0.539               0.211           0.215            0.249

     Note. Columns (1)-(3) show that the effect of elite connections is smaller for counties with higher exam quotas, suggesting that alternative opportunities mitigate the recruitment effect. Columns (4)-(6)
     show that the effect of elite connections holds within a battle, even thought it is larger for more important battles.
     Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county
     level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
                                            Table 4. The Impact of Elite Connections on Soldier Deaths: Clans and Placebo Networks
                                                     Sample: Hunan counties, 1850­1864; Dependent variable: ln(Deaths+1)


                                                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)                 (4)              (5)            (6)             (7)

                 Same-surname connections×Post                                  0.224***        0.247***         0.214***
                                                                                 (0.068)         (0.073)          (0.061)
                 Diff.-surname connections×Post                                                 0.056***
                                                                                                 (0.015)
                 National-level exam connect.×Post                                                                                   0.582***        0.616***         0.611**       0.616***
                                                                                                                                      (0.202)         (0.228)         (0.246)        (0.229)
                 Placebo connections I×Post                                                                                                            -0.058                         -0.023
                 (Assuming Zeng passed the previous exam)                                                                                             (0.164)                        (0.335)
                 Placebo connections II×Post                                                                                                                           -0.048         -0.035
34




                 (Assuming Zeng passed the next exam)                                                                                                                 (0.119)        (0.250)

                 County FE                                                           Y               Y               Y                    Y               Y               Y              Y
                 Year FE                                                             Y               Y               Y                    Y               Y               Y              Y
                 Pref FE×Year FE                                                     Y               Y               Y                    Y               Y               Y              Y
                 Controls×Post                                                       Y               Y               Y                    Y               Y               Y              Y
                 Year FE×Surname FE                                                  Y               Y               Y
                 County FE×Surname FE                                                Y               Y               Y
                 Year FE×County FE                                                                                   Y
                 Observations                                                     48,495          48,495          48,480               1,110            1,110          1,110           1,110
                 R-squared                                                         0.477           0.482           0.616               0.532            0.532          0.532           0.532

     Note. Columns (1)-(3) show that the impact of elite connections is larger for soldiers from the same clan as the elites. Columns (4)-(7) show that elite networks by assuming Zeng Guofan succeeded in the
     exam before and after the real one could not explain our finding.
     Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county
     level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
                                        Table 5. The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths on Elite Power: IV and OLS Estimates
                                                                     Sample: All counties, 1820­1910


                                                                      (1)                (2)                      (3)                       (4)                      (5)                     (6)              (7)
     Sample                                                         Hunan          Non-Hunan                      All                     All                        All                    All              All
                                                                                                                                         IV                                                        OLS
     Method                                                                                               Reduced-form                First-stage             Second-stage
                                                                  Natl-level        Natl-level              Natl-level                 Soldier                 Natl-level               Natl-level       Natl-level
     Dependent var
                                                                   offices           offices                 offices              deaths1854-64 (1K)             offices                 offices          offices
     Mean                                                          0.093             0.093                   0.093                                               0.093                   0.093            0.093

     Soldier deaths1854-64 (1K)×1854­1910                                                                                                                        0.189***               0.239***         0.244***
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.052)                (0.057)          (0.061)
     Connections×Hunan×1854­1910                                                                              0.048***                  0.256***                                                           -0.014
                                                                                                               (0.013)                   (0.016)                                                          (0.016)
35




     Connections×1854­1910                                        0.044***             0.012                    0.011                     0.001                     0.011                  0.010            0.011
                                                                   (0.009)            (0.011)                  (0.011)                   (0.001)                   (0.011)                (0.011)          (0.011)
     Hunan×1854­1910                                                                                            0.085                    0.322**                    0.024                  -0.006           0.007
                                                                                                               (0.063)                   (0.163)                   (0.046)                (0.029)          (0.032)

     County FE                                                         Y                Y                         Y                         Y                        Y                      Y                Y
     Year FE                                                           Y                Y                         Y                         Y                        Y                      Y                Y
     Controls×1854­1910                                                Y                Y                         Y                         Y                        Y                      Y                Y
     Observations                                                    6,825           142,961                   149,786                   149,786                  149,786                149,786          149,786
     R-squared                                                       0.359            0.388                     0.383                     0.688                    0.017                  0.392            0.392
     First-stage F-test                                                                                                                   249.2

     Note. Columns (1)-(2) motivate the reduced-form estimate in Column (3). Columns (3)-(5) present the reduced-form, first-stage, and IV estimates using Connections×Hunan×1854­1910 to instrument
     Soldier Deaths× 1854­1910. Column (6) presents the OLS estimate, and Column (7) a horse-race test between Connections×Hunan× 1854-1910 and Soldier Deaths×1854­1910.
     Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county
     level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
                                              Table 6. The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths on Elite Power: Over-id Tests
                                             Sample: All counties, 1820­1910; Dependent variable: Number of national-level offices


                                                                                                        (1)                                   (2)                               (3)
                      Instruments                                                        Expanded connections×                Natl-level exam connect.×               Other connect.×
                                                                                                                             Hunan×1854­1910
                      Natl-level exam connect.×Hunan×1854­1910                                                                                                               -0.001
                                                                                                                                                                             (0.074)
                      Other connect.×Hunan×1854­1910                                                                                       -0.000
                                                                                                                                           (0.036)

                      Soldier deaths1854-64 ×1854­1910                                             0.228***                               0.228***                         0.228***
                                                                                                    (0.047)                                (0.030)                          (0.054)
36




                      Natl-level exam connect.×1854­1910                                             0.007                                  0.007                            0.007
                                                                                                    (0.020)                                (0.022)                          (0.022)
                      Other connect.×1854­1910                                                       0.019                                  0.019                            0.019
                                                                                                    (0.031)                                (0.040)                          (0.040)

                      County FE                                                                        Y                                      Y                                Y
                      Year FE                                                                          Y                                      Y                                Y
                      Controls×1854-1910                                                               Y                                      Y                                Y
                      Observations                                                                  149,786                                149,786                          149,786
                      Over-identification test (p-value)                                             0.992

     Note. Column (1) presents the results using the expanded networks to define county-level elite connections. Then we separate all connections into two components: (i) those built via the national-level
     exams and (ii) the rest. Column (2) presents the result using component (ii) (interacting with Hunan and 1854­1910) as the instrument to check whether component (i) has any direct effect, and column (3)
     does the opposite.
     Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county
     level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
                                  Table 7. The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths on Elite Power: Inside and Outside the Network
                                                                   Sample: All counties, 1820­1910


                                                                                  (1)                                       (2)                                           (3)
                                                                  Total national-level offices            Held by elites in the network              Held by those outside the network
                Dependent var.
                                                                        / sample mean                           / sample mean                                 / sample mean

                Sample mean                                                     0.093                                     0.018                                         0.076

                Soldier deaths1854-64 ×1854-1910                              2.029***                                 3.205***                                       1.755***
                (Instrumented)                                                 (0.558)                                  (1.128)                                        (0.555)
37




                Connections×1854-1910                                           0.119                                     0.225                                         0.095
                                                                               (0.122)                                   (0.185)                                       (0.128)
                Hunan×1854-1910                                                 0.262                                     -0.870                                        0.526
                                                                               (0.490)                                   (0.772)                                       (0.550)

                County FE                                                         Y                                        Y                                              Y
                Year FE                                                           Y                                        Y                                              Y
                Controls×1854-1910                                                Y                                        Y                                              Y
                Observations                                                   149,786                                  149,786                                        149,786

     Note. Column (1) presents the average impact relative to the mean. Then, we decompose the national-level offices for a county-year into two groups: those held by individuals in and outside the elite
     network. Columns (2) and (3) show that both groups benefited.
     Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county
     level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
Online Appendix

Table of Contents
   A Data Construction                                                                          A-2

      A.1 Elite Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-2

      A.2 County-level Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-3

      A.3 Elite Connections and Other County Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-4

      A.4 Soldier Deaths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-5

      A.5 National-level Offices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-7


   B More Results on Elite Networks and Soldier Deaths                                          A-8

      B.1 Elite Networks and Soldier Deaths: Year-by-Year Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . A-8

      B.2 Elite Networks: Alternative Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-9

      B.3 Placebo Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-10

      B.4 Soldier Deaths: Prob. of Missing Years vs. Elite Connections . . . . . . . . . . A-11

      B.5 Soldier Deaths: Degree-Holders vs. Commoners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-12


   C More Results on Soldier Deaths and Elite Power                                           A-12

      C.1 Understanding the Fluctuation of the Power Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-12

      C.2 Elite Networks: Placebo Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-14

      C.3 Soldier Deaths: Placebo Deaths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-14

      C.4 Comparison Provinces: Alternative Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . A-15




                                                A-1
A     Data Construction

A.1    Elite Network

The Civil Service Exam Links Using information on all exams during 1820­1845, we define the
exam links by four steps described below.

    · Zeng Guofan passed the provincial-level exam in 1834 and the metropolitan (national-level)
      exam in 1838, based on which we identify the quasi-classmate relationships between other
      successful examinees and Zeng. We collect the list on Juren, successful examinees at the
      provincial exam, from Jiang, Jing and Chen (2010), and Jinshi, the successful examinee at
      the national-level exam, from Zhu and Xie (1980). Specifically, 53 Juren in 1834 and 182
      Jinshi in 1838 were directly connected with Zeng via quasi-classmate links.
    · We identify the examiners of Zeng in the national-level exam: Mu Zhang-e, Zhu Shiyuan,
      Wu Wenrong and Liao Hongquan, who were Zeng's masters.
    · We track all the other exams Zeng's examiners had supervised, and define the examiner-
      examinee relationship between these examiners and the Jinshi from all the other exams.
      Out of the four examiners of the 1838 national-level exam, two of them had served as the
      examiners of the other five exams. Specifically, Mu Zhang-e supervised the national-level
      exams in 1823, 1832, 1835 and 1845, Zhu Shiyuan in 1829 and 1832. In total, 1,138 Jinshi
      connected with the two examiners via examiner-examinee links and were, hence, indirectly
      connected with Zeng.
    · We track the political path of the quasi-classmates of Zeng Guofan at the 1834 provincial
      exam. Out of the 53 quasi-classmates, Tang Lidu and Li Dechun passed the national-level
      exams and became Jinshi. We repeat the three steps above to construct the exam links for
      these two individuals. Tang Lidu passed the national-level exam in 1836, which made him
      connected with 163 quasi-classmates and four examiners (masters), Pan Shi-en, Wang Ding,
      Wu Jie, and Wang Zhi. Out of these four examiners, Pan Shi-en also supervised the national-
      level exams in 1832, 1840, and 1847, and Wang Ding in 1826 and 1841. Li Dechun passed
      the national-level exam in 1847, which made him connected with 225 quasi-classmates and
      four examiners (masters), Pan Shi-en, Du Shoutian, Fu Ji and Zhu Fengbiao. Out of the four
      examiners, Pan Shi-en also supervised the national-level exams in 1832, 1840, and 1847, and
      Du Shoutian in 1841. All together, 1,235 individuals (198 individuals have been counted in
      step 3) got indirectly connected with Zeng via Tang Lidu and Li Dechun.


                                              A-2
Some individuals appeared multiple times in the exam links. In total, 2,414 unique individuals
were directly or indirectly connected with Zeng Guofan via these exam links.


Kinship We collect information on the blood and marriage relationships from Zeng Guofan's Family
Tree (Cheng 1997). Overall, 5 individuals were connected with Zeng via blood ties and 12 via
marriages.

Friends The friend network of Zeng is obtained from the Chronicle of Figures in the Hunan Army
(Mei 1997). In total, 29 individuals were mentioned as friends who helped Zeng in organizing the
Hunan Army.


A.2    County-level Characteristics

Geography-economic factors By matching CHGIS V4 (2007) with county boundary in Qing
Dynasty, we calculate the area of each county and construct a dummy indicating whether a county
contains a major river using the ArcGIS software. Based on the calorie suitability index at 0.5-
degree 0.5degree grid level from Galor and Özak (2016), we measure county-level calorie suitability
as the average for all cells located in each county. For Hunan province, we collect the information
on county population in 1820 from Zeng (1885). We obtain the county urban population in the
mid-19th century from Skinner, Yue and Henderson (2008).


Political importance We collect information on the geolocation of prefecture capitals . If a county
contains a prefecture capital, we term it a prefectural capital county. We use the county level quotas
at the entry level exam and the number of Jinshi, the successful candidates at the highest level
exam, to measure the influence of civil service exam. The quota information is obtained from Kun
(1899), and the number of Jinshi from Cheng and Hsu (1980).


Taiping related factors The Taipings started in Guangxi province in 1850 and launched a crusade
northward towards the rich provinces. Figure A.2 maps the route before 1854, which comes from
Cheng and Hsu (1980). We consider whether a county is on this route and calculate a county's
great circle distance to Nanjing ­ the Heavenly Capital.




                                                 A-3
                           Figure A.2. The Routes of the Taipings 1850-53




A.3    Elite Connections and Other County Characteristics

We examine the correlations between county-level elite connections and other county characteristics
in A.3. Two patterns are worth noting. First county-level elite connections are not correlated with
geographical variables, economic factors, or the Taiping routes. Second, elite connections are
positively associated with a county's political importance, proxied by being a prefecture capital and
the number of pre-war national-level exam graduates (Jinshi). This pattern begs a question whether
our results capture a general eliteness of a county, which we address in different ways.




                                                A-4
                         Table A.3. Elite Connections and Other Characteristics cross Counties
                                            Dependent variable: N  c   1
                                                                  n=1 dc,n


                                                                                            (1)              (2)
                                Sample                                                   Hunan               All

                                ln Calories suitability                                  -1.266             0.018
                                                                                         (2.863)          (0.022)
                                Main river dummy                                         -0.171             0.083
                                                                                         (0.514)          (0.187)
                                ln Area                                                   1.000            -0.756
                                                                                         (3.106)          (0.868)
                                ln Population                                            -0.424            1.177*
                                                                                         (0.613)          (0.637)
                                ln Urban population                                       0.084           -0.071*
                                                                                         (0.258)          (0.039)

                                Prefecture capital                                     3.123***          0.786***
                                                                                        (1.104)           (0.225)
                                ln Number of Jinshi                                     0.674**          0.527***
                                                                                        (0.336)           (0.164)
                                ln Quotas for the entry-level exam                       -0.734           -0.385
                                                                                        (1.131)           (0.698)

                                ln Distance to Nanjing                                   -0.356           -1.051
                                                                                         (3.856)          (1.007)
                                Along the route of Taiping, 1850-53                      -0.428            0.156
                                                                                         (0.903)          (0.477)

                                Observations                                                75             1,646
                                R-squared                                                 0.752            0.241

Note. All standard errors are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




A.4        Soldier Deaths

The Hunan Gazetteers (Zeng 1885) list all the soldiers who died during the Taiping rebellion by
county and year. The figure below presents an example of the records.




                                                                        A-5
                             Figure A.4. (a) Records on Soldier Deaths




     We use this information in several ways. First, we calculate the total number of soldier deaths
at the county-year level. Second, based on the surname information, we calculate the total number
of soldier death at county-surname-year level. Third, using the information on battle location, we
know the number of soldier death at county-battle level. During 1850-64, the Hunan Army and the
Taipings fought at least 694 battles across 11 provinces, as mapped in the figure below.

                            Figure A.4. (b) Map of the Battles 1850-1864




                                                A-6
A.5     National-level Offices

We collect data on national-level offices and officials from The Chronicle of Officials in the Qing
Dynasty (Qian 2005). Figure A.5 presents an example of the records.

                           Figure A.5. (a) Records on National-level Offices




      Based on the records, we construct a database for national-level offices during 1820­1910. As
shown in A.5, the number of national-level offices was relatively stable over time. Based on the
hometown county information provided in Qian (2005), we obtain the total number of offices at
county-year level. Our analysis focuses on the Han officials for both data and conceptual reasons.
On the data side, the Manchu officials originated from the Manchu region, which is not included
in main analysis. On the conceptual level, the civil service exam was the channel to recruit Han
officials, whereas the Manchu elites ­ a tiny share of the population ­ could gain power without
taking the exam.




                                                 A-7
               Figure A.5. (b) Number of National-level Offices and Officials Over Time




B     More Results on Elite Networks and Soldier Deaths

B.1    Elite Networks and Soldier Deaths: Year-by-Year Estimates

We report the year-by-year estimates on how elite connections affect soldier deaths in Table B.1,
using 1853 as the reference year. These estimates are visualized in Figure 4 in the main text.




                                                A-8
                                        Table B.1. Yearly Effects of Elite Connections
                                             Dependent variable: ln(Deaths+1)

                                                                                 Nc   1
                                     Elite connections measured by:              n=1 dc,n         Nc
                                                                                  (1)             (2)
                                     Elite connections×1850                     -0.006          0.008
                                                                                (0.053)        (0.034)
                                     Elite connections×1851                     -0.017          -0.001
                                                                                (0.050)        (0.032)
                                     Elite connections×1852                      0.031          0.026
                                                                                (0.085)        (0.057)

                                     Elite connections×1854                    0.259***       0.200***
                                                                                (0.085)        (0.059)
                                     Elite connections×1855                     0.214*         0.156*
                                                                                (0.113)        (0.080)
                                     Elite connections×1856                      0.137          0.107
                                                                                (0.118)        (0.082)
                                     Elite connections×1857                    0.263***       0.198***
                                                                                (0.089)        (0.062)
                                     Elite connections×1858                    0.291***       0.206***
                                                                                (0.087)        (0.060)
                                     Elite connections×1859                    0.240***       0.187***
                                                                                (0.086)        (0.059)
                                     Elite connections×1860                     0.217**       0.177***
                                                                                (0.085)        (0.059)
                                     Elite connections×1861                    0.217***       0.167***
                                                                                (0.081)        (0.057)
                                     Elite connections×1862                    0.260***       0.189***
                                                                                (0.085)        (0.058)
                                     Elite connections×1863                    0.270***       0.196***
                                                                                (0.084)        (0.061)
                                     Elite connections×1864                    0.287***       0.205***
                                                                                (0.082)        (0.065)
                                     County FE                                     Y              Y
                                     Year FE                                       Y              Y
                                     Pref. FE×Year FE                              Y              Y
                                     Controls×Post                                 Y              Y
                                     Observations                                1,125          1,125
                                     R-squared                                   0.535          0.534
                                     Number of counties                            75             75

Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard
errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




B.2       Elite Networks: Alternative Definitions

Our finding holds if we expand our elite network definition to including marriages and friends, as
reported in Columns (1)-(4) of Table B.2. Moreover, because those who passed the national-level


                                                                     A-9
(metropolitan) exams were promised a political career, we expect the links formed there to be more
important. Indeed, this is the case, as reported in Columns (5)-(8).

                Table B.2. Expanded Network Connections and National-level Exam Connections
                                     Dependent variable: ln(Deaths+1)

                                           Expanded networks                                        National-level exam only
                                (1)          (2)       (3)                 (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)              (8)

    Nc   1
    n=1 dc,n ×Post          0.180***      0.171***                                      0.607***       0.757***
                             (0.031)       (0.039)                                       (0.144)        (0.275)
                                                         0.126***      0.124***                                      0.292***       0.310**
 Nc ×Post                                                 (0.022)       (0.027)                                       (0.070)       (0.144)

 County FE                      Y             Y              Y             Y                 Y             Y              Y            Y
 Year FE                        Y             Y              Y             Y                 Y             Y              Y            Y
 Pref. FE×Year FE                             Y                            Y                               Y                           Y
 Controls×Post                                Y                            Y                               Y                           Y
 Observations                 1,125         1,125          1,125         1,125             1,125         1,125         1,125         1,125
 R-squared                    0.196         0.535          0.197         0.536             0.177         0.530         0.174         0.527
 Number of counties             75            75             75            75                75            75            75            75

Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard
errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




B.3       Placebo Networks

The timing of the exam provides us natural placebo tests. Zeng Guofan passed the national-level
exam in 1838. This exam took place twice every three years. We construct two fake networks, by
assuming Zeng passed the previous national-level exam (1836) or the following one (1840). As
shown in B.3, the county-level connections would be different.




                                                                    A-10
                          Figure B.3. Maps of Real and Faked National-level Exam Networks

        (a) Actual: passed in 1838                    (b) Placebo I: passed in 1836                  (c) Placebo II: passed in 1840




B.4       Soldier Deaths: Prob. of Missing Years vs. Elite Connections

In the soldier death records, 14% missed year information. We examine whether the missing
probability correlates with elite connections and find it not to be the case. Table B.4 reports the
results using the probability of soldier deaths with missing years to the total soldier deaths as the
dependent variable.

                                        Table B.4. Elite Connections and Data Missing
                                         Dependent variable: Share of missing years

                                                                     Nc   1
  Elite connections measured by:                                     n=1 dc,n                                          Nc
                                                   (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)       (8)

  Connections                                     0.003      -0.003        0.014     0.010         0.002       -0.002        0.010     0.008
                                                 (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.013)   (0.013)       (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.009)   (0.009)
  ln (Total soldier deaths during 1850-64)                  0.030***                 0.022                   0.030***                  0.022
                                                             (0.011)                (0.021)                   (0.011)                 (0.020)

  Controls                                                                   Y         Y                                      Y          Y
  Prefecture FE                                                              Y         Y                                      Y          Y
  Observations                                     74          74           74         74            74          74           74         74
  R-squared                                       0.003       0.098        0.283     0.307         0.003       0.098        0.283      0.003

Note. Since one county has no soldier deaths during the Taiping Rebellion, the total observation number is 74.
Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors
presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




                                                                      A-11
B.5       Soldier Deaths: Degree-Holders vs. Commoners

We find similar magnitudes on the deaths of individuals with and without exam degrees, as reported
in B.5. Since those with degrees are unlikely to be missed, the finding suggests that measure error
in soldier deaths is not a critical concern for our findings.

      Table B.5. The Impact of Elite Connections on Soldier Deaths: Degree-Holders vs. Commoners

                   Dependent var. (standardized)           ln (Commoner deaths +1)               ln (Gentry deaths +1)
                                                               (1)        (2)                      (3)         (4)

                      Nc   1
                      n=1 dc,n ×Post                       0.145***                              0.132*
                                                            (0.045)                              (0.071)
                   Nc ×Post                                                 0.105***                            0.091*
                                                                             (0.033)                            (0.054)

                   County FE                                    Y                Y                  Y              Y
                   Year FE                                      Y                Y                  Y              Y
                   Pref. FE×Year FE                                              Y                                 Y
                   Controls×Post                                                 Y                                 Y
                   Observations                              1,125             1,125              1,125          1,125
                   R-squared                                 0.532             0.532              0.348          0.347

Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard
errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




C        More Results on Soldier Deaths and Elite Power

C.1       Understanding the Fluctuation of the Power Impact

To examine whether the dynamic fluctuation pattern is driven by a fixed group or different cohorts,
we differ two groups of individuals: (1) those who obtained national-level office only once, and (2)
those with multiple switches. We find that our finding is driven by (1), implying that the fluctuating
patterns are driven by multiple cohorts.




                                                                    A-12
                                                                Figure C.1. Understanding the Fluctuation of the Power Impact
A-13




       Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the
       county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
C.2       Elite Networks: Placebo Networks

Our finding on how soldier deaths benefits the elites holds if we focus on the national-level exam
connections, as shown in Column (1) of Table C.2. Columns (2)-(4) show that placebo connections
by assuming Zeng succeeded in previous or next national-level exam cannot explain our finding.

        Table C.2. The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths and Elite Power: Placebo Networks
                           Dependent variable: Number of national-level offices

                                                                                (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)


         Natl-level exam connect.×Hunan×1854-1910                          0.195***                                      0.351***
                                                                            (0.042)                                       (0.107)
         Natl-level exam connect×1854-1910                                   0.022                                          0.019
                                                                            (0.021)                                       (0.035)
         Placebo exam connect. I×Hunan×1854-1910                                             0.563                          0.609
         (assuming Zeng passed the previous exam)                                           (0.487)                        (0.496)
         Placebo exam connect. I×1854-1910                                                   0.020                         -0.059
                                                                                            (0.022)                       (0.050)
         Placebo exam connect. II×Hunan×1854-1910                                                           0.013        -0.327***
         (assuming Zeng passed the next exam)                                                              (0.029)         (0.076)
         Placebo exam connect. II×1854-1910                                                                 0.024           0.067
                                                                                                           (0.021)        (0.046)

         County FE                                                             Y              Y              Y               Y
         Year FE                                                               Y              Y              Y               Y
         Controls×1854-1910                                                    Y              Y              Y               Y
         Observations                                                       149,786        149,786        149,786         149,786
         R-squared                                                           0.383          0.384          0.383           0.385

Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard
errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




C.3       Soldier Deaths: Placebo Deaths

Soldier deaths before 1854 were not driven by the elite network we characterize, and thus, do not
reflect war mobilization by the elites in the network. We find that soldier deaths before 1854 are
not associated with an increase in elite power, as shown in Appendix Table C.3.




                                                                    A-14
         Table C.3. The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths and Elite Power: Placebo Deaths
                          Dependent variable: Number of national-level offices

                                                                                  (1)             (2)            (3)



                      Soldier deaths1854-64 (sd)×1854-1910                    0.502***                       0.502***
                                                                               (0.119)                        (0.119)
                      Soldier deaths1850-53 (sd)×1854-1910                                      0.030          0.022
                                                                                               (0.049)        (0.037)

                      Connections×1854-1910                                     0.010           0.014          0.010
                                                                               (0.011)         (0.011)        (0.011)
                      Hunan×1854-1910                                           -0.006          0.129         -0.013
                                                                               (0.029)         (0.089)        (0.028)

                      County FE                                                   Y              Y              Y
                      Year FE                                                     Y              Y              Y
                      Controls×1854-1910                                          Y              Y              Y
                      Observations                                             149,786        149,786        149,786
                      R-squared                                                 0.392          0.383          0.392

Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard
errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.




C.4       Comparison Provinces: Alternative Groups

In our main analysis, the 2,282 connected elites come from all of the 18 provinces in the Qing
dynasty. Our finding holds even if we focus on various subgroups of provinces as the comparison,
as reported in Table C.4.




                                                                    A-15
                                  Table C.4. The Impact of Network-induced Soldier Deaths and Elite Power: Varying Comparison Provinces

                                                                      (1)                     (2)                         (3)                     (4)                       (5)                     (6)
       Hunan vs.                                            Other prov. along the Taiping Route                        Neighbor provinces                                     Huai Region
                                                                First-stage       Second-stage                      First-stage    Second-stage                        First-stage      Second-stage
                                                                 Soldier           Natl-level                        Soldier         Natl-level                         Soldier           Natl-level
       Dependent var
                                                            deaths1854-64 (1K)       offices                    deaths1854-64 (1K)     offices                     deaths1854-64 (1K)      offices

       Soldier deaths1854-64 (1K)×1854-1910                                               0.317***                                            0.284**                                            0.328**
                                                                                           (0.096)                                            (0.114)                                            (0.152)
       Connections×Hunan×1854-1910                                0.253***                                            0.254***                                          0.277***
                                                                   (0.018)                                             (0.018)                                           (0.027)

       Connections×1854-1910                                        0.008                    -0.021                     0.013                  -0.019                     -0.004                 -0.025
                                                                   (0.006)                  (0.021)                    (0.014)                 (0.029)                    (0.011)                (0.034)
       Hunan×1854-1910                                             0.281**                   -0.068                    0.250*                   -0.011                    0.860*                 -0.091
                                                                   (0.138)                  (0.050)                    (0.129)                 (0.052)                    (0.499)                (0.228)
A-16




       County FE                                                                                                          Y                      Y                          Y                      Y
       Year FE                                                                                                            Y                      Y                          Y                      Y
       Controls×1854-1910                                                                                                 Y                      Y                          Y                      Y
       Observations                                                43,225                   43,225                      31,122                 31,122                     18,928                 18,928
       First-stage F-test                                          208.8                                                195.1                                             103.1

       Note. Controls include all the geography-economic variables, political importance proxies, and Taiping-related factors used in Table 2. Standard errors presented in the paraphrases are clustered at the
       county level. ***: significant at 1%, **: significant at 5%, *: significant at 10%.
