                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               "I STILL HAVEN'T FOUND WHAT I'M LOOKING FOR":
           EVIDENCE OF DIRECTED SEARCH FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT

                                          Haoran He
                                        David Neumark
                                         Qian Weng

                                      Working Paper 28660
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28660


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We owe a huge thanks to the job board on which we ran our experiment. We are grateful for
helpful comments from Xiaoming Cai, Chao He, Daniel Houser, Binglin Gong, Zhiyun Li, David
Ong, Xiangquan Zeng, participants at 2020 ESA Global Online Conference, 2020 Beijing Normal
University Conference on Experimental Economics, 2020 International Symposium on Labor
Economics, and seminar participants at Harbin Institute of Technology at Shenzhen, Jinan
University, Peking University, Shandong University, Wuhan University, and Xiamen University.
We thank Shiwen Chen, Yiqiang Guo, Wanyu Jiang, Kelin Lu, Yue Yin, Zhuo Zhang, and
especially Shuqing Luo, for research assistance. Financial support from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (Project Nos. 71503255 & 71973016), the Beijing National Natural
Science Foundation (Project No. 9192013), and MOE (Ministry of Education in China) Project of
Humanities and Social Sciences (Project No. 18YJA790032) is gratefully acknowledged. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Haoran He, David Neumark, and Qian Weng. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
"I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For": Evidence of Directed Search from a Field
Experiment
Haoran He, David Neumark, and Qian Weng
NBER Working Paper No. 28660
April 2021
JEL No. E24,J64

                                         ABSTRACT

We explore the impact of wage offers on job applications, testing implications of the directed
search model and trying to distinguish it from random search. We use a field experiment
conducted on a Chinese job board, with real jobs for which we randomly varied the wage offers
across three ranges. We find that higher wage offers raise application rates overall, which is
consistent with directed search but can also arise with random search. We also find that higher
wage offers raise application rates for job seekers with wage offers above reservation wages, and
that ­ among the latter ­ the increase in application rates is stronger for those with higher
reservation wages. The latter two types of evidence are consistent with directed search but not
random search. Hence, our evidence lends support to directed search models.


Haoran He                                       Qian Weng
Beijing Normal University                       Renmin University of China
No 19, Xinjiekouwai St.                         No. 59 Zhongguancun Street
Haidian District                                Haidian District
100875 Beiing                                   Beijing 100872
China                                           China
haoran.he@bnu.edu.cn                            qian.weng@ruc.edu.cn

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
1. Introduction

        Existing models of the labor market in the search and matching literature often describe a

specific way in which workers search for jobs and employers attract workers, i.e., either random

search or directed search. Random search models assume that job seekers and employers meet

exogenously and at random (e.g., Diamond, 1982; Mortensen, 1982, 1986; Pissarides, 1985).

Whether a meeting results in a hire, and at what wage (and/or other terms of trade), is

endogenously determined by post-meeting bargaining. As a consequence, changing these terms

has no influence on attracting workers to jobs. In contrast, models of directed search (also known

as competitive search) assume that agents target their search towards particular counterparts

based on the terms posted, and therefore these terms, such as higher wages, influence who meets

whom (e.g., Peters, 1984, 1991; Hosios, 1990; Montgomery, 1991; Moen, 1997; Menzio et al.,

2016; see Wright et al., 2019 for a review). The nearly mutually exclusive assumptions of these

two types of models lead to different predictions for market efficiency and the effectiveness of

certain labor market policies. 1

        Researchers tend to choose random or directed search for analytical convenience

(although theoretical implications can differ), rather than based on the best characterization of

job seekers' behavior. There is, however, some work that tries to test which type of model is

supported empirically by job seekers' search behavior. In labor markets with informational

frictions, job seekers' search behavior may involve both randomness, such as which job ads to



1
  Random search in general yields inefficient equilibrium trading prices in the Diamond-Mortensen-
Pissarides tradition, unless the vacancy-elasticity of the matching function equals the employer's
bargaining power (Hosios, 1990). In contrast, the efficiency of directed search equilibrium depends on
specific model assumptions, such as the number of (sub)markets workers can search in, whether it is on-
the-job search, whether agents can enter the market, etc. (Wright et al., 2019). For policy effects, see, e.g.:
Flinn (2006) on the minimum wage; Acemoglu and Shimer (2000) and Braun et al. (2016) on
unemployment insurance; and Acemoglu (1997) and Moen and Rosén (2004) on training subsidies.



                                                       1
open, and direction, such as which job ads to apply to conditional on opening them. Thus, the

question is not so much whether the evidence is completely consistent with one model or the

other, but which model provides a better characterization of job seekers' behavior ­ and, in

particular, whether there is evidence that the random search assumption is too simple and we

therefore have to allow for directed search. Our goal in this paper is to contribute new evidence

on this question from a field experiment.

        The prediction that is derived from directed search models with heterogeneous firms

(e.g., in terms of productivity or technology, hence offering different wages) but homogeneous

workers (e.g., in terms of reservation wage or quality), and is most commonly tested to attempt

to differentiate between the two types of search models, is that holding other things equal the

number of applications firms receive should not vary with the wage offered ­ consistent with

random search. In contrast, it should vary with offered wages under directed search (Moen,

1997). In particular, under directed search the number of applications should increase if the

potential gain from higher wages exceeds the potential cost from the lower probability of getting

the job because higher wages generate more search and applications by other job seekers; it

should decrease otherwise. 2 An additional prediction of directed search models with

heterogeneous firms and heterogeneous workers is that job seekers direct their search effort to a

particular (sub)market where employers post wage offers specifically to attract them (Shi, 2002;

Menzio et al., 2016). The directed search mechanism generates this kind of endogenous

sorting/segmentation of the labor market, whereas random search does not.



2
  As discussed below, the empirical literature examining evidence on directed search mainly focuses on
applications as the outcome of interest, because it is difficult to observe search per se, and applications
should be a good proxy for search (Belot et al., 2018). Moreover, applications are a better measure of
search behavior than hires because higher wage firms might be more successful in hiring even under
random search.



                                                      2
        In this paper, we present a series of tests for these predictions using data from our field

experiment to examine whether and how job search (i.e., applications) responds to the wages

offered, for job seekers as a whole, and then accounting for heterogeneous quality. We pay

particular consideration to the role of job seekers' reservation wages (RWs hereafter) relative to

offered wages ­ which, as we explain below, is central to trying to distinguish between directed

and random search.

        There is a growing empirical literature trying to test for directed search by investigating

the effects of offered wages on job applications. Evidence based on observational data is mixed.

Some studies find a positive effect (e.g., Banfi and Villena-Roldán, 2019; Cable and Judge,

1994; Krueger, 1988), while others find a negative effect (e.g., Faberman and Menzio, 2018;

Holzer et al., 1991). 3 Marinescu and Wolthoff (2020) obtain mixed evidence, finding that higher

wages are associated with fewer applications across job titles within occupations and firms, but

more applications within job titles. (It is possible that job titles better capture heterogeneity

across jobs, so that within job titles the effect of wage offer variation is better isolated from

variation in other characteristics of jobs.)

        However, testing for a causal impact of wages on job applications based on observational

data faces the challenge that variation in wages tends to be correlated with other features of jobs

(perhaps included in job ads, or perhaps just assumed by job seekers). 4 This challenge can be

overcome by comparing job seekers' search and application responses to homogeneous real jobs


3
  Some papers focus on the effect on the quality of applicants, in isolation from quantity (Ferraz and
Finan, 2009; Crawford and Disney, 2018) or in addition to quantity (Krueger, 1988; Marinescu and
Wolthoff, 2020).
4
  For instance, observed characteristics such as words used to describe the job title, region, and quarter
explain 57.7% of the variance of log intended wages and 62.2% of the variance of log wages when wages
are hidden or are posted explicitly in job ads, respectively (Banfi and Villena-Roldán, 2019). Moreover,
ads for managerial and highly-paid jobs also tended to request particular sets of skills (Bennett, 2002).




                                                    3
that differ only in exogenously varied offered wages, under the underlying assumption that these

jobs are perceived as identical in terms of unlisted job conditions. 5 In line with this strategy,

recent research uses field experiments in which wages for otherwise identical jobs (in a single

occupation) are randomly assigned to real job seekers. This research finds that job applications

increase with offered wages (e.g., Abebe et al., 2020; Dal Bo et al., 2013; Deserranno, 2019;

Hedblom et al., 2019). 6

         However, another potential issue that most of the existing experimental studies ignore is

that job seekers' RWs can influence whether job seekers apply for certain jobs, generating

spurious evidence in favor of directed search if RWs are not considered. In particular, if job

seekers use random search but only apply for jobs with offered wages higher than their RWs, one

will still find evidence of more applications when offered wages are higher, because the higher

the offered wage is, the larger is the share of job seekers for whom the offered wage exceeds the

RW (Belot et al., 2018). Thus, without accounting for the RW, a positive effect of offered wages

on job applications cannot definitively be viewed as evidence for directed search.

         Our paper tries to address both challenges. First, we test for directed search by

exogenously varying wages, in a large-scale natural field experiment (Harrison and List, 2004),



5
  It is possible that job seekers believe that unlisted job conditions vary with the wage. However, in our
experiment, at least, this is unlikely to influence our analysis, for three reasons. First, our experimental
job ads (and most ads on the job board we use) include many details about the job conditions that may
affect applications, including job description, job responsibilities, and employer information, and these
details are identical across wage offers. Second, the experimental job ads are posted by a single employer,
which may minimize any assumed unobserved employer differences. Third, we control for any
differences in the job description and job responsibilities in our regression analysis. In addition, based on
an online labor market experiment, Horton and Johari (2018) provide evidence that job seekers' response
differences across treatments are not caused by applicants perceiving job amenities/disamenities
differently in ways that might be correlated with variation in employers' willingness to pay for job
seekers' quality.
6
  All of these studies also present some evidence on effects on applicant quality, in each case finding
positive effects on applicant quality (measured in different ways).




                                                      4
for otherwise identical real jobs (in multiple occupations) that are offered to real job seekers by a

single firm. 7 Second, we account for how job seekers' RWs affect their responses to better

distinguish between random and directed search. 8

        Belot et al. (2018) is the only other study of which we are aware that tries to address both

of these issues in testing for directed search. 9 They bring unemployed job seekers to the lab to

search for jobs once a week, for a duration of 12 weeks. Job seekers were informed that fewer

than 2% of the jobs were pairs of fictitious job vacancies posted only for research purposes. One

job in the pair offered the original salary of the real job vacancies, and the other offered a higher

or lower salary. 10 Belot et al. test the key implication of directed search models that higher

wages generate more interest in (the fictitious) vacancies (measured as viewing and saving the

vacancies), and also explore whether there are job seekers who apply only to the low-wage jobs

even if high-wage jobs are present as a strategy to avoid competition at high-wage jobs. They

find affirmative answers to both questions, consistent with directed search. However, the authors

do not provide conclusive evidence that perceived competition (obtained via a survey by rating

each pair of fictitious vacancies) can explain job seekers' interest in the jobs above and beyond



7
   We use only one firm in our experiment. Although the setting differs from typical models with
heterogeneous firms, we are interested in worker responses to wage offers rather than studying
equilibrium behavior; that is, our focus is on testing a behavioral assumption about how workers search.
In addition, it is common (almost universal) in experiments manipulating behavior of real firms to use
only one firm, probably to avoid the logistical difficulties of using multiple firms (e.g., Abebe et al., 2020;
Dal Bo et al., 2013; Deserranno, 2019; Hedblom et al., 2019).
8
   There is also random variation in job flexibility in the experiment, for which we control in the present
analysis. This experiment was originally designed to study job seekers' valuation of flexible working
conditions (He et al., 2020). We use the same data to test alternative search models in the present study.
9
   There are two studies trying to account for RWs when testing for evidence of directed search, using
observational data. Godoy and Moen (2011) use the current job's wage (as we do), while Braun et al.
(2016) use individual demographics such as education and urban status as proxies for the RW. However,
both studies face the shortcoming of using observational data.
10
    Since they are doing within-individual comparisons over vacancies within pairs, the RWs are implicitly
held constant.




                                                      5
the salary difference, although they do find that job seekers expected to face more competition

when applying for high-wage jobs. 11

        Two other studies, with seemingly contradictory evidence, also shed light on competition

avoiding behavior. In an experiment, Gee (2019) finds that a higher number of applicants to a

job does not deter applications, in contrast to the prediction of directed search models. On the

other hand, Horton and Johari's (2018) experimental evidence indicates that allowing employers

to signal their willingness to pay for employees with varying quality induces substantial sorting

of job seekers by quality, which is consistent with directed search.

        Our analysis proceeds in three steps. First, we follow the common practice in existing

empirical studies of testing whether higher wage offers attract more applications. However, an

affirmative answer to this question alone ­ without considering RWs ­ cannot provide decisive

evidence of directed search.

        Second, we examine whether higher wage offers attract more job applications when wage

offers are always above RWs ­ which is consistent with directed search but not random search. 12

Because in our data the wage offers are in ranges, as are the measures of RWs, this analysis



11
   Their design, although innovative, may have some limitations. First, it may suffer from sample
selection bias; only about one-quarter of the eligible job seekers they approached participated in the
experiment (about half signed up, and about half of those showed up). It may also suffer from sample
attrition bias, with subjects leaving the experiment before its end, perhaps due to accepting job offers.
Both issues are likely to result in a sample of job seekers with lower quality than average, which could
contribute to their finding that a significant share (42%) of job seekers are only interested in low-wage
jobs even when the otherwise identical high-wage jobs are present. Hence, this finding may overstate the
evidence for directed search. Second, this study may encounter a potential threat to external validity from
inducing the perception of scrutiny because subjects were pre-informed that a small proportion of
vacancies were fictitious and were immediately informed once they saved these fictitious vacancies.
Third, there may be an experimenter demand effect because subjects were told the research purpose was
"to learn whether they would find these vacancies attractive and would consider applying to them if they
were available."
12
   RW is measured by the current/most recent job's monthly wage, and hence in our context means the
minimal wage that a job seeker is willing to accept a new job, rather than the usual meaning of the
minimal wage to enter the labor market.



                                                     6
focuses on job seekers with RWs capped at the upper limit of the lowest wage offer range. By

restricting the sample to the job seekers always having RWs below (loosely or strictly) the higher

wage offers, we eliminate the possibility that the number of applications increases with higher

wages because the share of job seekers for whom the offered wage exceeds the RW increases.

This analysis hence examines the pure tradeoff between higher wage offers and the lower

probability of getting a job offer, which provides more decisive evidence on directed search.

        Third, we test whether, among the job seekers with wage offers always above their RWs,

the response to wage offers varies with the RW. We assume that higher quality job seekers have

higher RWs, so that the probability of getting a job, conditional on the same wage offer, should

increase with the RW, and hence the response to higher offered wages should be stronger for

those with higher RWs. Thus, this final analysis addresses how search responds to competition. 13

Evidence of a stronger response to higher wage offers as the average quality of job seekers

improves would provide additional evidence in favor of directed search. 14

        Our findings are consistent with predictions from directed search models. First, in

analyses that ignore job seekers' RWs, higher wage offers significantly raise application rates.

Second, higher wage offers raise application rates of job seekers for whom all variation in wage

offers is above their RWs. Finally, the positive relationship between wage offers and application

rates is stronger for job seekers with higher reservation wages. All three findings are consistent

with directed search, while the second and third findings provide more definitive support for



13
   Directed search models explicitly consider the probability of getting a job, thereby incorporating a
tradeoff between higher wages and greater competition. In past research, as Kircher (2020, p. 7)
concludes in his review, "which individual characteristics are most prone to avoid the competitive but
high-paying jobs is not answered... but could be important for future work."
14
   For this analysis, we vary the job seekers included in the analysis depending on their RWs; the upper
limit of the RW is always kept at the upper limit of the lowest wage offer, while the lower limit of the RW
is gradually raised, to focus on workers with higher reservation wages.



                                                     7
directed search in contrast to random search.

2. Experimental design

        The experimental design was originally developed to study job seekers' valuation of job

flexibility in a prior paper of ours (He et al., 2020). But the same data ­ used in different ways ­

can be used to assess evidence on directed vs. random search. Since many of the details are

provided in our prior paper, here we describe key design features while leaving some of the

details out. Also, consistent with our original intention, we only pre-registered the experiment for

the initial study. 15

Experimental setting

        Our field experiment was run on a very large nationwide online job board in China,

which posts tens of millions of job openings per year, with over 100 million job seekers in total

of whom millions are active each day. The job board specializes in white-collar, high-education

jobs and hence most job seekers are well educated.

        Designing job ads for the experiment was simplified because the ads are produced using a

standard template capturing information about the job and employee requirements. Importantly,

the job information includes the range of the pre-tax monthly wage offered (mostly with a fixed

monthly rate), or pay is stated as "negotiable."

        We collaborated with a start-up company in the information technology (IT) industry.

The company had real recruitment demand for several positions and was interested in exploring

how varying wages offered and flexible working conditions would affect its recruitment. IT jobs

are common on the job board (about 40% of jobs), and companies in this industry frequently



15
   Prior to data collection, the experiment described in He et al. (2020) was registered on the AEA RCT
registry website (AEARCTR-0002645) in December 2017. The registration did not mention the analysis
conducted in the present paper.



                                                   8
allow flexible working conditions (about one-quarter of the above-mentioned jobs). Using a

small (20-99 employees) and not well-known company helped minimize the effect of our

intervention on the market. Using a single employer keeps the employer-specific characteristics

fixed across jobs. We transferred the resumes of the job applicants to the company, and its HR

department contacted selected applicants for further recruitment procedures. 16

        The five job positions included in the experiment ­ java engineer, financial executive,

human resource manager, marketing executive, and sales executive ­ were dictated by the needs

of the company. These could be classified in the following broader occupations that could be

listed on the job board: software, finance, personnel, marketing, and sales management.

        Job seekers need to first register and provide individual information to construct a

standardized resume. The required information includes, among other things: the current (if

currently employed) or most recent (if currently unemployed) job's monthly wage, and generic

monthly wage expectations (pre-tax). 17,18 After registering, job seekers can apply for job ads

listed on employers' webpages. When they click on an ad, they see a full-page description, and



16
   As far as we know, the company contacted 87 applicants for interviews and the rest of them received a
rejection letter via their account on the job board.
17
   Both variables are measured in ranges, selected from a drop-down menu, including below 1,000,
1,001-2,000, 2,001-4,000, 4,001-6,000, 6,001-8,000, 8,001-10,000, 10,001-15,000, 15,001-25,000,
25,001-35,000, 35,001-50,000, 50,001-70,000, 70,001-100,000, and above 100,000 CNY. Job seekers can
choose not to reveal this information to potential employers.
18
   The other required information includes: individual details (name, contact information, gender, year
and month of birth, year and month when she started her first job, place of Hukou, highest educational
degree and dates of start and completion, school name, major, and overseas work/study experience);
information about work or internship experience (industry, job title, and length of job); type of job sought
(occupation, industry, and location); current work status (employed and unemployed). Providing marital
status is optional. In the self-reported resume data on individual characteristics, there are sometimes
inconsistencies related to the dates of events reported, such as a birth date later than other events, or start
dates for specific spells (such as education) that are later than ending dates. There are also some less clear
inconsistencies, such as completing education at too young an age (e.g., completing college before age 18
or university before age 22). We clean the data to eliminate these kinds of inconsistent cases. The various
criteria end up excluding fewer than 1.6% of observations.




                                                       9
they can then click the "apply" button in the ad to apply for that job and send their generated

resume to the employer. The employer then receives the generated resume along with contact

information. Most employers choose to contact applicants offline outside of the job board's

communications system, by telephone or email, so the job board does not capture the subsequent

outcomes of the search process (callbacks, job offers, and pay).

       We define the population of eligible job seekers targeted by our experiment based on the

following criteria: (1) residence in Beijing at the time of the experiment; (2) college degree or

higher; (3) active in job search (having logged onto their job board account within one month

from when we first extracted their resumes for inclusion in the experiment); 19 and (4) a match

between any of the "intended occupations" chosen by the job seeker (they could indicate up to

three) and our chosen occupations. 20 We drew the population of job seekers for the study, which

was all job seekers registered on the job board fulfilling these criteria, a week before the

experimental contacts were made.

Treatments

       The treatment manipulation we exploit in this paper is the pay variation that was part of

the manipulation in the experiment conducted in He et al. (2020). Specifically, in the present

study, we used a 1 × 3 between-subjects factorial design in which we exogenously varied the

pre-tax monthly wage offered for the same posted jobs in three ranges: 10,000-15,000 CNY,



19
   The one-month cutoff was chosen to correspond to the usual definition of unemployment. In the
United States a worker is defined as unemployed if she searched for a job in the past month (see
https://www.bls.gov/cps/cps_htgm.htm#unemployed, viewed August 15, 2018). In China, the criterion is
three months (see http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/tjzd/gjtjzd/201807/t20180717_1610135.html, in Chinese,
viewed August 18, 2018). We chose the more restrictive U.S. standard to have a more active sample of
job searchers.
20
   For a job seeker who had multiple "intended occupations" that matched our occupations, we randomly
assigned her to one of the jobs with equal probability.




                                                 10
15,000-20,000 CNY, and 20,000-25,000 CNY, which are referred as Low, Medium, and High

level treatments, respectively. 21,22 These ranges were derived from the distribution of wage

ranges of over 8,000 real job ads we collected from the job board a few months before our

experiment, which were recruiting for our five experimental occupations and required at least

college education and at least 5-10 years of work experience, which are also the education and

experience requirements of our experimental jobs. 23,24

        The wage offer range treatment conditions were presented in the job ad emails and app

messages that were sent to the subjects. Given that thousands of job ads are posted every day for

most occupations, the job board uses a matching algorithm to identify potentially suitable

candidates and to facilitate matches between jobs and workers. 25 Based on these matches, the

job board provides two services to employers ­ email pushing and message pushing. Email

pushing entails sending a brief description of selected job openings via email to candidates.

Message pushing plays a similar role. Both emails and messages include a link to the full job ad.

A job seeker receives on average 1-2 emails and app messages per day during the time she



21
   1 CNY = 0.15 USD at the time of the experiment in early 2018. We used a monthly wage instead of an
hourly wage in the experiment because it was natural for full-time jobs of similar types (most ads on the
job board) to set a fixed monthly wage. We also explicitly mentioned in the job ads that the work day was
eight hours, to try to preclude higher wages being viewed as compensation for longer working hours.
22
   Given the goal of the original experiment, we also manipulated the flexibility of working conditions.
These are orthogonal to the pay variation, but we retain the flexibility conditions as control variables in
our analysis.
23
   We separately computed the 25th, 50th, and the 75th percentiles for the lower and upper limits of the
wage ranges, which were 10,001, 15,001, and 20,001 CNY for the lower limits, and 15,000, 20,000, and
30,000 CNY for the upper limits, respectively. Appendix A provides the distributions of the lower and
upper limits of wage ranges of the 8,000+ jobs. To keep the width of the ranges comparable, we used
25,000 as the upper limit for the high range. We also computed the corresponding wage range
distributions for the five experimental occupations and found that they were similar to the full sample.
24
   Employers could select from no degree requirement, below college, college, bachelor, or master or
above, and could select from no experience requirement, 0-1, 1-3, 3-5, 5-10, or >10 years.
25
   The matching algorithms can rely on information in the resumes, job seekers' previous job search, and
application behavior on the job board.




                                                    11
frequently logs onto her account or searches for jobs.

        For job ad emails, the treatment condition appeared in both the subject line and right after

the title of the job position with highlighted fonts in the main body of the emails. The app

messages simply contained information on the job title and the wage offer range for each

treatment. Both the job ad emails and app messages included a link to the job ads. Appendix B

presents examples of the job ad email and the app message for the financial executive position.

We set the monthly wage offered to be "negotiable" in the job ads published on the employers'

webpage, to avoid direct contradictions with variation in wage offer ranges in the emails and app

messages. 26 Appendix C provides an example of the job ad, for the financial executive position.

Experimental procedure

        Our experiment includes an application stage and a survey stage, which enable us to

collect job seekers' application decisions, and then questionnaire completion decisions

conditional on applying. In the application stage, the company published the job ads on the job

board, and then the job board pushed the corresponding job ads via both emails and app

messages to the population of eligible job seekers, with one job seeker being sent one ad through

both an email and an app message. The job ads of the five job positions were published

simultaneously on Thursday morning and all ads stated that the application deadline was 9 AM

the following Wednesday. For the job seekers who were sent emails and app messages, applying

for a job involves two steps. First, they needed to click the link to the job ad, which directed

them to the corresponding job ad on the employer's webpage on the job board. Second, they

needed to click the "apply" button on the webpage. The redirection from the email or app system



26
  It would have been far more complex, and perhaps not feasible, to try to coordinate the company's
webpage job ads to vary with the timing of our treatments. Specifying the wage as "negotiable" is not
contradictory to the "direct search model" setup, since it is negotiable within the indicated pay ranges.



                                                     12
to the webpage was standard for all email or message recipients contacted through these means,

and applications taken on the job board could be recorded. Any job seeker, whether or not they

were sent an email or an app message, could search the job board and find and apply for the

experimental jobs.

          In the second stage, we sent an email and a text message to all job seekers who had

applied for our jobs, inviting them to voluntarily answer an online questionnaire within three

days, prompting them by writing: "Your qualifications match our position well. We would like to

know more about you." 27 We did not provide additional incentive to respond to the

questionnaire because we believed job seekers who were interested in the job would have enough

incentive to complete the questionnaire, and it seemed unnatural for a company evaluating job

applicants to offer incentives to complete the survey. Completion of the questionnaire required

additional effort and thus serves as an alternative measure of interest in our job, which we use in

a parallel analysis to our analysis of job applications as, effectively, an alternative measure of

applying for the job.

          Compared to the procedure adopted by Flory et al. (2015) and Hedblom et al. (2019), in

which randomized treatment conditions were revealed only after job seekers had expressed

interest in the job by emailing their resumes, our treatment conditions were presented to job

seekers in the job ads at first contact. In our view, this procedure had two advantages: it

preserved the normal way of presenting key job conditions on the job board we used; and it

allowed us to collect data on responses to treatment conditions in one stage.

          The experiment was conducted in January and early February of 2018. We randomly

assigned eligible job seekers into the wage offer range conditions and gave the subsample for



27
     The information collected was used in our original experiment (He et al., 2020).



                                                      13
each treatment to the job board to operate the email and app message pushing. Throughout the

experiment, there were no communications between the applicants and the experimenters, except

for the carefully scripted job ad emails and app messages sent in the first stage, and emails and

text messages regarding questionnaire completion in the second stage.

3. Results

        The key outcome data collected from the experiment include the individual-level data on

who applied for the experimental jobs and who filled in the questionnaire. As outlined in the

introduction, we present the results addressing three questions:

        (1) Do applications respond positively to higher wages, without considering RWs, which

can provide some evidence of directed vs. random search?; (2) Do applications respond

positively to higher wages, conditional on offered wages exceeding the RW, which provides

more decisive evidence on directed vs. random search?; and (3) Is a positive response of

applications to offered wages stronger the higher the probability that the job seeker would get the

job (based on higher RWs), consistent with directed search?

Do higher wages attract more applications, ignoring reservation wages?

        We first test the prediction of directed search models that job seekers apply more for

higher wage jobs that are otherwise identical. Here we simply follow the common practice of

most of the previous empirical studies without considering the role of RWs.

        Table 1 reports the distributions of applications and questionnaire completion across

treatments. 28 The total number of job seekers included in the experiment is 99,178, almost


28
   Appendix Table D1 in Appendix D reports summary statistics on job seekers' individual characteristics
for each treatment, to assess the randomization. The mean differences for almost all variables are small
across treatments. We also ran pairwise (across three treatments) Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests of equality
of distributions of these characteristics. We find no significant differences at conventional levels. In the
regressions we control for these characteristics anyway, and we find that our estimated treatment effects
do not vary whether or not we control for these characteristics.



                                                    14
equally distributed across wage offer ranges. In the upper panel, the application rates reported in

the last column are computed as the number of applications divided by the number of job seekers

who were sent job ad emails and app messages. The application rates for all treatments are below

0.5%. Application rates are low because there are thousands of job openings posted every day,

presumably with many job descriptions similar to ours, so that getting an email or an app

message as part of the experiment would not be expected to generate a large number of

applications. 29 Nonetheless, the application rates are 22% and 50% higher for Medium and High

wage jobs, respectively, than for Low wage jobs, and 23% higher for High wage jobs than for

Medium wage jobs; the differences are statistically significant at the 1% or 10% level for the

latter two comparisons, based on tests of equality of proportions.

        Another indicator of interest in the experimental jobs is whether the job seekers

completed the questionnaire. In the lower panel of Table 1, the completion rates reported in the

last column are computed as the number of applicants who completed the questionnaire divided

by the number of sampled job seekers who were sent job ad emails and app messages. 30 The

completion rates show that 0.2%-0.3% of job seekers completed the questionnaire; the rates are

36% and 75% higher for Medium and High wage jobs, respectively, than for Low wage jobs and

29% higher for High wage jobs than for Medium wage jobs; the differences are statistically

significant at the 1% or 10% level for all three comparisons.

        Next, we turn to regression analysis. Table 2 reports the differential effects of the wage

offer treatments on application and questionnaire completion decisions, with Low wage as the

reference group, estimated from a probit model. The dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is an


29
   Personal conversations with the staff at the job board indicated that a 0.5% rate of application for job
ads pushed to job seekers is typical.
30
   Because we use this as an alternative indicator of "applying," we do not condition on applying.




                                                     15
indicator for whether the job seeker applied, and in columns (1')-(3') it is an indicator for

whether the job seeker completed the questionnaire. 31 We present the implied percentage

changes in the application or completion rate, relative to the comparison groups, in the top panel,

and the marginal effects from the probit estimation in the bottom panel.

        Column (1) includes only the treatment dummy variables. We find evidence that High

wage offers significantly boost application rates ­ by 50% compared to an application rate of

0.27% for Low wage offers. This is computed based on a 0.14 percentage point increase (the

marginal effect) relative to Low wage offers. 32 The estimates in column (1) also indicate that the

application rate is significantly higher (at the 5% level) for High wage offers relative to Medium

wage offers; the implied effect is a 31% increase. The estimated effect of Medium wage offers

relative to Low wage offers is not significant, although it is positive.

        The increase in the monthly wage from Low to High wage offers is about 80%, and the

increase from Medium to High wage offers is about 29%. 33 Converting our estimated treatment

effects to elasticities, our estimated elasticities are 0.62 for High vs. Low offers and 1.09 for High

vs. Medium wage offers. These are comparable in magnitude to the results in Dal Bo et al.

(2013), that a 1% increase in wages leads to a 0.79% increase in applications, and Belot et al.

(2018), who find that a 1% increase in wages leads to 0.7%-0.9% rise in applications.

        Column (2) adds controls for job characteristics ­ the job flexibility condition and job


31
   We exclude 32 applications made to job positions other than those applicants were sent. This explains
the decrease in the total number of job seekers from 99,178 in Table 1 to 99,146 in columns (1), (2), (1'),
and (2') in Table 2, and explains the decrease in the application and questionnaire completion rates (which
occurs for the Low and Medium wage offers) from Table 1 to the same columns in Table 2.
32
   Although the marginal effects are fairly small mainly due to a low "baseline" response rate as
discussed in footnote 29, the relative (percentage) effects are sizable.
33
   For example, the monthly wage offer range midpoint difference between High and Low wage levels is
10,000 CNY. Dividing the difference by the midpoint of Low wage offer range 12,500 gives a wage offer
increase of 80%.




                                                    16
position dummy variables; column (3) further adds controls for job seekers' individual

characteristics. The estimates are little changed. 34

        The analysis for questionnaire completion is reported in columns (1')-(3'). It uses the

same specifications as in the analysis for applications, and the results are qualitatively similar. As

the top panel of the table shows, the relative (percentage) effects of higher wage offers on the

probability of completing the questionnaire are larger in most cases than those on the probability

of applying (the estimated differences in the marginal effects in the bottom panel are smaller due

to a lower "baseline" questionnaire completion rate).

        Overall, the findings on job application rates ­ whether measured directly or based on the

more-intensive measure of questionnaire completion ­ show that job seekers are more likely to

apply for higher wage jobs, in line with most of previous empirical studies. This evidence could

be more consistent with direct search than random search. Our next two analyses are needed to

obtain more definitive evidence.

Do higher wages attract more applications, for offer wage variation above reservation wages?

        As discussed in the Introduction, evidence of a positive response of job applications to

higher offered wages is not definitive evidence in favor of directed vs. random search because

job seekers using random search may only apply for jobs with offered wages higher than their

RWs, generating evidence that higher offered wages attract more applications even though job

seekers are not using directed search. To better differentiate whether job seekers use random



34
   Appendix Table D2 in Appendix D reports the summary statistics for the individual characteristics of
job seekers and the treatments, job flexibility conditions, and occupations for this regression sample.
Complete results showing the estimated marginal effects of all job and job seeker characteristics are
available from the authors upon request. To briefly summarize the findings for the latter: the application
rate rises with job flexibility, experience, the other four occupations relative to software, male, married,
currently employed job seekers, and those expecting to work in Beijing.




                                                     17
search and simply apply when offered wages exceed RWs, or instead use directed search, we

restrict our sample to job seekers with RWs capped at 15,000 CNY, which is the upper bound of

the Low wage offer range, and re-estimate the specifications in columns (3) and (3') in Table 2. 35

We use the current/most recent job's monthly wage as proxy for the RW. 36 We call this the "less

restrictive" sample because the ranges for the RW and the Low wage offer overlap (10,000-

15,000 CNY), so an offer wage in this range can exceed the RW, but possibly could not; offer

wages above 15,000 CNY clearly exceed the RW. Estimates indicating that these job

applications respond positively to higher wage offers conditional on those wage offers exceeding

RWs would provide evidence in favor of directed search over random search. Below, we turn to

a more restrictive sample with less ambiguity about RWs vs. offer wages.

        Columns (1) and (1') in Table 3 report the estimation results. For application decisions, in

column (1), High wage offers raise application rates of job seekers relative to Low wage offers

by a statistically significant 0.10 percentage point. Compared to an application rate of 0.40% for

Low wage offers, this represents a 25% increase in application rates. Medium wage offers do not



35
   Capping RW at 15,000 CNY allows the inclusion of the largest subsample given our wage offer ranges.
36
   In principle, we could also use the generic monthly wage expectation as a proxy. However, the
current/most recent job's monthly wage is a more natural reference point to determine the RW for
accepting a new job. In addition, some features of the data support this choice. First, 38% of our eligible
job seekers were employed at the time of the experiment, and for them it is especially likely that the wage
offer of the new job would have to exceed the wage on the current job. Second, of the 369 applicants who
received our experimental job ad emails and app messages, only 231 reveal their generic wage
expectation, vs. 305 who report their current/most recent wage; thus, the available sample is 32% larger.
Third, comparing wage offers to which job seekers applied with their reported RWs, more than 15% (35
out of 231) applied for jobs that offered wages below generic wage expectations, which violates the
definition of the RW, vs. fewer than 8% (24 out of 305) did so when the RW is measured by the wage on
the current/most recent job, despite the distribution of job seekers by RW across treatments being similar.
(We measure these "violations" as applications from job seekers with RWs over 15,000 CNY to Low
wage offers and job seekers with RWs over 25,000 CNY to Low, Medium, and High wage offers. Since
there is no RW cutoff at 20,000 CNY, no criterion violation is associated with Medium wage offers.)
Nonetheless, we also ran the analyses in Tables 3-5 using the generic wage expectation as the RW proxy.
The results were qualitatively similar but generally weaker (results available from the authors upon
request).



                                                    18
significantly raise the application rate significantly relative to Low wage offers. In addition, the

application rate is significantly higher for High wage offers than for Medium wage offers.

Compared to an average application rate of 0.45% for Medium wage offers, the estimate implies

a 19% increase in application rates. The result for questionnaire completion decision in column

(1') is qualitatively similar and quantitatively a bit smaller (although the relative effects are

larger). Compared to the results in Table 2 columns (3) and (3'), the treatment effects are

smaller.

        To rule out the possibility that the wage offer was below the RW, we also do this analysis

using a more restrictive sample ­ the subsample of job seekers who were sent Medium and High

wage offers and have RWs no higher than 15,000 CNY; this guarantees that wage offers exceed

RWs. Columns (2) and (2') in Table 3 report the estimation results. We find a significant

application rate increase for High relative to Medium wage offers (at the 10% level). 37

        Overall, the findings on job application rates ­ whether measured directly or based on the

more-intensive questionnaire completion measure ­ show that job seekers are still more likely to

apply for higher wage jobs even when the offered wage variation is always above their RWs.

This provides more definitive evidence in favor of directed search.

Is the response of applications to higher offered wages stronger for those with a higher probability

of getting the job?




37
   It is possible that our RW measure is not perfect. For instance, workers' RWs for new jobs might be
higher than their current/most recent job's wage if they require a pay increase to compensate for the cost
of switching jobs. In such a case, with our current cutoff of 15,000 CNY, we might incorrectly classify a
RW as below the wage offer when it is in fact above the wage offer. However, as long as the actual RW is
no more than 5,000 CNY higher than the current/most recent job's wage, the corresponding actual RW
cutoff would not exceed 20,000 CNY, which is the upper bound of our Medium wage offer range.
Therefore, job seekers receiving our High wage offers would always have actual RWs below the wage
offers. Thus, our analysis for the more restrictive sample in Table 3 ­ which supports the finding of
directed search ­ would still be valid.



                                                    19
       Finally, we explore whether the positive relationship between wage offers and job

applications varies across job seekers in relation to their probability of getting the job, as proxied

by their RWs. We use the same samples as in the prior test, restricting attention to variation in

offered wages above the RW. A stronger positive effect of higher wage offers on job application

when we increase the RW cutoff (keeping it below 15,000 CNY, as before) would provide

additional evidence in favor of directed search. This is because job seekers with higher RWs are

(we assume) of higher quality, and hence for the same offered wage should view themselves as

more likely to get the job in competition with other job applicants. Therefore, under directed

search, the degree of responsiveness to the higher wage job should be positively related to the

competence of job seekers as proxied by their RW, while the two should be unrelated under

random search.

       Before implementing this test, we first investigate whether job seekers with higher RWs

have higher values of observed characteristics related to worker quality. We use currently

employed, tenure on the current job (zero if not employed), years of work experience, education,

and whether the current/most recent job was in IT (which could reflect industry-specific human

capital, or general ability). 38 Table 4 reports the summary statistics of these characteristics for

each RW range. 39 In nearly every case, these quality measures are increasing with the RW,

consistent with job seekers with higher RWs being higher quality.



38
   IT-related industries include IT service, e-commerce, online game, computer hardware, computer
software, communications/ telecom & network equipment, communications/telecom operations, and
value-added services ­ a subset of the 51 industries job seekers can indicate.
39
   We omit job seekers with RWs below 2,000 CNY in this analysis, for two reasons. First, job seekers
with RWs this low are abnormal given the monthly minimum wage in Beijing was 2,000 CNY at the time
of the experiment (Beijing Municipal Human Resources and Social Security Bureau, 2018). Second, the
numbers of applications and of job seekers for RW ranges below 2,000 CNY are small, so omitting them
would not change the results.




                                                  20
        Finally, we report evidence on differences in the effects of wage offers on job

applications associated with variation in RWs. The estimated relationships between wage offer

ranges and job applications across job seekers with different RW lower cutoffs within the

subsample capped at 15,000 CNY are reported in Table 5 including (columns (1) and (1')) and

then excluding (columns (2) and (2')) job seekers who were sent Low wage offers. 40 We can see

that regardless of the job application measure used, or the inclusion of job seekers who were sent

Low wage offers, as we raise the lower RW cutoff from 2,001 to 10,001 CNY, the treatment

effects (especially the effects of High wage offers) become stronger in both magnitude and

statistical significance. This provides additional evidence in favor of directed search over random

search, and suggests that the more competent job seekers are (i.e., the higher probability of

getting the job), the more strongly they respond to higher wages. 41,42

4. Conclusions

        We explore evidence on random vs. directed search using data from a field experiment on

a Chinese job board. In the experiment, we generate random variation across job seekers in

invitations to apply for jobs that differ in terms of wage offers, in three ranges (High, Medium,


40
   An alternative way to compare the relationship for job seekers across different RWs is to do the
analysis for job seekers separately in each narrow RW range implied by the ranges in Table 5 (e.g., 2,000
to 4,000, 4,000 to 6,000, etc.). However, this led to some very small samples with large numbers of
perfect predictions for the probit models (recall that the overall application rate is low), and hence
problems of both estimation and interpretation.
41
   An alternative way of imposing the "more restrictive" sample restriction in Table 3 is to use the sample
of job seekers who were sent Low, Medium, or High wage offers and have RWs no more than 10,000
CNY. The results are qualitatively similar but generally weaker (results available from the authors upon
request). This finding parallels the evidence in Table 5 that the application responses to higher wage
offers are stronger for more competent job seekers due to lower quality job seekers being more likely to
avoid competition for higher wage jobs.
42
   Our findings on lower quality job seekers avoiding competition for higher wage jobs might be viewed
as indirect evidence of directed search. Since our offered wages vary across job seekers (i.e., we used a
between-subjects rather than within-subject design), our result shows how different job seekers apply to
high wage compared to low wage jobs (though they are similar on observables), rather than showing how
one particular worker sometimes avoids high wage jobs in favor of low wage jobs because high wage jobs
are more competitive (as in Belot et al., 2018).



                                                    21
and Low). The experimental data allow the estimation of application responses for job ads that

are otherwise identical, free from the potential bias that can arise in observational data when

wage variation is correlated with other job characteristics. We also use the current/most recent

wage from job seekers' resumes as a proxy for their reservation wage (RW) for accepting a new

job. Combining these data allows the estimation of application responses to exogenous wage

variation that is above the job seekers' RWs, which is important for distinguishing between

random and directed search.

       Our findings provide evidence in favor of directed search over random search. First, in

line with previous field experiments, higher wage offers (ignoring RWs) significantly raise

application rates. Second, for wage variation above RWs, higher wage offers raise application

rates, which provides more definitive evidence of directed vs. random search because the first

type of evidence could simply reflect whether the wage offer resulting from random search is

above the reservation wage, which would also raise application rates under random search.

Finally, among job seekers with wage offers always above their RWs, the response to higher

wage offers is higher for job seekers with higher reservation wages; this provides additional

evidence for directed search because it implies that job seekers respond not only to the higher

wage offer but to variation in the probability of getting a job.

       There are two natural directions in which this research could be fruitfully extended. First,

the external validity of our findings could be strengthened if one could run the experiment in a

broader range of cities, industries, and firms. Second, while our study provides evidence of

directed search in the labor market, it would be valuable to quantify how much directed search is

used compared to using random search ­ exploring questions such as what proportion of job




                                                  22
seekers uses directed search, and to what extent a job seeker uses directed search and under what

circumstances.




                                               23
                                           References


Abebe, G, Caria, S & Ortiz-Ospina, E. 2020. The selection of talent: Experimental and structural
   evidence from Ethiopia. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Acemoglu, D. 1997. Training and innovation in an imperfect labour market. Review of Economic
   Studies, 64(3), 445-464.
Acemoglu, D., & Shimer, R. 2000. Productivity gains from unemployment insurance. European
   Economic Review, 44(7), 1195-1224.
Banfi, S., & Villena-Roldán, B. 2019. Do high-wage jobs attract more applicants? Directed
   search evidence from the online labor market. Journal of Labor Economics, 37(3), 715-746.
Belot, M., Kircher, P., & Muller P. 2018. How wage announcements affect job search ­ a field
   experiment. IZA Discussion Paper No. 11814.
Beijing Municipal Human Resources and Social Security Bureau. 2018. Notice on adjusting the
   minimum wage standard of Beijing in 2018.
   http://rsj.beijing.gov.cn/xxgk/zcwj/201912/t20191206_943464.html, accessed on March 6,
   2020.
Bennett, R. 2002. Employers' demands for personal transferable skills in graduates: A content
   analysis of 1000 job advertisements and an associated empirical study. Journal of Vocational
   Education and training, 54(4), 457-476.
Braun, C., Engelhardt, B., Griffy, B., & Rupert, P. 2016. Do workers direct their search? UC-
   Santa Barbara Working Paper.
Cable, D. M., & Judge, T. A. 1994. Pay preferences and job search decisions: A person
   organization fit perspective. Personnel Psychology, 47(2), 317-348.
Crawford, R., & Disney, R. 2018. Wage regulation and the quality of police applicants.
   Economica, 85(340), 701-734.
Dal Bo, E., Finan, F., & Rossi, M. A. 2013. Strengthening state capabilities: The role of financial
   incentives in the call to public service. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 1169-1218.
Deserranno, E., 2019. Financial incentives as signals: Experimental evidence from the
   recruitment of village promoters in Uganda. American Economic Journal: Applied
   Economics 11(1), 277-317.
Diamond, P. A. 1982. Wage determination and efficiency in search equilibrium. Review of
   Economic Studies, 49(2), 217-227.
Faberman, R. J., & Menzio, G. 2018. Evidence on the Relationship between Recruiting and the
   Starting Wage. Labour Economics, 50, 67-79.
Ferraz, C., & Finan, F. 2009. Motivating politicians: The impacts of monetary incentives on
    quality and performance. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 14906.
Flinn, C. J. 2006. Minimum wage effects on labor market outcomes under search, matching, and
    endogenous contact rates. Econometrica, 74(4), 1013-1062.
Flory, J. A., Leibbrandt, A., & List, J. A. 2015. Do competitive workplaces deter female
   workers? A large-scale natural field experiment on job-entry decisions. Review of Economic
   Studies, 82(1), 122-155.
Gee, L. K. 2019. The more you know: information effects on job application rates in a large field
   experiment. Management Science, 65(5), 2077-2094.
Godoy, A., & Moen, E. R. 2011. Taking competitive search to the data. Unpublished paper.
Harrison, G.W., & List, J.A. 2004. Field experiments. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(4),
   1009-1055.
He, H., Neumark, D., & Weng, Q. 2020. Do workers value flexible jobs? A field experiment.
   Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.
Hedblom, D., Hickman, B. R., & List, J. A. 2019. Toward an understanding of corporate social
   responsibility: Theory and field experimental evidence). National Bureau of Economic
   Research Working Paper No. 26222.
Holzer, H. J., Katz, L. F., & Krueger, A. B. 1991. Job queues and wages. Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 106(3), 739-768.
Horton, J. J., & Johari, R. (2018). Buyer signaling improves matching: Evidence from a field
   experiment. Unpublished paper.
Hosios, Arthur J. 1990. On the efficiency of matching and related models of search and
   unemployment. Review of Economic Studies, 57(2), 279-298.
Kircher, P. (2020). Search Design and Online Job Search­New Avenues for Applied and
   Experimental Research. Labour Economics, 64, 101820.
Krueger, A., 1988. The determinants of queues for federal jobs. Industrial and Labor Relations
   Review, 41(4), 567-581.
Marinescu, I., & Wolthoff, R. 2020. Opening the black box of the matching function: The power
   of words. Journal of Labor Economics, Forthcoming.
Menzio, G., Telyukova, I. A., & Visschers, L. 2016. Directed search over the life cycle. Review
  of Economic Dynamics, 19, 38-62.
Moen, E. R. 1997. Competitive search equilibrium. Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 385-
  411.
Moen, E. R., & Rosén, Å. 2004. Does poaching distort training? Review of Economic Studies,
  71(4), 1143-1162.
Montgomery, J. D. 1991. Equilibrium wage dispersion and interindustry wage differentials.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(1), 163-179.
Mortensen, D. T. 1982. Property rights and efficiency in mating, racing, and related games.
  American Economic Review, 72(5), 968-979.
Mortensen, D. T. 1986. Job search and labor market analysis. In Ashenfelter, O., Card, D.
  (eds.). The Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 2, 849-919. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Peters, M. 1984. Bertrand equilibrium with capacity constraints and restricted mobility.
    Econometrica, 52(5), 1117-1127.
Peters, M. 1991. Ex ante price offers in matching games non-steady states. Econometrica, 59(5),
    1425-1454.
Pissarides, C. 1985. Short-run equilibrium dynamics of unemployment, vacancies, and real
    wages. American Economic Review, 75(4), 676-690.
Shi, S. 2002. A directed search model of inequality with heterogeneous skills and skill-biased
    technology. Review of Economic Studies, 69(2), 467-491.
Wright, R., Kircher, P., Julien, B., & Guerrieri, V. 2019. Directed and competitive search: A
   guided tour. Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.
Table 1. Applications and questionnaire completion by treatment
 Treatment                Number of applications                Number of job seekers        Application rate
 Low                                 99                                 33,052                     0.30%
 Medium                             121                                 33,063                     0.37%
 High                               149                                 33,063                   0.45%***,
 Total                              369
 Treatment          Number of questionnaires completed          Number of job seekers        Completion rate
 Low                                 56                                 33,052                     0.17%
 Medium                              76                                 33,063                    0.23%*
 High                                98                                 33,063                   0.30%***,
 Total                              230
Notes: Application rate is computed as the number of applications divided by the number of sampled job
seekers who were sent job ad emails and app messages. Completion rate is computed as the number of
applications that completed the questionnaire divided by the number of sampled job seekers who were sent
job ad emails and app messages. Since we cannot track who successfully received the email or app message at
the individual level, we use all job seekers intended to be treated as the denominator. There are 373 (166)
applications (questionnaires completed) by job seekers who were not sent email or app message but saw the
job ad on the job board. We excluded these applications (questionnaires completed) from our analysis. The *
symbols attached to Medium and High wage offer variables are for the statistical significance of the
differences between the rates for High and Medium relative to Low, and the  symbols are for the statistical
significance of the difference between the rates for High and Medium. One, two, or three symbols indicates
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, or 1% level respectively.
Table 2. Random search vs. directed search
 Dependent variable                               Apply or not                               Complete or not
                                        (1)           (2)              (3)          (1')         (2')            (3')
 Average application/                 0.27%         0.27%            0.41%         0.16%        0.16%           0.25%
 questionnaire completion rate
 for Low
 Percentage increase for Medium       14.43%         11.70%         11.40%         32.06%        26.21%        20.69%*
 relative to Low average
 Percentage increase for High       49.97%***       42.75%***      38.32%***     71.67%***     60.98%***       53.55%***
 relative to Low average
 Average application/                 0.31%          0.31%           0.52%         0.21%         0.21%          0.36%
 questionnaire completion rate
 for Medium
 Percentage increase for High        31.06%         27.14%         20.97%         30.00%        26.33%         22.78%
 relative to Medium average
 Medium                                  0.0004        0.0003           0.0005        0.0005        0.0004        0.0005*
                                        (0.0004)      (0.0004)         (0.0004)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)
High                                   0.0014 ***,
                                                     0.0012  ***,
                                                                     0.0016 ***,
                                                                                    0.0011 ***,
                                                                                                  0.0010 ***,
                                                                                                                0.0013***,
                                        (0.0005)      (0.0004)         (0.0004)      (0.0004)      (0.0003)      (0.0004)
Job characteristics                        No            Yes             Yes            No           Yes            Yes
Job seeker characteristics                 No            No              Yes            No            No            Yes
Number of job seekers                    99,146        99,146           58,151        99,146        99,146        58,151
Wald      2                              9.71 ***
                                                       75.84 ***
                                                                      377.91 ***
                                                                                     10.05 ***
                                                                                                 57.87 ***
                                                                                                               274.06***
Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model in the bottom panel, and implied percentage changes in
the upper panel. The dependent variable is indicated in column headings. The sample includes only sampled job seekers
who were sent job ad emails and app messages. All applications made to job positions other than those applicants were
sent are excluded. Job characteristics include job flexibility and job position dummy variables, and job seeker
characteristics include gender, marital status, age and its square, highest educational degree in category, years of work
experience and its square, overseas work/study experience, current work status, job tenure and its square, Beijing
Hukou, type of job sought (full-time, part-time, or intern), and expect to work in Beijing. Job seekers with missing or
inconsistent data on individual characteristics are excluded. Robust standard errors allowing for heteroskedasticity are
reported in parentheses. The * symbols attached to Medium and High wage variables in the lower panel and to
percentage increase in the upper panel are for the statistical significance of the High and Medium relative to Low
estimates, and the  symbols are for the statistical significance of the High relative to the Medium estimates. Three, two,
or one symbols indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Wald-statistic is for Wald
test of joint significance of all regressors.
Table 3. Random search vs. directed search conditional on RW no more than 15,000 CNY
Sample restriction                                       Less restrictive                    More restrictive
                                                                     Complete or                       Complete or
Dependent variable                                Apply or not            not          Apply or not         not
                                                      (1)                 (1')             (2)              (2')
Average application/ questionnaire                  0.40%               0.25%
completion rate for Low
Percentage increase for Medium relative to           3.69%             10.65%
Low average
Percentage increase for High relative to Low        24.90%**           36.37%**
average
Average application/ questionnaire                   0.45%              0.31%             0.45%             0.31%
completion rate for Medium
Percentage increase for High relative to            18.61%             20.67%            14.81%            16.74%
Medium average
Medium                                               0.0001              0.0003
                                                    (0.0004)            (0.0003)
High                                                0.0010**,           0.0009**,         0.0007            0.0005
                                                    (0.0005)            (0.0004)         (0.0004)          (0.0003)
Job characteristics                                    Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Job seeker characteristics                             Yes                 Yes              Yes               Yes
Number of job seekers                                50,641              50,641           33,708            33,708
Wald    2                                           310.84  ***
                                                                        238.51 ***
                                                                                         259.81  ***
                                                                                                           198.35***
Notes: The table reports marginal effects from a probit model in the bottom panel, and implied percentage changes in
the top panel. The sample restriction and dependent variable are indicated in column headings. The RW is measured by
the current/most recent wage. The sample in all models is restricted to sampled job seekers who had RW no more than
15,000 CNY. In addition, the "less restrictive" sample includes sampled job seekers who were sent Low, Medium, or
High wage offers, whereas the "more restrictive" sample only includes sampled job seekers who were sent Medium or
High wage offers. All models include control variables for job and job seeker characteristics as in columns (3) and (3')
of Table 2. See also notes to Table 2.
Table 4. Summary statistics of observed characteristics related to quality for job seekers by RW range
Current/ most recent job wage range      2000<RW4000         4000<RW6000         6000<RW8000         8000<RW10000          10000<RW15000
Currently employed (percent)                   0.18                0.35                0.43                0.47                  0.52
                                              (0.38)              (0.48)              (0.49)              (0.50)                (0.50)
                                             [0.004]             [0.004]             [0.005]              [0.01]                [0.01]
Tenure (year)                                  0.58                0.88                1.15                1.39                  1.62
                                              (1.78)              (1.93)              (2.12)              (2.38)                (2.62)
                                              [0.02]              [0.02]              [0.02]              [0.03]                [0.03]
Experience (year)                              4.24                4.42                5.23                6.17                  6.99
                                              (3.74)              (3.78)              (4.00)              (4.39)                (4.48)
                                              [0.04]              [0.03]              [0.04]              [0.05]                [0.05]
Education
  College (percent)                            0.37                 0.39                0.31                 0.26                  0.20
                                              (0.48)               (0.49)              (0.46)               (0.44)                (0.40)
                                              [0.01]              [0.004]             [0.004]               [0.01]               [0.005]
   Bachelor (percent)                          0.54                 0.57                0.61                 0.61                  0.64
                                              (0.50)               (0.50)              (0.49)               (0.49)                (0.48)
                                              [0.01]              [0.004]             [0.005]               [0.01]                [0.01]
   Master or above
                                               0.09                0.04                 0.08                0.13                   0.16
(percent)
                                               (0.29)              (0.20)              (0.27)               (0.34)                (0.37)
                                              [0.003]             [0.002]             [0.003]              [0.004]               [0.004]
IT-related industry
                                               0.20                0.23                 0.30                0.33                   0.40
(percent)
                                               (0.40)              (0.42)              (0.46)               (0.47)                (0.49)
                                              [0.005]             [0.004]             [0.004]               [0.01]                [0.01]
Number of job seekers                          7,372              13,428              11,036                7,621                 7,315
Notes: Statistics in parentheses (brackets) are the standard deviations (standard errors of means) of the indicated characteristics for job
seekers in the indicated RW range. "College" refers to the tertiary education degree that requires two or three years to complete.
Table 5. Random search vs. directed search by RW range conditional on RW no more than
15,000 CNY
Sample restriction                            Less restrictive                      More restrictive
Dependent variable                    Apply or not    Complete or not       Apply or not    Complete or not
                                          (1)                (1')               (2)                (2')
2,000<RW15,000
Medium                                   0.0001            0.0004
                                        (0.0004)          (0.0003)
High                                   0.0011**,          0.0010***            0.0008*             0.0005
                                        (0.0005)          (0.0004)            (0.0004)            (0.0003)
Number of job seekers                    46,772            46,772              31,134              31,134
4,000<RW15,000
Medium                                  0.00002            0.0003
                                       (0.0005)           (0.0003)
High                                   0.0011**,          0.0010**,            0.0008*             0.0006*
                                       (0.0006)           (0.0004)            (0.0005)            (0.0004)
Number of job seekers                    39,400            39,400              26,165              26,165
6,000<RW15,000
Medium                                  -0.00004            0.0001
                                        (0.0007)           (0.0005)
High                                   0.0016**,          0.0014**,            0.0013*             0.0010*
                                        (0.0008)           (0.0006)           (0.0006)            (0.0005)
Number of job seekers                    25,922             25,922             17,243              17,243
8,000<RW15,000
Medium                                  0.00002            0.0005
                                        (0.0011)          (0.0007)
High                                     0.0018           0.0020**,            0.0013              0.0012
                                        (0.0012)          (0.0009)            (0.0010)            (0.0007)
Number of job seekers                    14,794            14,794               9,825               9,825
10,000<RW15,000
Medium                                     0.0003              0.0008
                                          (0.0016)            (0.0009)
 High                                    0.0040 **,
                                                             0.0032**,            0.0030*           0.0021
                                          (0.0020)            (0.0014)           (0.0018)          (0.0013)
 Number of job seekers                      7,261               7,261              4,839             4,839
Notes: The table reports marginal effects from probit models. The sample restriction and dependent variable are
indicated in column headings. The RW is measured by the current/most recent wage. The sample in all models
is restricted to sampled job seekers who had RW no more than 15,000 CNY. In addition, the "less restrictive"
sample includes sampled job seekers who were sent Low, Medium, or High wage offers, whereas the "more
restrictive" sample only includes sampled job seekers who were sent Medium or High wage offers. Each panel
from the top to the bottom increases the RW lower limit. All models include control variables for job and job
seeker characteristics as in columns (3) and (3') of Table 2. See also notes to Table 2.
       Appendix A. Distribution of the Lower and Upper Limits of Wage Ranges




Notes: These ranges were derived from the distribution of the wage ranges of over 8,000 real job ads
collected from the job board a few months before our experiment, recruiting for the five experimental
occupations, and requiring at least college education and at least 5-10 years of work experience.
                Appendix B. Examples of Job Ad Emails and App Messages

Email subject line:
Job recommendation: Financial Executive [with both flexible work time and place/monthly wage:
15-20K]


Email content




App Message
Find your dream job here!
Click to check the job designated for youFinancial Executive [with both flexible work time and
place/monthly wage: 15-20K]
Appendix C. A Job Ad on the Employer's Webpage Posted in the Experiment
                                                              Appendix D: Additional Tables

Appendix Table D1. Pairwise randomization tests between treatments
                                                                       Low                              Medium                                High
                                                                        (1)                                 (2)                                (3)
Variable                                                   Obs.       Mean      Std. Dev.     Obs.       Mean      Std. Dev.     Obs.       Mean       Std. Dev.
Female (proportion)                                       32,492       0.54       0.50       32,486       0.54        0.50      32,566       0.54        0.50
Married (proportion)                                      19,600       0.58       0.49       19,537       0.59        0.49      19,505       0.58        0.49
Age                                                       32,492      29.60       5.49       32,486      29.58        5.42      32,566      29.57        5.41
College (proportion)                                      32,492       0.26       0.44       32,486       0.26        0.44      32,566       0.26        0.44
Bachelor (proportion)                                     32,492       0.61       0.49       32,486       0.62        0.49      32,566       0.61        0.49
Master or above (proportion)                              32,492       0.12       0.33       32,486       0.13        0.33      32,566       0.12        0.33
Experience                                                32,492       7.03       4.95       32,486       6.97        4.87      32,566       6.98        4.88
Overseas studying or work experience (proportion)         32,492       0.06       0.23       32,486       0.05        0.23      32,566       0.05        0.23
Currently employed                                        32,220       0.39       0.49       32,236       0.38        0.49      32,301       0.38        0.49
Tenure                                                    32,220       1.34       2.66       32,236       1.35        2.66      32,301       1.33        2.64
Beijing Hukou (proportion)                                32,380       0.37       0.48       32,361       0.37        0.48      32,453       0.37        0.48
Expect to work full-time (proportion)                     32,472       0.97       0.16       32,468       0.97        0.16      32,550       0.97        0.16
Expect to work part-time (proportion)                     32,472       0.01       0.12       32,468       0.01        0.12      32,550       0.01        0.12
Expect to work as an intern (proportion)                  32,472       0.01       0.11       32,468       0.01        0.11      32,550       0.01        0.12
Expect to work in Beijing (proportion)                    32,433       0.92       0.27       32,440       0.92        0.27      32,521       0.92        0.27
Generic wage expectation midpoint                         26,790 10983.15 8585.36            26,721 11020.30 8736.60            26,890 11014.04 8729.20
Current/ most recent job wage midpoint                    30,956     9553.92    8067.14      30,907 9585.71         8226.35     30,996 9543.86         8109.58
Notes: The sample for each individual characteristic is limited to non-missing observations after eliminating those with inconsistent dates of events.
Appendix Table D2. Summary statistics of regression variables
Variable                                  Mean     Std. Dev.     N      % missing values
Apply or not                               0.005     0.07      97,512      40.37%
Questionnaire complete or not              0.004     0.06      97,512      40.37%
Generic wage expectation midpoint        9763.91   7648.50     80,377      39.96%
Current/ most recent job wage midpoint   8233.80   7143.59     92,828      39.89%
Female                                      0.58     0.49      97,512      40.37%
Married                                     0.58     0.49      58,612       0.79%
Age                                        27.97     4.67      97,512      40.37%
Age2                                      803.99    293.90     97,512      40.37%
Beijing Hukou                               0.28     0.45      97,162      40.15%
Educational degree
College                                   0.30       0.46      97,512       40.37%
Bachelor                                  0.59       0.49      97,512       40.37%
Master or above                           0.11       0.32      97,512       40.37%
Work experience
Experience                                 5.69      4.43      97,512       40.37%
Experience2                               52.01     91.36      97,512       40.37%
Overseas studying or work experience       0.05      0.23      97,512       40.37%
Employment status
Currently employed                        0.38       0.49      96,725       39.88%
Tenure                                    1.14       2.28      96,725       39.88%
Tenure2                                   6.50      27.61      96,725       39.88%
Job expectation
Expect to work full time                  0.97       0.17      97,458       40.33%
Expect to work part time                  0.01       0.11      97,458       40.33%
Expect to work as an intern               0.02       0.13      97,458       40.33%
Expect to work in Beijing                 0.90       0.29      97,362       40.27%
Wage offer ranges
High                                      0.33       0.47      97,512       40.37%
Medium                                    0.33       0.47      97,512       40.37%
Low                                       0.33       0.47      97,512       40.37%
Job flexibility conditions
NoFlex                                    0.24       0.43      97,512       40.37%
TimeFlex                                  0.27       0.44      97,512       40.37%
PlaceFlex                                 0.23       0.42      97,512       40.37%
FullFlex                                  0.26       0.44      97,512       40.37%
Job occupations
Java                                      0.17       0.37      97,512       40.37%
Finance                                   0.21       0.40      97,512       40.37%
HR                                        0.28       0.45      97,512       40.37%
Marketing                                 0.20       0.40      97,512       40.37%
Sales                                     0.14       0.35      97,512       40.37%
