                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                             OPTIMAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE

                                        Eduardo Dávila
                                        Itay Goldstein

                                      Working Paper 28676
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28676


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021

We would like to thank Anat Admati, Alberto Bisin, Peter Diamond, Emmanuel Farhi,
Xavier Freixas, Douglas Gale, Gary Gorton, Kinda Hachem, Todd Keister, Deborah
Lucas, Gregor Matvos, Cecilia Parlatore, Manju Puri, Juan Carlos Quintero, Adriano
Rampini, Johannes Stroebel, Javier Suarez, Alexander Ufier, Tanju Yorulmazer and our
discussants Hengjie Ai, Ugo Albertazzi, Sebastian Di Tella, Huberto Ennis, Maryam
Farboodi, Martin Oehmke, Giorgia Piacentino, Rafael Repullo, Suresh Sundaresan, and
Francesca Zucchi for very helpful comments. We would like to especially thank Doug
Diamond for detailed feedback and for discussing the paper twice. We would also like to
thank seminar participants at the Financial Intermediation Barcelona GSE Summer Forum,
NYU Financial Economics Workshop, NYU Stern/NY Fed Financial Intermediation
Conference, Stanford GSB Financial Regulation Conference, University of Virginia,
Minnesota Corporate Finance Conference, FIRS Lisbon Conference, NBER SI Corporate
Finance, AFA Chicago Meetings, International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI)
Conference, Bank of Italy/Bocconi Financial Stability and Regulation Conference, Maryland/Fed
Board Short Term Funding Markets Conference, Wisconsin Finance Junior Conference, Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), Diamond-Dybvig 36th Anniversary Conference at
Washington University in St. Louis, and AEA San Diego Meetings. Luke Min, Ryungha Oh, and
Flint O'Neil provided excellent research assistance. Itay Goldstein has been retained by a law
firm as an expert on a case involving a liquidity crisis and government intervention in a
European bank. This case has not influenced the research in this paper, and the research in this
paper has not influenced the case. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Eduardo Dávila and Itay Goldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Optimal Deposit Insurance
Eduardo Dávila and Itay Goldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 28676
April 2021
JEL No. G01,G21,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies the optimal determination of deposit insurance when bank runs are possible.
We show that the welfare impact of changes in the level of deposit insurance coverage can be
generally expressed in terms of a small number of sufficient statistics, which include the level of
losses in specific scenarios and the probability of bank failure. We characterize the wedges that
determine the optimal ex-ante regulation, which map to asset- and liability-side regulation. We
demonstrate how to employ our framework in an application to the most recent change in
coverage, which took place in 2008.


Eduardo Dávila
Yale University
Department of Economics
28 Hillhouse Avenue, Room 304
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
eduardo.davila@yale.edu

Itay Goldstein
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
itayg@wharton.upenn.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28676
1        Introduction
Bank failures have been a recurrent phenomenon in the United States and many other countries
throughout modern history. A sharp change in the United States banking system occurred with the
introduction of federal deposit insurance in 1934, which dramatically reduced the number of bank failures.
For reference, more than 13,000 banks failed between 1921 and 1933, of which 4,000 banks failed in 1933
alone. In contrast, a total of 4,057 banks failed in the United States between 1934 and 2014.1 In many
other countries, the design of deposit insurance schemes is still in progress and is the subject of ongoing
debates; see, e.g., Demirgüç-Kunt, Kane and Laeven (2014) for a recent account of deposit insurance
systems around the world. As of today, deposit insurance is a crucial pillar of financial regulation in
most economies and represents the most salient explicit government guarantee to the financial sector.
        Despite its success in reducing bank failures, deposit insurance entails costs when it has to be paid
and affects the ex-ante behavior of market participants -- these responses to the policy are often referred
to as moral hazard. Hence, in practice, deposit insurance only guarantees a fixed level of deposits. As
shown in Figure 1, this level of coverage has changed over time in the US. Starting from the original
$2,500 in 1934, the nominal insured limit per account in the US has been $250,000 since October 2008.
A natural question to ask is how the level of this guarantee should be determined to maximize social
welfare. In particular, what is the optimal level of deposit insurance coverage? Are $250,000, the current
value in the US, and 100,000, the current value in most European countries, the optimal levels of deposit
insurance coverage for these economies? How should emerging economies set their insured limits? Which
variables ought to be measured to optimally determine the level of deposit insurance coverage in a given
economy?
        This paper provides an analytical characterization, written as a function of observable or potentially
recoverable variables, which directly addresses these questions. Although existing research has been
effective at understanding several of the theoretical tradeoffs associated with deposit insurance, a general
framework that incorporates the most relevant tradeoffs and that can be used to provide explicit guidance
to policymakers when facing these questions has been missing. With this paper, we provide a first step
in that direction.
        We initially derive the main results of the paper in a version of the canonical model of bank runs of
Diamond and Dybvig (1983), augmented to consider depositors who hold different levels of deposits. In
our framework, banks offer a predetermined interest rate on a deposit contract to share risks between
early and late depositors in an environment with aggregate uncertainty about the profitability of banks'
investments. Due to the demandable nature of the deposit contract, depending on the aggregate state,
both fundamental-based and panic-based bank failures are possible. Mimicking actual deposit insurance
arrangements, we assume that deposits are guaranteed by the government up to a deposit insurance limit
of  dollars and then focus on the implications for social welfare of varying the level of coverage  . We
also assume that any funding shortfall associated with deposit insurance payments entails a distortionary
    1
    These values come from the FDIC Historical Statistics on Banking. Weighting bank failures by the level of banks'
assets or correcting by the total number of banks still generates a significant discontinuity on the level of bank failures after
the introduction of deposit insurance.

                                                               2
                  $300,000

                  $275,000

                  $250,000

                  $225,000

                  $200,000

                  $175,000

                  $150,000

                  $125,000

                  $100,000

                   $75,000

                   $50,000

                   $25,000

                       $0
                         1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015


Note: Figure 1 shows the evolution of the level of deposit insurance coverage between 1934 and 2018 in nominal and
real terms. Nominal values are from the FDIC. Real values are reported in 2012 dollars using a consumption expenditure
deflator.

                             Figure 1: Evolution of Deposit Insurance Coverage Limit


fiscal cost.
    After characterizing how changes in the level of coverage  affect equilibrium outcomes, in particular
depositors' withdrawal choices and bank failure probabilities, we focus on the welfare implications of
varying  . We initially characterize the marginal welfare change of varying the level of deposit insurance
coverage, which provides an exact test for whether it is desirable to increase or decrease the level of
coverage. In order to implement this test in practice, a policymaker would need detailed information on
individual deposit balances and consumption across different scenarios. While gathering this information
is conceivable, the informational requirements on the policymaker would be large. To make our results
more applicable, we provide an approximate characterization of the marginal welfare change that can be
expressed in terms of a few sufficient statistics that can be constructed relying exclusively on bank-level
aggregates. The approximation of the marginal welfare change of varying the level of deposit insurance
coverage takes the form

 dW
  d   = -Sensitivity of bank failure probability to an increase in  × Consumption gain of preventing marginal failure
                     -Probability of bank failure × Expected marginal social cost of intervention.
                                                                                                                  (1)
    Equation (1) embeds the fundamental tradeoffs regarding the optimal determination of deposit
insurance. On the one hand, when a marginal change in  substantially reduces the likelihood of bank
failure at the same time that there are significant gains from avoiding a marginal bank failure, it is
optimal to increase the level of coverage. On the other hand, when bank failures are frequent and when
the social cost of ex-post intervention associated with them -- for instance, when it is very costly to raise
resources through distortionary taxation -- is substantial, it is optimal to decrease the level of coverage.
    Our formulation in terms of sufficient statistics is appealing for three reasons. First, conceptually, we


                                                               3
show that the same characterization of the marginal welfare impact of a change in the level of coverage
is valid for a large set of primitives. In that sense, the high-level variables that we identify are not
specific to a particular set of modeling assumptions. Second, in practice, it is possible to directly infer
                                                            dW
or recover the different elements that determine             d     using aggregate information at the bank level. By
directly measuring the variables in Equation (1), our framework provides direct guidance to policymakers
regarding which variables ought to be measured to determine the optimal level of deposit insurance.
Once the relevant variables are known, the policymaker does not need any other information to consider
changes in the level of coverage, at least locally. Third, within a structural model, the sufficient statistics
that we identify can be used as calibration targets or as intermediate outcomes that shed light on the
connection between primitives and welfare assessments.
    Our characterization can also be used to derive several analytical insights. In particular, we show that
in an environment in which banks never fail and government intervention is never required in equilibrium,
it is optimal to guarantee deposits fully. This result, which revisits the classic finding by Diamond and
Dybvig (1983), follows from Equation (1) when the probability of bank failure tends towards zero. We
also describe the conditions under which a non-zero or a maximal level of coverage are optimal.
    Although we initially derive our results when banks' deposit rates are predetermined, we also study
the scenarios in which banks face no ex-ante regulation or perfect ex-ante regulation. First, we show that
the changes in the behavior of unregulated competitive banks in response to the policy (often referred
to as moral hazard) only modify the optimal policy formula directly through a fiscal externality caused
by banks.2 Next, we use our framework to explore the optimal ex-ante regulation, which in practice
corresponds to optimally setting deposit insurance premia or deposit rate regulations. In particular, we
show that the optimal ex-ante regulation, which requires jointly restricting banks' asset and liability
choices, is designed so that banks internalize the fiscal externalities of their actions. We characterize the
wedges that banks must face when the optimal ex-ante regulation is implemented, sharply distinguishing
between the corrective and revenue-raising roles of ex-ante regulations. In practice, our results imply
that deposit insurance premia, even if optimally determined, are not sufficient when banks can adjust
their asset allocation, so regulating banks' asset allocations is necessary. Our results also imply that
fairly-priced deposit insurance is neither necessary nor sufficient for the optimal regulation.
    Next, we demonstrate how to employ our framework in an application to the most recent change
in deposit insurance coverage, which took place in 2008. We describe how a policymaker, armed with
our framework, would have set the optimal level of coverage in early 2008, sometime before the moment
in which the change in coverage took place. Our quantitative application features two complementary
approaches.
    First, we provide direct measures of the sufficient statistics that we identify and implement the test
   2
     We use the term fiscal externality to refer to the social resource cost associated with the need to raise funds through
distortionary taxation, as in the public finance literature. This result does not contradict common wisdom, which emphasizes
the role of moral hazard as the primary welfare loss created by having a deposit insurance system. Our results simply show
that the changes in banks' behavior associated with changes in the level of coverage are subsumed into the sufficient statistics
that we identify. In other words, even though high levels of coverage can induce unregulated banks to make decisions that
will increase the likelihood and severity of bank failures, only their effects through the fiscal externality that we identify
have a first-order impact on welfare.


                                                               4
that determines whether it is optimal to increase or decrease coverage. This approach has the advantage
of sidestepping the need to specify model parameters and functional forms. Using the best empirical
counterparts of the sufficient statistics that we can construct, we explain why our test finds that an
increase in the level of coverage was desirable and discuss the associated welfare gains.
   Second, using the sufficient statistics that we identify -- along with additional information -- as
calibration targets for our structural model, we explore the quantitative results that the model generates.
We draw four main conclusions. First, we find that the welfare gains from increasing the level of coverage
when starting from low levels of coverage are very large. This result implies that having some form of
deposit insurance is highly valuable. This should not be surprising, given that arguably no other financial
regulation has had a more significant impact than the introduction of deposit insurance. Second, given
our assumptions, we find that the optimal level of coverage in the scenario that we consider would
have been $381,000. This magnitude is larger than the $250,000 that was chosen, but is perhaps more
aligned with the extended guarantees that were implemented soon after. Third, we explain why a drop
in confidence (modeled as an increase in the probability of a sunspot) is associated with a higher optimal
level of coverage. We also explain why an increase in the riskiness of bank investments is associated
with a lower optimal level of coverage. Finally, we find that increasing the level of coverage increases the
welfare of most depositors most of the time but not always. In particular, there are situations in which
large depositors may be worse off when the level of coverage increases.
   Finally, we explain how our framework accommodates additional features relevant for the
determination of deposit insurance. We formally show (in the Online Appendix) how the sufficient
statistics of the baseline model continue to be valid exactly or suitably modified once we allow for i)
depositors with a consumption-savings decision and portfolio decisions, ii) banks that face an arbitrary
set of investment opportunities with different liquidity and return properties, iii) alternative equilibrium
selection mechanisms (e.g., global games), and iv) spillovers among banks. Lastly, we discuss how to
integrate additional channels within our framework.

Related Literature This paper is directly related to the well-developed literature on financial fragility,
banking, and bank runs that follows Diamond and Dybvig (1983), which includes contributions by Allen
and Gale (1998), Rochet and Vives (2004), Goldstein and Pauzner (2005), Uhlig (2010), and Keister
(2016), among others. As originally pointed out by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), bank runs can be
prevented by either modifying the trading structure, in particular by suspending convertibility, or by
introducing deposit insurance. Both ideas have been further developed ever since. A sizable literature
on mechanism design, including Peck and Shell (2003), Green and Lin (2003), and Ennis and Keister
(2009), among others, has focused on the optimal design of contracts to prevent runs. Schilling (2018) has
recently studied the optimal delay of bank resolution. Instead, taking the contracts used as a primitive,
we focus on the optimal determination of the deposit insurance limit, a policy measure implemented in
most modern economies.
   Purely from a theoretical perspective, our paper expands on previous work by developing a new
tractable framework with a rich cross-section of depositors. Allowing for depositors with different deposit


                                                     5
balances turns out to be a key element for studying the optimal level of deposit insurance coverage, since
changes in the level of coverage vary the composition of the set of fully insured depositors at the margin.
Along this dimension, the recent work of Mitkov (2020) is the most closely related -- see also Cooper and
Kempf (2016). Building on the framework of Keister (2016), Mitkov (2020) studies the optimal ex-post
government response (bailouts) to banking failures, relating inequality to financial fragility. While his
focus is different (ex-post bailouts), his work also features a non-trivial distribution of deposit sizes and
a cost of public funds that determines the size of the intervention. We connect our results to his at
different points in the paper.
   The papers by Merton (1977), Kareken and Wallace (1978), Pennacchi (1987, 2006), Chan,
Greenbaum and Thakor (1992), Matutes and Vives (1996), Hazlett (1997), Freixas and Rochet (1998),
Freixas and Gabillon (1999), Cooper and Ross (2002), Duffie et al. (2003), and Acharya, Santos and
Yorulmazer (2010) have explored different dimensions of the deposit insurance institution. In particular,
they study the role of moral hazard and the determination of appropriately priced deposit insurance for an
imperfectly informed policymaker. More recently, Allen et al. (2018) show that government guarantees,
including deposit insurance, are welfare improving within a global games framework, while Kashyap,
Tsomocos and Vardoulakis (2019) study optimal asset and liability regulations with credit and run risk,
but abstract from modeling deposit insurance. In this paper, we depart from the existing literature,
which has exclusively provided theoretical results, by developing a general but tractable framework that
provides direct guidance to policymakers regarding the set of variables that must be measured to set
the level of deposit insurance optimally. Our approach crucially relies on characterizing optimal policy
prescriptions as a function of potentially observable variables.
   Our emphasis on measurement is related to a growing quantitative literature on the implications of
bank runs and deposit insurance. Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002), Ioannidou and Penas (2010),
Iyer and Puri (2012), and Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017) are examples of recent empirical studies that
shed light on how deposit insurance affects the behavior of banks and depositors in practice. Lucas
(2019) provides economic estimates of the magnitude of transfers associated with deposit insurance.
Our quantitative results complement the work of Egan, Hortaçsu and Matvos (2017), who quantitatively
explore different regulations within a rich empirical structural model of deposit choice. Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2015) have also explored quantitatively the implications of guaranteeing bank deposits. Neither
of these papers has characterized optimal policies, which is the focus of our paper.
   Methodologically, we draw from the sufficient statistic approach developed in public finance,
summarized in Chetty (2009), to tackle a core normative question for banking regulation. In the
context of financial intermediation and credit markets, Matvos (2013) follows a similar approach to
measure the benefits of contractual completeness. Dávila (2020) uses a related approach to optimally
determine the level of bankruptcy exemptions. Sraer and Thesmar (2018) build on similar methods to
produce aggregate estimates from individual firms' experiments. More broadly, this paper contributes
to the growing literature that seeks to inform financial regulation by designing adequate measurement
systems for financial markets, recently synthesized in Haubrich and Lo (2013) and Brunnermeier and
Krishnamurthy (2014).

                                                     6
Outline The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.                        Section 2 lays out the baseline
model and introduces the main results when the deposit rate is predetermined. Section 3 allows for
endogenous deposit rates and characterizes the optimal ex-ante regulation in different scenarios. Section
4 demonstrates how to employ our framework in an application to the most recent change in coverage,
which took place in 2008. Section 5 discusses several extensions and Section 6 concludes. Proofs and
derivations are in the Appendix. An Online Appendix includes detailed derivations and additional
results.


2     A Model of Bank Runs with Heterogeneous Depositors
This paper develops a framework suitable to determine the optimal level of deposit insurance coverage.
In this section, we introduce our main results in a tractable model of bank runs with aggregate risk and
heterogeneous depositors. We explain how our insights extend to richer environments in Sections 3 and
5.


2.1    Environment

Our model builds on Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Time is discrete. There are three dates t = 0, 1, 2, and
a single type of consumption good (dollar), which serves as numeraire. There is a continuum of aggregate
states realized at date 1, denoted by s  [s, s] and distributed according to a cumulative distribution
function (cdf) F (s). The realization of the state s becomes common knowledge at the beginning of date
1. Figure 2 illustrates the timing of the model.

                          Deposit insurance    Deposit rate        Depositors choose
                             determined       R1 determined        deposits D1 (i, s)

                                                  t=0                    t=1                t=2
                                                                   State s is realized
                                                 Figure 2: Timeline

     The economy is populated by a (double) continuum of depositor types, each type indexed by i  I ,
and a continuum of identical taxpayers, indexed by  . We use the index j = {i,  } to denote both
depositor types and taxpayers. There are also banks and a benevolent planner/regulator/policymaker.

Depositors The cross-sectional distribution of depositor types is given by a cdf G (i), where we
                                                      ¡
denote the total mass of depositors by G =                iI   dG (i). Each type i depositor is initially endowed
with D0 (i) dollars, which are deposited in a bank. Hence, the aggregate initial mass of deposits is given
           ¡
by D0 =        iI   D0 (i) dG (i). We denote the smallest and largest deposit balance by D and D, respectively.
     Depositors, whose preferences are identical ex-ante, are uncertain about their preferences over future
consumption. Some will be early depositors, who only want to consume at date 1, and some will be late
depositors, who only want to consume at date 2. At date 0, depositors know the probability of being
an early or a late depositor. At date 1, depositors privately learn whether they are of the early or the


                                                               7
late type. We assume that the likelihood of being an early depositor, denoted by , or a late depositor,
denoted by 1 - , is constant across all depositor types. Under a law of large numbers,  and 1 -  are
the exact proportions of early and late depositors, respectively, for every depositor type i.3
       Formally, the ex-ante utility of a type i depositor, V (i), is given by

                    V (i) = Es [E [U (Ct (i, s))]] = Es [U (C1 (i, s)) + (1 - ) U (C2 (i, s))] ,                         (2)

where C1 (i, s) and C2 (i, s) denote the consumption of early and late type i depositors, respectively, for
a given realization of the state s. Depositors' flow utility U (·) satisfies standard regularity conditions:
U (·) > 0, U (·) < 0, and limC 0 U (C ) = .4 Because depositors have external sources of income,
our model remains well-behaved even when their utility satisfies an Inada condition.
       Early depositors receive a stochastic endowment Y1 (i, s) > 0 at date 1 while late depositors receive a
stochastic endowment Y2 (i, s) > 0 at date 2. The endowments at dates 1 and 2 capture the net payoffs
on the rest of a depositor's portfolio. Late depositors also have access to a storage technology between
dates 1 and 2.
       At date 1, after learning their early/late status and observing the state s, depositors can change
their deposit balance by choosing a new deposit level D1 (i, s). The new deposit level is the single
choice variable for depositors in the model. We also assume that there is an i.i.d. sunspot at date 1 for
every realization s of the state. This assumption becomes relevant later on when dealing with multiple
equilibria.

Banks' Technology and Deposit Contract                    At date 0, banks have access to a production technology
with the following properties. Every unit of consumption good invested at date 0 is transformed into
1 (s)  0 units of consumption good at date 1. Every unit of consumption good held by banks at the
end of date 1 is transformed into 2 (s)  0 units of consumption good at date 2.5 For simplicity, we
assume that banks do not have access to an additional storage technology at date 1 with returns that
differ from 2 (s).
       We assume that both 1 (s) and 2 (s) are continuous and increasing in the realization of the state
s, so high (low) realizations of s correspond to states in which banks are more (less) profitable. We
further assume i) that 2 (s)  1, which guarantees the existence of fundamental bank failures, ii) that
1 (s)  1 whenever 2 (s)  1, which simplifies the exposition by limiting the cases to consider, and
                                                                             ^ (R1 ) and s (, R1 ) (defined
iii) that 2 (s) is strictly increasing, which guarantees that the thresholds s
below) are uniquely defined.
       The only contract available to depositors is a deposit contract, which takes the following form. Every
   3
      In previous versions of this paper, as in Wallace (1988, 1990) and Chari (1989), among others, we allowed for the share
of early depositors to vary with the state s, by making  a function of s, as in  (s). This introduces an additional source of
aggregate risk but does not affect our main conclusions. Similarly, we could allow for the share of early/late depositors to
be type i dependent by making  also a function of i, as in  (i, s). Our framework can also accommodate this possibility.
    4
      Our framework can accommodate preferences U (·) that vary with a depositor's type i and the state s.
    5
      Many models in the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) tradition often set 1 (s) = 1, s. Allowing 1 (s) to take values
different from 1 is necessary to guarantee that there are regions in which banks cannot fail even when all depositors
withdraw their funds. Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) make an equivalent assumption to generate an upper-dominance
region. By flexibly modeling 1 (s) and 2 (s) our framework accommodates illiquidity and insolvency scenarios.

                                                             8
dollar deposited at date 0 is promised an uncontingent gross return R1  1, which accrues at date 1.
Hence, a depositor that deposits D0 (i) at date 0 is entitled to withdraw on demand up to D0 (i) R1
dollars at either date 1 or date 2. At date 1, depositors can withdraw funds or leave them in the bank,
but cannot deposit new funds. This assumption restricts depositors' choices to D1 (i, s)  [0, D0 (i) R1 ].
When D0 (i) R1 > D1 (i, s), a depositor withdraws a strictly positive amount of deposits at date 1.
When D0 (i) R1 = D1 (i, s), a depositor leaves his deposit balance unchanged. We denote aggregate net
withdrawals in state s by  (s), given by
                 ¢
         (s) =        (D0 (i) R1 - D1 (i, s)) dG (i) = D0 R1 - D1 (s) ,             (Aggregate net withdrawals)
                 iI

                 ¡                                       ¡
where D0 =           iI   D0 (i) dG (i) and D1 (s) =      iI   D1 (i, s) dG (i) denote the aggregate mass of bank
deposits at date 0 and at date 1 in state s, respectively.
       Depositors make withdrawal decisions at date 1 simultaneously. Similarly to Allen and Gale (1998),
funds are allocated proportionally in case of failure among all depositors. That is, if, given withdrawal
decisions, banks anticipate being unable to satisfy all promised claims at date 1 or 2, they enter into
a liquidation process in which funds are distributed on a proportional basis among claimants after the
deposit insurance guarantee has been satisfied.6
       Hence, the actual payoff received by a given depositor at either date 1 or date 2 depends on the
realization of the state, the promised deposit rate, the behavior of all depositors, and the level of deposit
insurance -- as described in Equations (4) and (5) below. If a bank does not fail at date 1, consistent
with models that build on Diamond and Dybvig (1983), all remaining proceeds of banks' investments at
date 2 are distributed to depositors in the form of a return on deposits higher than the promised R1 .

Deposit Rate Determination                 Throughout the paper, we consider three alternative assumptions
regarding the determination of the deposit rate.                   First, we assume that the deposit rate R1 is
predetermined and invariant to the level of deposit insurance coverage  . That is, we take R1 as a
primitive of the model. This assumption simplifies the characterization of the equilibrium and allows for
a transparent derivation of the optimal policy formulas.
       Subsequently, in Section 3, we re-derive our results in two scenarios in which the deposit rate is
endogenously determined, allowing for changes in banks' choices induced by varying the level of coverage
-- this behavior is often referred to as moral hazard. We first study the scenario in which R1 is chosen
by a benevolent planner and then the case in which R1 is chosen by competitive banks. Comparing both
solutions allows us to study the optimal ex-ante deposit rate regulation.

Deposit Insurance and Taxpayers                  The level of deposit insurance  , expressed in dollars (units of
the consumption good), is the single instrument available to the planner. It is modeled to mimic actual
deposit insurance policies: in any event, depositors are guaranteed the promised return on their deposits
   6
     In previous versions of this paper, we adopted a sequential service constraint, without affecting our conclusions. The
current formulation, which is substantially more tractable, eliminates the need to keep track of which specific depositors are
first in line when banks cannot pay back all depositors in full. See Ennis and Keister (2009, 2010) for a detailed exploration
of the dynamics of deposit withdrawals during runs.


                                                               9
up to a predetermined amount  . The level of the deposit insurance guarantee,   0, is chosen under
commitment at date 0 through a planning problem.
    In case of bank failure, the deposit insurance authority recovers a fraction  (s)  [0, 1] of any
resources held by the banks to cover the deposit insurance guarantee. The remaining fraction 1 -  (s)
captures deadweight losses associated with bank failure. We allow for the recovery rate  (s) to vary with
the realization of the state s and, to preserve the differentiability of the planner's problem, we assume
that  (s) is continuous and that  (s) = 0.
    Whenever the resources recovered from a failed bank are sufficient to cover all insured deposits, the
remaining funds are distributed proportionally among the partially insured depositors, as described in
Equations (4) and (5) below. Whenever the resources recovered from a failed bank are not sufficient
to cover the deposit insurance guarantee, the recovery rate on uninsured deposits is zero. In the latter
scenario, public funds are used to cover the funding shortfall, denoted by T (s) in state s. Funding
shortfalls must be covered through taxation. Any dollar raised through taxation is associated with a
resource loss of  (T (s))  0 dollars, which represents the cost of public funds. We assume that  (·) is
a weakly increasing and convex function that satisfies  (0) = 0 and limT   (T ) = .7
    Finally, we assume that the taxes necessary to cover the funding shortfall and the associated
deadweight losses are borne by taxpayers (equivalently, a representative taxpayer), who have the same
flow utility U (·) as depositors. For simplicity, taxpayers only consume at date 1. We assume that the
endowment of taxpayers Y (, s) is sufficiently large to cover the funding shortfall T (s) in any state.
Modeling depositors and taxpayers as distinct groups of agents highlights the fiscal implications of the
deposit insurance policy.

Equilibrium Definition An equilibrium, for a given level of deposit insurance  and a given deposit
rate R1 , is defined as consumption allocations C1 (i, s) and C2 (i, s) and deposit choices D1 (i, s), such
that depositors maximize their utility, given that other depositors behave optimally, and taxpayers cover
the funding shortfall.

Remarks on the Environment We conclude the description of the environment with four remarks.
    First, following most of the literature on bank runs, we take the noncontingent nature of deposits
and their demandability as primitives. With this, we depart from the approach that regards deposit
contracts as the outcome of a mechanism. The upside of our approach is that we can map banks' choices
and outcomes to observables, like deposit rates and failure probabilities, as opposed to focusing on more
abstract assignment procedures.
    Second, we restrict our attention to the choice of a single policy instrument under commitment:
a maximum amount of deposit insurance coverage. Consequently, we study a second-best problem in
the Ramsey tradition. The form of the policy that we consider (deposits are insured 100% up to a
maximum, and 0% insured above that amount) matches well the policies implemented in many deposit
insurance systems. The arguments in Mitkov (2020) can be adapted to show that this form of policy
   7
     It is trivial to make the fiscal distortion endogenous by endowing taxpayers with a labor supply choice and assuming
that raising public funds distorts their consumption-leisure decision. The model can also accommodate a cost of public
funds that varies with the state by making s an additional argument of  (·).

                                                           10
can be credible ex-post (for a given s) in our model under plausible circumstances, as follows. It is
evident that deposit insurance policies can only be effective if they provide full coverage of deposits for
at least some depositors.8 In principle, there is some indeterminacy regarding which depositors should
be fully insured. However, whenever a planner has a preference for protecting the consumption of smaller
depositors, perhaps because they are poorer, a deposit insurance policy of the form we consider in this
paper is ex-post optimal.
      That said, policies that are explicitly or implicitly state-contingent, for instance, lender-of-last-
resort policies, can bring social welfare closer to the first-best. Even when those policies are available,
independently of whether they are chosen optimally, our main characterization and the insights associated
with it remain valid as long as these additional policies do not restore the first-best, as we discuss in
Section 5. In the quantitative analysis in Section 4, we show how alternative calibrations of our model
can be used to explore how the optimal level of coverage varies with financial/business cycle conditions.
Last, note that the assumption of full commitment may require credible fiscal backing in practice, as
highlighted by Ennis and Keister (2009) -- see Bonfim and Santos (2020) for recent evidence consistent
with this view.
      Third, our paper departs from Diamond and Dybvig (1983) in three significant ways. First, we
allow for a non-degenerate distribution of deposit balances, which is crucial to capture the extensive
margin effects of deposit insurance. Second, the profitability of banks' investments at dates 1 and 2 is
subject to aggregate risk, which is necessary to observe bank failures in equilibrium under the optimal
deposit insurance policy, as in Goldstein and Pauzner (2005). Finally, instead of a sequential service
constraint, we adopt a proportional sharing rule for the distribution of funds in the case of bank failure.
This formulation, similar to Allen and Gale (1998), allows us to eliminate the ex-post consumption
heterogeneity among depositors of the same type that emerges under sequential service and to simplify
the model solution, but it is otherwise inessential.
      Finally, our baseline model should be interpreted as describing a single representative bank within
a banking sector. Therefore, deposit withdrawals in our model should be interpreted as transfers to
cash. In Section 4, we explain how our framework can be used to build system-wide welfare assessments.
In Section 5, we formally allow for general equilibrium spillovers among banks, identifying interactions
between banks absent in our baseline framework, for instance through the relocation of deposits via
interbank markets.


2.2     Equilibrium Characterization

We first characterize depositors' equilibrium choices at date 1. Subsequently, we study the planning
problem that determines  .

Depositors' Optimal Choices The amount of aggregate deposit withdrawals determines the funds
available to banks to satisfy their promises to depositors. Two scenarios may arise, depending on the
  8
    See Goldsmith-Pinkham and Yorulmazer (2010) for an account of the Northern Rock failure episode in 2007 in the UK,
which illustrates why partial and delayed coverage of deposits fails to stop runs.



                                                         11
aggregate level of deposits at date 1, D1 (s). In the no bank failure scenario, banks have sufficient funds
to satisfy their commitments. In the bank failure scenario, banks do not have sufficient funds to satisfy
their commitments to depositors either at date 1 or at date 2. In that case, banks fail and depositors
resort to the deposit insurance guarantee. Formally, bank failure is determined by

                            Bank Failure,         if 2 (s) 1 (s) D0 -  (s) < D1 (s)
                                                                                                                       (3)
                            No Bank Failure, if 2 (s) 1 (s) D0 -  (s)  D1 (s) ,

where the left-hand side of the inequalities in Equation (3) represents the total resources available to
banks to satisfy deposits at date 2.
    We must separately consider the behavior of i) early depositors, ii) fully insured late depositors, and
iii) partially insured late depositors, in both the failure and no-failure scenarios. Under our assumptions,
regardless of the actions of other depositors, it is optimal for early depositors to withdraw all their
deposits at date 1, setting D1 (i, s) = 0, s. Hence, the equilibrium consumption of early depositors is
given by
                  
                  min {D0 (i) R1 ,  } + F (s) max {D0 (i) R1 - , 0} + Y1 (i, s) ,
                  
                                                                                             Bank Failure
    C1 (i, s) =                                                                                                        (4)
                  D0 (i) R1 + Y1 (i, s) ,
                  
                                                                                             No Bank Failure,

where F (s)  0 corresponds to the equilibrium recovery rate on uninsured deposits, characterized in
Equation (15) below.
    Fully insured late depositors are those whose deposit balances are weakly less than the level of deposit
insurance coverage, that is, D0 (i) R1   . Regardless of the actions of other depositors, fully insured
late depositors are indifferent between withdrawing or leaving all their funds inside the banks in case of
failure, as long as they have access to a perfect storage technology. They also weakly prefer to leave all
deposits inside the banks if there is no bank failure. We restrict our attention to equilibria in which fully
insured late depositors leave all their funds in banks at date 1, so D1 (i, s) = D0 (i) R1 if D0 (i) R1   .
This equilibrium behavior is consistent with a small fixed cost of withdrawing funds or an imperfect
storage technology.
    Partially insured late depositors are those whose deposit balances are larger than the level of deposit
insurance coverage, that is, D0 (i) R1 >  . If banks do not fail, it is weakly optimal for these depositors
to set D1 (i, s) = D0 (i) R1 , since they will receive a positive net return on their deposits between dates
1 and 2, as shown below. In the case of bank failure, we restrict our attention to equilibria in which
these depositors leave up to the level of coverage inside the banks, setting D1 (i, s) =  . In net terms,
this behavior is consistent with the recent evidence uncovered by Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017), which
shows that depositors rarely exceed the level of deposit insurance coverage when a bank failure is likely.9
   9
     Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017) provide the most detailed available evidence on the behavior of depositors in the case
of a representative bank failure in the US. They show that a fraction of existing depositors abandon the bank in question
when it is close to failure. They also show that these depositors are replaced by new depositors who hold exactly up to
the level of coverage. In net terms, which is the relevant dimension for the problem we study, our model is consistent with
their evidence. Our model can also accommodate a type of failure equilibrium in which partially insured late depositors


                                                            12
    Formally, the equilibrium consumption of both fully insured and partially insured late depositors can
be expressed as
                   
                   min {D0 (i) R1 ,  } + F (s) max {D0 (i) R1 - , 0} + Y2 (i, s) ,
                   
                                                                                                      Bank Failure
     C2 (i, s) =                                                                                                              (5)
                   N (s) D0 (i) R1 + Y2 (i, s) ,
                   
                                                                                                      No Bank Failure,

where N (s)  1 corresponds to the additional gross return earned by those deposits that stay within
the bank until date 2. When a bank does not fail, late depositors receive a higher return relative to
early depositors, modulated by N (s), which is fully characterized in Equation (15) below. Note that
the consumption of early and late depositors with the same deposit balance is identical in the case of
bank failure.

Equilibria at Date 1 After characterizing the optimal individual behavior of depositors for a given
level of aggregate withdrawals, we now show that two different types of equilibria may emerge at date 1,
depending on the realization of s. We refer to the first type of equilibrium as a no-failure equilibrium. In
that equilibrium, partially insured depositors keep their deposits in banks, allowing banks to honor their
promises at dates 1 and 2. We refer to the second type of equilibrium as a failure equilibrium. In that
equilibrium, partially insured depositors withdraw all deposits in excess of the level of coverage, making
banks unable to honor their promises either at date 1 or date 2. As explained above, in both types of
equilibria early depositors find it optimal to withdraw all their funds, and fully insured late depositors
find it optimal not to withdraw any of their funds.
    Note that we can reformulate Equation (3), which determines the type of equilibrium that arises, as
follows:
                                         Bank Failure,       ~ 1 (s) > D1 (s)
                                                          if D
                                                                                                                              (6)
                                                             ~ 1 (s)  D1 (s) ,
                                         No Bank Failure, if D
                                    ~ 1 (s) is given by
where the deposit failure threshold D
                                                    
                                                     (R1 -1 (1
                                                             s))D0
                                                                   ,           if 2 (s) > 1
                                        ~ 1 (s) =         1- 
                                        D                       2 (s)                                                         (7)
                                                    ,
                                                    
                                                                               if 2 (s)  1,

and where D1 (s) corresponds to the aggregate level of deposits in state s, which can potentially take two
values, depending on the behavior of partially insured depositors.10 If partially insured late depositors
decide to withdraw all their uninsured deposits, the aggregate level of deposits D1 (s) is given by the
total amount of insured deposits among late depositors, that is,
                                                                    ¢
                                        -
                           D1 (s) =    D1 (, R1 )     (1 - )                 min {D0 (i) R1 ,  } dG (i) .                     (8)
                                                                        iI

optimally set D1 (i, s) = 0, yielding similar conclusions.
   10                                         ~ 1 (s) can be negative if R1 < 1 (s). In that case, only the no-failure equilibrium
      Note that the deposit failure threshold D
trivially exists.




                                                                 13
                      Deposits
                                                                                         Multiplicity Region
                                                ~ 1 (s) =   (R1 -1 (s))D 0
                                                D              1-  1
                                                                   2(s)



                                                                                +
                                                                               D1 (R1 ) = (1 - ) D0 R1




                                                                               -
                                                                              D1 (, R1 ) = (1 - )   iI
                                                                                                         min {D0 (i)R1 ,  } dG (i)



                                       Fundamental           Panic
                                         Failures           Failures
                                 0 s    - 1       s
                                                  ^(R1 )               s (, R1 )         - 1             s     State (s)
                                        2 (1)                                            1 (R1 )


                                         Unique             Multiple                 Unique
                                        (Failure)           Equilibria             (No Failure)
                                       Equilibrium                                 Equilibrium

                                                     Figure 3: Equilibrium Regions
Note: Figure 3 illustrates, for a given level of deposit insurance coverage  and for a given deposit rate R1 , whether there
exists a unique equilibrium or multiple equilibria for different realizations of the state s. The red dashed line is defined in
Equation (7). The black solid lines are defined in Equations (8) and (9). The intersections between the red dashed line and
the black solid lines define the thresholds s^ (R1 ) and s (, R1 ), characterized in Equations (10) and (11) and represented
in Figure 4 as a function of the level of coverage  .


Alternatively, if partially insured late depositors decide not to withdraw their deposits, the aggregate
level of deposits D1 (s) corresponds to

                                                           +
                                                 D1 (s) = D1 (R1 )  (1 - ) D0 R1 .                                                   (9)

       Figure 3 illustrates how Equation (6) determines whether there is a unique equilibrium or multiple
                                                                                                 +
equilibria. There are three possibilities. First, for sufficiently low realizations of s, both D1  (R1 ) and
  -                                                        ~ 1 (s). Within this region, even if there are no
D1 (, R1 ) are less than the deposit failure threshold D
withdrawals by late depositors, bank profitability is so low that early depositors' withdrawals make bank
failure unavoidable. In this case, a unique failure equilibrium exists. We refer to bank failures in this
region as fundamental failures.11 Second, for intermediate realizations of s, if the level of aggregate
                         +
deposits corresponds to D1 (R1 ), banks are able to honor their promises, and a no-failure equilibrium
                                                                    -
exists. However, if the level of aggregate deposits corresponds to D1 (, R1 ), banks are unable to honor
their promises, and a failure equilibrium exists. Within this region, there are multiple equilibria. We
refer to bank failures in this region as panic failures. Finally, for sufficiently high realizations of s, both
D+ (R1 ) and D- (, R1 ) are higher than the deposit failure threshold D
  1               1
                                                                            ~ 1 (s). Within this region, even if
partially insured late depositors decide to withdraw all their uninsured funds, bank profitability is high
enough to be able to honor all promises, so a unique no-failure equilibrium exists.
  11
    There exists a long tradition that distinguishes between fundamental failures (business cycle view) and panic failures
(sunspot view). Our model purposefully accommodates both. See the earlier work by Chari and Jagannathan (1988),
Gorton (1988), and Jacklin and Bhattacharya (1988), among others, as well as the more recent discussions by Allen and
Gale (1998, 2007) and Goldstein (2012).


                                                                             14
      Figure 3 also illustrates the mechanism through which deposit insurance affects the set of equilibria.
                    -
Since the value of D1 (, R1 ) is increasing in  , a higher level of deposit insurance coverage reduces the
                                             -            +
multiplicity region. Note that          lim D1 (, R1 ) = D1 (R1 ), so bank failure is possible even when all
                                       DR1
deposits are covered. In this case, when the realization of s is sufficiently low, the withdrawals of early
depositors are sufficient to make banks fail. Note also that if   0, the equilibrium still features three
regions. For very low realizations of the state s, there is a unique fundamental failure equilibrium, while
for very high realizations of s, there is a unique no-failure equilibrium. In an intermediate region of s
there are multiple equilibria. Therefore, high enough levels of deposit insurance eliminate the failure
equilibrium as long as banks are not completely insolvent. Interestingly, the expression for the deposit
                  ~ 1 (s) features a "multiplier"
failure threshold D                                 1
                                                       > 1. Intuitively, every dollar left inside the banks
                                                  1- 1     2 (s)
not only reduces the net loss on investments that must be liquidated, but also earns the extra marginal
net return on banks' investments. This mechanism amplifies the impact of deposit insurance.
      To characterize ex-ante behavior and welfare, it is useful to formally define the regions of s that
determine the different type of equilibria that may arise at date 1. Formally,

                           Unique (Failure) equilibrium,            if s  s < s
                                                                              ^ (R1 )
                           Multiple equilibria,                        ^ (R1 )  s < s (, R1 )
                                                                    if s
                           Unique (No-Failure) equilibrium, if s (, R1 )  s  s,

                     ^ (R1 ) and s (, R1 ) are defined as follows:
where the thresholds s

                                           s            +
                                           ^ (R1 ) = s D1         ~ 1 (s)
                                                          (R1 ) = D                                                 (10)
                                                      -
                                       s (, R1 ) = s D1           ~ 1 (s) ,
                                                        (, R1 ) = D                                                 (11)

                                           -           ~ 1 (s) cannot be satisfied for any value of s.
where s (, R1 ) = s whenever the Equation D1 (, R1 ) = D
Figure 4 illustrates the three regions graphically. In Section A of the Online Appendix, we explicitly
                                                    ^ (R1 ) and s (, R1 ). We show that
establish the relevant properties of the thresholds s

                                       s            s                    s^
                                          0,            0,         and       0.
                                                    R1                   R1

That is, the region of multiplicity decreases with the level of deposit insurance while the region with a
unique failure equilibrium increases in the deposit rate offered by banks. The region of multiplicity can
increase or decrease with the deposit rate offered by banks.

Probability of Bank Failure In order to compute ex-ante welfare whenever there are multiple
equilibria at date 1, we must take a stance on which equilibrium materializes for every realization
of s. For now, a sunspot coordinates depositors' behavior: for a given realization of s, the failure
equilibrium occurs with probability   [0, 1] and the no-failure equilibrium occurs with probability
1 -  .12 Alternatively, we could have introduced imperfect common knowledge of fundamentals, as in
 12
      Our model also accommodates the case in which the sunspot probability  varies with the state s, as in  (s).


                                                            15
                                        s

                                        s

                                                               Unique (No Failure)
                                 - 1
                                 1 (R1 )                          Equilibrium


                                                                   s (, R1 )
                                                 Multiple
                                                 Equilibria

                                   s
                                   ^ (R1 )
                                                   Unique (Failure) Equilibrium
                                        s


                                             0                                       DR1   

                                Figure 4: Regions Defined by s (, R1 ) and s
                                                                           ^ (R1 )
Note: For a given deposit rate R1 , Figure 4 illustrates which realizations of the state s are associated with a unique
equilibrium and its type, or with multiple equilibria, for different levels of deposit insurance coverage  .


Goldstein and Pauzner (2005), which would allow us to endogenize the probability of bank failure. We
explain in Section 5 how the main insights of the paper extend to that case.
    Therefore we can write the unconditional probability of bank failure in this economy, which we denote
by q F (, R1 ), as

                              s (R1 )) +  [F (s (, R1 )) - F (^
             q F (, R1 ) = F (^                               s (R1 ))] .              (Failure Probability)           (12)

The unconditional probability of bank failure q F (·) inherits the properties of s (·) and s
                                                                                           ^ (·). Formally,
we express the sensitivity of the probability of failure to a change in the level of coverage holding the
                          q F
deposit rate constant,          , which is a key input for the optimal determination of  , and the sensitivity
                                                              q F
of the probability of failure to a change in R1 ,             R1 ,   as follows:

                           q F                  s
                               = f (s (, R1 ))       0                                                                 (13)
                                                 
                           q F                       s^                 s
                               = (1 -  ) f (^
                                            s (R1 ))    + f (s (, R1 ))     0,                                         (14)
                           R1                        R1                 R1

where f (s) is the probability density associated with F (s). Intuitively, holding the deposit rate constant,
a higher level of deposit insurance coverage decreases the likelihood of bank failures in equilibrium by
                                                                                                   q F
reducing the region in which there are multiple equilibria. Figure 4 illustrates why                     is weakly negative.
Similarly, holding the level of deposit insurance constant, a higher deposit rate increases the likelihood of
                                                                                              s
bank failure both by reducing the region with a unique no-failure equilibrium,                R1    0, and by enlarging
                                                              s^
the region with a unique failure equilibrium,                 R1    0. Note that deposit insurance is more effective in
reducing bank failures whenever depositors are more likely to coordinate in the failure equilibrium, that
is, when   1.


                                                                   16
Depositors' Equilibrium Consumption To determine depositors' consumption in equilibrium, it
is necessary to characterize the equilibrium objects N (s) and F (s). As shown in Section A of the
Online Appendix, the recovery rate on uninsured claims in case of failure F (s) and the additional gross
return in case of no-failure N (s) are respectively given by
                                        ¡
            max  (s) 1 (s) D0 - iI min {D0 (i) R1 ,  } dG (i) , 0                                      1 (s) - R1
    F (s) =          ¡                                                         and N (s) = 2 (s)                  .       (15)
                       iI
                          max {D0 (i) R1 - , 0} dG (i)                                                 (1 - ) R1

Figure 5 illustrates how both F (s) and N (s) vary with the state s. Intuitively, the recovery rate on
uninsured claims in case of failure is given by the ratio of total funds available after insurance payments
to uninsured claims. The funds available after liquidation correspond to the difference between the total
                                                                                           ¡
amount of bank resources  (s) 1 (s) D0 and the level of insured payments,                   iI   min {D0 (i) R1 ,  } dG (i).
                                                       ¡
The level of uninsured claims corresponds to               iI   max {D0 (i) R1 - , 0} dG (i). Note that for sufficiently
low values of bank profitability at date 1 or their recovery rate on assets  (s), F (s) can be zero in
some states, implying that the recovery rate on uninsured deposits is zero. The funding shortfall will be
positive in those scenarios. The value of F (s)  [0, 1) is decreasing in the deposit rate R1 and in the
level of coverage  , and it is increasing in the realization of the state s.

                                                                                                              N (s)

             T (s)
                                                           F (s)




       0 s                                             s State (s) 0 s                                      s State (s)

           Figure 5: Depositors' Equilibrium Consumption Determinants and Funding Shortfall
Note: For a given level of deposit insurance coverage  and a given deposit rate R1 , the left panel in Figure 5 shows the
recovery rate on uninsured deposits in case of failure, F (s), as well as the funding shortfall, T (s), for different values of
the realizations of the state s. For the same levels of  and R1 , the right panel in Figure 5 shows the additional gross return
earned by the deposits that stay within the bank until date 2, N (s).


    The additional gross return in case of no-failure, N (s), corresponds to the ratio of available funds
at date 2, given by 2 (s) (1 (s) - R1 ) D0 , to the level of date 1 deposits, given by (1 - ) D0 R1 . The
value of N (s) is increasing in the realization of the state s and decreasing in  and R1 .
    As we show below, a key determinant of the optimal test for whether to increase or decrease the
optimal level of deposit insurance is the consumption gap between failure and no-failure equilibria.
Formally, for a given realization of s, the consumption gaps for early and late depositors are respectively




                                                                 17
given by

       N           F
      C1 (i, s) - C1 (i, s) = (1 - F (s)) max {D0 (i) R1 - , 0}                                         (Early Depositors)   (16)
                                       Unrecovered Uninsured Deposits
       N               F
      C2   (i, s) -   C2   (i, s) = (N (s) - 1) D0 (i) R1 + (1 - F (s)) max {D0 (i) R1 - , 0} .         (Late Depositors)    (17)
                                     Additional Net Return        Unrecovered Uninsured Deposits


Note that the consumption gap between failure and no-failure equilibria is zero for early depositors who
are fully insured. The consumption gap for partially insured early depositors corresponds to the funds
that are not recovered in the case of bank failure. The consumption gap for late depositors contains an
additional term relative to early depositors that captures the forgone additional net return on deposits
between dates 1 and 2.

Funding Shortfall and Taxpayers' Equilibrium Consumption Finally, we characterize the
funding shortfall in state s, T (s), given by
                              ¢
        T (s) = max                 min {D0 (i) R1 ,  } dG (i) -  (s) 1 (s) D0 , 0 .               (Funding Shortfall)       (18)
                               iI

The funding shortfall is positive when the total amount of deposit insurance claims exceeds the funds
available after liquidation. In this case, the recovery rate on uninsured deposits is zero, that is, F (s) = 0.
The funding shortfall is zero when the funds available after liquidation are sufficient to cover all insured
deposits. Figure 5 illustrates how T (s) varies with the state s and how T (s) and F (s) are related.
      Given that the deadweight loss of taxation  (T (s)) is borne by taxpayers, we can express taxpayers'
equilibrium consumption C (, s) = C N (, s) , C F (, s) in failure and no-failure scenarios as

                            C F (, s) = Y (, s) - T (s) -  (T (s))           and C N (, s) = Y (, s) ,                       (19)

where T (s) is defined in Equation (18). The consumption gap between failure and no-failure equilibria
for taxpayers is simply given by the funding shortfall augmented by the deadweight loss of taxation, that
is,
                                            C N (, s) - C F (, s) = T (s) +  (T (s)) .                                       (20)


2.3        Normative Analysis

After characterizing the equilibrium of this economy for a given level of deposit insurance coverage  , we
now study how changes in the level of coverage affect social welfare. We initially consider a scenario in
which the deposit rate offered by banks is predetermined and invariant to the level of coverage  . This
case provides a tractable benchmark from which we study multiple departures in the next section.
      We denote by V (j, , R1 ) = {V (i, , R1 ) , V (, , R1 )} the ex-ante indirect utilities of depositors and
taxpayers, respectively, for given levels of deposit insurance and the deposit rate. Formally, V (i, , R1 )




                                                                   18
and V (, , R1 ) correspond to

                   V (i, , R1 ) = Es [U (C1 (i, s))] + (1 - ) Es [U (C2 (i, s))]                                 (Depositors)
                   V (, , R1 ) = Es [U (C (, s))] ,                                                               (Taxpayers)

where early and late depositors' expected utility can be expressed as
                                 ¢        s
                                          ^(R1 )                              ¢    s (,R1 )
                                                      F                                          F                     N
       Es [U (Ct (i, s))] =                        U Ct (i, s) dF (s) +                       U Ct (i, s) + (1 -  ) U Ct (i, s)      dF (s)
                                      s                                           s
                                                                                  ^(R1 )
                                 ¢       s
                                                       N
                             +                      U Ct (i, s) dF (s) ,
                                     s (,R1 )


       F (i, s) and C N (i, s) represent consumption of depositors in failure and no-failure equilibria, as
where Ct             t
described in Equations (4) and (5), and where C (, s) is defined in Equation (19).13 The thresholds
^ (R1 ) and s (, R1 ) are defined in Equations (10) and (11), while  corresponds to the predetermined
s
sunspot probability.
      Because our model features a rich cross-section of depositors, we must set a criterion to aggregate
welfare. Instead of directly maximizing a weighted sum of the utilities of depositors and taxpayers, we
assess the aggregate welfare gains/losses of a marginal change in the level of coverage by aggregating the
money-metric utility change (in dollars of the marginal failure state) across all agents. This approach can
be interpreted as selecting a set of "generalized social marginal welfare weights" -- described in Saez and
Stantcheva (2016) -- for all agents. As we show in Section C of the Online Appendix, there is a one-to-
one mapping between using generalized welfare weights and selecting a particular set of traditional social
welfare weights. There are two main advantages to using our approach. First, this approach allows us
to quantify aggregate marginal welfare changes in dollars. Second, it facilitates aggregation by making
(approximate) welfare assessments exclusively a function of bank-level aggregates, as we formally show
in Proposition 2 below.
      Formally, we express the change in social welfare induced by a marginal change in the level of deposit
                                     dW
insurance coverage  ,                 d ,     as follows:
                         ¢                                         ¢
             dW                    dVm (j, , R1 )                                     dVm (i, , R1 )               dVm (, , R1 )
                =             (j )                dj =                        (i)                    dG (i) +  ( )               ,            (21)
              d                         d                           iI                     d                            d
                                                                                        Depositors                  Taxpayers


                              dV (j,,R1 )
          dVm (j,,R1 )
where          d         =         d
                             U (C F (j,s ))
                                                      denotes the money-metric change in indirect utility for agent j = {i,  },
 13
      Note that V (, , R1 ) can be explicitly written as
                                 ¢       s
                                         ^(R1 )                          ¢    s (,R1 )
             V (, , R1 ) =                        U C F (, s) dF (s) +                     U C F (, s) + (1 -  ) U C N (, s)    dF (s)
                                     s                                       s
                                                                             ^(R1 )
                                 ¢    s
                             +                     U C N (, s) dF (s)
                                     s (,R1 )




                                                                                   19
using the marginal failure state, s , as reference.14 The subindex m indicates that                       dVm
                                                                                                           d    is a "money-
metric" welfare representation. The weights  (j ) = { (i) ,  ( )} are the generalized social marginal
welfare weights. We derive Proposition 1 for general weights, although we specialize to the case of
uniform weights --  (j ) = 1, j -- in Proposition 2.
                                 dW
       Given the definition of    d ,   Proposition 1, which presents a central result of this paper, provides an
exact test that determines whether it is optimal to increase or decrease the level of deposit insurance
coverage.

Proposition 1. (Exact directional test) The change in social welfare induced by a marginal change
in the level of deposit insurance coverage  , dW
                                               d , is given by
                                                                                                                
                     ¢
                                q F      U C N (j, s ) - U C F (j, s )                             C F (j, s)
                                                                                                                
              dW                                                                 F
                                                                                     EF
                                                                                                                
                          (j ) -                                            +q            m (j, s)
                 =                                                                    s
                                                                                                                 dj,      (22)
               d                                U (C F (j, s ))                                                 
                                                                                                                
                                              Marginal Benefit                            Marginal Cost


                                                                                                     U (C F (j,s))
where  (j ) denotes the generalized social welfare weight for agent j , m (j, s) =                  U (C F (j,s ))
                                                                                                                    denotes the
stochastic discount factor of agent j in state s relative to the marginal failure                                  F
                                                                                                    state s , Es [·] denotes
the conditional expectation over bank failure states, and q F denotes the unconditional probability of bank
              dW
failure. If    d   > (<) 0, it is optimal to locally increase (decrease) the level of coverage.

       Proposition 1 characterizes the effect on social welfare of a marginal change in the level of deposit
insurance, and formalizes the tradeoffs that determine the optimal deposit insurance limit. The first
element of the weighted sum in Equation (22) can be interpreted as the marginal benefit of increasing
the level of deposit insurance by a dollar. A marginal increase in the deposit insurance limit decreases
                                        q F 15
the likelihood of bank failure by        .       The marginal utility gain associated with such a reduction in the
probability of bank failure is captured by the differences in utilities between the failure and no-failure
equilibria evaluated at the marginal failure state s , U C N (j, s ) - U C F (j, s ) . For each agent, this
difference in utilities is determined by the difference in consumption, characterized in Equations (16),
(17), and (20).
       To better understand the aggregate marginal benefit of increasing coverage, in Lemma 1 we formally
characterize the aggregate consumption difference between failure and no-failure equilibria at the
marginal failure state.

Lemma 1. (Aggregate consumption difference between failure and no-failure equilibria) The aggregate
  14
     In principle, any state could be chosen as reference for the money-metric normalization. By choosing s , we slightly
simplify the characterization of Proposition 1. In Section C of the Online Appendix, we re-derive Equation (22) for any
reference state and show that Proposition 2 remains valid in that case after suitably redefining m (j, s).
  15
     As we show in Section 3, the total impact of a change in coverage on the probability of failure when deposit rates react
                                           F       F
                                                        q F dR1
to the level of  can be decomposed as dq  d
                                              = q 
                                                      + R  1 d
                                                                . In this section, note that we adopt the partial derivative
                        dR1
notation, even though d = 0. It will become clear in Sections 3 and 5 that the partial derivative is the relevant object of
interest more generally.




                                                                 20
consumption change induced by a bank failure in the marginal failure state s is given by
     ¢
         C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj = (2 (s ) - 1) (1 (s ) - R1 ) D0 + (1 -  (s )) 1 (s ) D0 +  (T (s )) .              (23)
                                              Net Return Loss                   Bank Failure           Net Cost of
                                                                               Deadweight Loss         Public Funds


     As we show below, Equation (23) corresponds to the approximate social gain from avoiding the
marginal bank failure. Its first term corresponds to the marginal net return loss caused by bank failure.
Intuitively, at date 1, a bank failure forfeits the net return 2 (s ) - 1 per unit of available funds
(1 (s ) - R1 ) D0 . The second term corresponds to the deadweight loss on banks' assets associated
with bank failure. The final term is the total cost of public funds, which is non-zero at the margin
whenever banks do not have enough resources after liquidation to pay for all insurance claims at the
marginal failure state s . Part of the marginal benefit of preventing a bank failure comes from avoiding
fiscal distortions at the marginal state.
     The second element of the weighted sum in Equation (22) can be interpreted as the marginal cost
of increasing the level of deposit insurance by a dollar. A marginal increase in the level of deposit
                                                                                                                      C F (j,s)
insurance changes the consumption of depositors and taxpayers in the case of bank failure by                            
over the set of failure states, which take place with probability q F . Each agent values consumption
changes in state s according to his stochastic discount factor relative to the marginal failure state:
           U (C F (j,s))
m (j, s) = U (C F (j,s )) . In Section A of the Online Appendix, we provide explicit characterizations
     C F (j,s)                                                                     C F (j,s)
of               for both depositors and taxpayers. There we show that                         is zero for fully insured
depositors and can be positive (for depositors whose deposits are right above the coverage limit) or
negative (for depositors with large uninsured balances) for partially insured depositors. We also show
                                                   ¡  C F (i,s)
that the aggregate effect among depositors,                     dG (i), is weakly positive and is zero when the
                                                                       F (,s)
funding shortfall is zero, i.e., T (s) = 0. We    also show that C            is weakly negative for taxpayers.
     To better understand the aggregate marginal cost of increasing coverage, in Lemma 2 we formally
characterize the aggregate change in consumption in case of bank failure in state s induced by an increase
in the level of coverage  .

Lemma 2. (Aggregate consumption change induced by a change in coverage in failure states) The
aggregate consumption change in case of bank failure in state s induced by a marginal change in the
level of deposit insurance coverage  is given by
                                            
                                                                 Mass of
                                                  Marginal Partially Insured
                                            
                                                   Cost of      Depositors
                          ¢
                                            
                                                 Public Funds ¢
                                            
                              C F (j, s)
                                            
                                         dj = -  (T (s))              dG (i) ,    if T (s) > 0                            (24)
                                             
                                            
                                                                iPI
                                            
                                            0,
                                            
                                                                                  if T (s) = 0,

where PI = { i| D0 (i) R1 >  } denotes the set of partially insured depositors.

     Lemma 2 shows that the marginal cost of increasing  is increasing in the marginal cost of public
                                                                ¡                                ¡   C F (j,s)
funds  (·) and the mass of partially insured depositors         iPI   dG (i). The value of                     dj   is strictly

                                                         21
negative whenever the transfer of resources among different agents associated with the deposit insurance
system is distortionary, in this case due to the deadweight losses of taxation. Intuitively, the net social
cost of a marginal increase in  is given by the deadweight loss associated with transferring a dollar
from taxpayers to the partially insured depositors. Equation (24) highlights that only partially insured
depositors are marginal as the coverage limit changes. In other words, a marginal change in the coverage
limit has no marginal cost impact on already fully insured depositors. Taking an expectation over the
failure states, we can express the marginal cost of increasing the level of coverage as
                             ¢                                                                                   ¢
                                 C F (j, s)
                q   F
                        EF
                         s                  dj = -q F · q T+ |F · EF
                                                                   s  (T (s)) T (s) > 0 ·                                  dG (i) .       (25)
                                                                                                                   iPI


Intuitively, the cost increasing the level of coverage by a dollar is given by the marginal cost of public
                                                                                                   ¡
funds,  (T (s)), which has to be paid to partially insured depositors,                                 iPI     dG (i), whenever banks fail
(which occurs with probability              qF )   and the funding shortfall is positive (which occurs with probability
q T+ |F conditional on bank failure).
      Even though the test characterized in Proposition 1 is exact, it is challenging to operationalize
in practice by directly measuring its constituents. A policymaker would need detailed information on
individual deposit balances and consumption across different scenarios. While gathering this information
is conceivable, the informational requirements on the policymaker would be large. Instead, in Proposition
2, we introduce an approximate directional test that determines whether it is optimal to increase or
decrease the level of coverage relying exclusively on aggregate outcomes at the bank level. As we explain
in our remarks below, the elements of Equation (26) are sufficient statistics to determine whether to
increase or decrease the level of coverage.

Proposition 2. (Approximate directional test based on bank-level aggregates) When the
planner i) sets uniform generalized marginal social welfare weights, i.e.,  (j ) = 1, j , ii) approximates
U C N (j, s ) linearly around C F (j, s ),16 and iii) values consumption equally across agents and states,
i.e., computes welfare as if m (j, s) = 1, j , s, the change in social welfare induced by a marginal change
                                                               dW
in the level of deposit insurance coverage  ,                   d ,   is given by

                                        ¢                                                          ¢
                         dW   q F                  N                  F                   F                C F (j, s)
                            -                 C (j, s ) - C (j, s ) dj + q                    EF
                                                                                               s                      dj ,                (26)
                          d                                                                                  

where EF
       s [·] denotes the conditional expectation over bank failure states, q
                                                                             F denotes the unconditional
                                                       ¡                                               ¡    C F (j,s)
probability of bank failure, and where                     C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj and                           dj   are characterized in
                                              dW
Lemmas 1 and 2, respectively. If               d       > (<) 0, it is approximately optimal to locally increase (decrease)
the level of coverage.

      The approximate test characterized in Proposition 2 is based on three premises. First, it uses uniform
 16
      Formally, the linear approximation of U C N (j, s ) around C F (j, s ) is given by

                             U C N (j, s ) - U C F (j, s )  U              C F (j, s )   C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) .



                                                                          22
generalized marginal social welfare weights. This choice of weights eliminates distributional motives by
valuing resources equally among all agents, using the state s as reference. Second, it approximates the
difference in utilities at the marginal failure state s as U                      C F (j, s )    C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) , which
is necessary to express individual valuations in terms of marginal utilities. Note that this approximation
also allows us to express              dW
                                        d in terms        of consumption differences, C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ), and not in
consumption levels,              C N (j, s ) and C F      (j, s ), which makes the result substantially more applicable.
Finally, it imposes that all agents value resources equally in all (failure) states, which further eliminates
any desire to redistribute across agents with different valuations. As a whole, these three requirements
allow the planner to give equal weight to dollar transfers across different agents and different states,
abstracting away from distributional issues.17 Since the distributional implications of policies may be
an important practical concern for policymakers, any conclusion obtained from applying Equation (26)
should be understood as a reference point.
         In practice, Equation (26) allows anyone interested in making approximate welfare assessments
                                                                                          q F
to rely only on information on failure probabilities, q F and                                   , and aggregate consumption,
¡                                                 ¡   C F (j,s)
     CN     (j, s )   -   CF   (j, s )   dj and                 dj .   In Section 4, we show how to combine Proposition 2
with Lemmas 1 and 2 to find specific estimates of Equation (26) in a particular scenario, illustrating
how to implement our approximate test in practice.
         We conclude our normative analysis with five remarks. In these remarks, we focus on the implications
of Proposition 2, because it is more widely applicable, although similar insights emerge when we consider
the test in Proposition 1.

Remark 1. Sufficient statistics. Proposition 2 provides a simple test for whether to increase or decrease
the level of coverage that exclusively relies on a few potentially observable sufficient statistics. These
sufficient statistics are: i) the probability of bank failure, ii) its sensitivity to changes in the level
of coverage, iii) the aggregate consumption losses associated with a marginal bank failure, and iv)
the marginal impact on aggregate consumption in failure states induced by changing the level of
coverage. These sufficient statistics can a) be potentially recovered from measured data, or b) be
used to shed light on the results of a calibrated structural model. In Section 4, we make use of
                                                                                                         dW
both approaches within a particular application. Even though we characterize                              d   locally, the welfare
change caused by a non-local change in the level of coverage can be recovered by integrating over the
               dW
values of     Formally, for a non-local policy change from  to  , we can write the welfare change as
                d .
                          ¡
follows: W ( ) - W ( ) =  dW      ~ ~           dW
                              d  d , where d (·) is determined in Proposition 1. Therefore, direct
measurement of these variables for different levels of  is sufficient to assess the welfare impact of any
change in the level of coverage.

Remark 2. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) revisited. In an environment without aggregate risk, Diamond
and Dybvig (1983) show that it is optimal to provide unlimited deposit insurance coverage, eliminating
bank failure equilibria altogether. Importantly, in their model, deposit insurance never has to be paid
    17
   Note that the first requirement is an assumption on how to assign welfare weights, while the last two are actual
approximations. We describe the quantitative impact of each of both types of requirements in Section D of the Online
Appendix.


                                                                        23
in equilibrium. In our model, there are scenarios in which deposit insurance must be paid even if the
level of coverage is unlimited, which makes unlimited coverage suboptimal. Equation (26) allows us
to heuristically recover the Diamond and Dybvig (1983) result by setting q F = 0 and assuming that
q F
       < 0. In this case, banks never fail, so there is no cost of intervention, but increasing the level
of coverage reduces the probability of failure, making unlimited deposit insurance optimal. This logic
extends more broadly to other models of multiple equilibria, in which policies that costlessly eliminate
bad equilibria are optimal.

Remark 3. Convexity and limiting results. Our assumptions guarantee that the planner's problem is
continuous and differentiable in  . When numerically solving the model, we find that the planner's
problem is well-behaved for standard functional forms and distributional assumptions, although the
convexity of the planner's problem is not guaranteed in general, as in most normative problems. Note
that Equation (26) can be used to conclude whether a non-zero or a maximal level of coverage is desirable.
For instance, if the marginal cost of a small increase in the level of coverage is zero, because q F , q T+ |F ,
or  (·) are zero when  = 0, but a small increase in the level of coverage is effective at reducing the
                          q F                                                              dW
probability of failure,     =0         < 0, then Equation (26) implies that                 d  =0    > 0, so a strictly positive
level of coverage is optimal. Note that as long as banks fail in equilibrium when coverage is unlimited,
 = DR1 , and fiscal costs are positive,  (·) > 0, a maximal level of coverage is not optimal, since
q F                                          dW
  =DR        = 0, which implies that          d  =DR      < 0.
      1                                             1

Remark 4. Optimal level of coverage  . At an interior optimum, the optimal level of deposit insurance
             dW
 satisfies    d   ( ) = 0, which implies the following relations exactly and approximately:

                              ¡U (C N (j,s ))-U (C F (j,s ))              ¡
                                       U (C F (j,s ))
                                                              dj              C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj
                     =    q        ¡                F                 q               ¡   C F (j,s)
                                                                                                             ,             (27)
                              EF
                               s      m (j, s) C      (j,s)
                                                            dj                   EF
                                                                                  s                 dj

                      F
where q     log q
       = -  log( ) denotes the elasticity of the probability of bank failure to a change in the level
of coverage. Intuitively, a high (low) value for  is optimal when q     N           F     
                                                                   and C (j, s ) - C (j, s ) are
                                   ¡   C F (j,s)
large (small), or when EF
                        s                        dj   is large (small), all else equal. As it is common in optimal
policy exercises,  cannot be written as a function of primitives, since all right-hand side variables in
Equation (27) are endogenous to the level of  .18 Since solving for the fixed point that determines 
in Equation (27) would require finding measures of all right-hand side variables for every level of  , we
                            dW
focus on characterizing      d ,   which can be computed for a given level of  .

Remark 5. Accuracy of the approximation. It is not obvious whether the approximate test in Proposition
2 delivers results that are similar to those obtained using Proposition 1. In Section D of the Online
Appendix, we address this issue in detail within the calibrated quantitative model from Section 4.2.
First, as expected, we conclude that the choice of welfare weights is important. Using generalized welfare
weights that are not uniform will deliver different conclusions regarding the desirability of changing the
  18
    This logic is similar to conventional characterizations of optimal taxes. For instance, optimal Ramsey commodity taxes
are a function of demand elasticities, which are endogenous to the level of taxes.


                                                               24
level of coverage. For instance, we find that a classic utilitarian planner who values resources in the
hands of smaller depositors more would prefer lower levels of coverage. Second, we find that the actual
approximations, i.e., approximating U C N (j, s ) linearly around C F (j, s ) and setting m (j, s) = 1,
j , s, have a small quantitative impact, at least for our calibration. As we explain in the Online
Appendix, a planner who uses the approximate results tends to overestimate the welfare gains from
increasing the level of coverage, mostly by underweighting the marginal cost of providing public funds
for taxpayers.


3     Endogenous Deposit Rate and Optimal Regulation
So far, we have considered the case in which the deposit rate R1 offered by banks is predetermined.
We now analyze two environments in which R1 is endogenously determined. First, we consider an
environment in which a regulator can directly determine the deposit rate offered by banks. Next, we
consider a different environment in which competitive banks freely choose the deposit rate offered to
depositors. Finally, by comparing the solution to both problems, we characterize the optimal deposit
rate regulation.
    We draw three major conclusions from this analysis.            First, we show that the equation that
                 dW                                                                                  dW
characterizes     d   when deposit rates are fixed is identical to the equation that characterizes    d   under
the optimal deposit rate regulation. Therefore, in both scenarios, the same set of sufficient statistics is
needed to determine the optimal policy. Second, we show that this equation only has to be augmented
by the fiscal externality induced by banks' behavior when deposit rates can vary freely. Finally, we
show that the optimal deposit rate regulation should be exclusively designed to counteract the fiscal
externality caused by banks, regardless of whether deposit insurance is "fairly-priced".


3.1   Regulated Deposit Rate

We now allow the policymaker to jointly determine the welfare maximizing deposit rate along with the
optimal level of deposit insurance. Letting the planner choose the deposit rate directly is analogous to
allowing for a rich set of ex-ante policies that modify banks' behavior at date 0. Deposit rate regulation
has been commonly used in practice, in particular before the financial deregulation wave at the end of
the last century. We first characterize the set of constrained efficient policies and then discuss possible
decentralizations, including, for instance, imposing deposit rate ceilings or requiring a deposit insurance
premium.
    Formally, we let the planner jointly choose the level of  and the deposit rate offered to households.
Going forward, we assume that the planner uses uniform generalized marginal social welfare weights, i.e.,
                                                                                                     W
 (j ) = 1. In this case, the optimal choice of R1  1, R1 is characterized by the solution to         R1    = 0,
where social welfare is now a function of both  and R1 . Importantly, the planner internalizes the effect
of changing R1 on the funding shortfall T (s). We formally describe in Section A.2 of the Appendix the
expression that characterizes the optimal rate. Here, we directly characterize the directional test for how


                                                       25
social welfare varies with the level of coverage.

Proposition 3. (Directional test for  under perfect ex-ante regulation) The change in welfare
                                                                          dW
induced by a marginal change in the level of deposit insurance             d   when R1 is optimally determined by
the planner is given by

               ¢                                                  ¢
                                                                                        
        dW           q F  U C N (j, s ) - U C F (j, s )                      C F (j, s)
           =       -                                     + q F EF   m (j, s)             dj,                        (28)
                                                                s
                         
         d                       U (C F (j, s ))                               

                  U (C F (j,s))
where m (j, s) = U (C F (j,s ))
                                denotes the stochastic discount factor of agent j in state s relative to the
                          
marginal failure state s , Es [·] denotes the conditional expectation over bank failure states, and q F
                                F

denotes the unconditional probability of bank failure. If dW d > (<) 0, it is optimal to locally increase
(decrease) the level of coverage.

       By comparing Equations (22) and (28), we observe that the marginal change in welfare caused by
a change in the level of coverage can be expressed in identical form when R1 is predetermined and
when R1 is optimally chosen by the planner. Once again, information about depositors' and taxpayers'
consumption and failure probabilities is sufficient to determine the welfare effect of changes in the level
of coverage. Intuitively, any impact on welfare induced by the change in deposit rates generated by a
change in  must be 0 when R1 is optimally chosen by perfectly regulated banks.
                                                                               dW
       If one were to solve for the optimal value of  by setting                d   = 0, the solutions when R1 is
predetermined and optimally chosen would differ, because the endogenous elements (consumption and
failure probabilities) vary with the level of R1 . However, from the perspective of understanding the
welfare impact of changes in the level of coverage, the set of relevant sufficient statistics is the same.
This reasoning motivates the use of Equation (28) or, equivalently, Equation (22) for the purpose of
direct measurement exercises, as we do in Section 4.1.


3.2      Unregulated Deposit Rate

We now allow banks to freely choose the deposit rate that they offer to depositors. In environments with
a representative depositor, including Diamond and Dybvig (1983), the assumption of perfect competition
among banks translates into an objective function for banks that simply maximizes depositors' welfare.
However, specifying the objective function of banks in an environment with heterogeneous depositors is
far from trivial.19
       Here we proceed as follows. For a given level of coverage  , we assume that banks set the single
deposit rate R1  1, R1 competitively at date 0 to maximize a money-metric sum of depositors'
  19
    Formally modeling how banks compete for depositors and how depositors end up grouped in different banks is outside
of the scope of the paper. This is an important question that has not received much attention. On the theoretical side,
Mitkov (2020) addresses this problem by assuming that each bank serves only depositors of the same wealth level, so the
objective of the bank is clearly defined. He then provides conditions under which the equilibrium outcome is unchanged if
depositors with different wealth levels are grouped together in the same bank. Quantitatively, Egan, Hortaçsu and Matvos
(2017) have structurally estimated a quantitative model for demand deposits.


                                                           26
utilities. Formally, we let R1 be pinned down by the solution to
                                                      ¢
                                               V              Vm (i, , R1 )
                                                  =                         dG (i) = 0,                                 (29)
                                               R1               R1
                           V (i,,R1 )
        Vm (i,,R1 )           R1
where     R1          =   U (C F (j,s ))
                                           denotes the money-metric change in indirect utility for depositor i induced
by an increase in the deposit rate.20 Our definition of equilibrium needs to be augmented to incorporate
that R1 is optimally chosen by banks at date 0, for a given level of deposit insurance  . Note that when
R1 is set according to Equation (29), banks endogenously give more weight to depositors with larger
balances.
    The choice of R1 determines the optimal degree of risk sharing between early and late types and across
depositors, accounting for the level of aggregate uncertainty and incorporating the costs associated with
bank failure. Overall, banks internalize that varying R1 not only changes the consumption of depositors
in both failure and no-failure states (intensive margin terms) but also the likelihood of experiencing a
bank failure (extensive margin terms). Importantly, banks do not take into account how their choice of
R1 affects the need to raise resources through taxation to pay for deposit insurance.
                V (i,,R1 )
    Formally,     R1          is given by

                        V (i, , R1 )    Es [U (C1 (i, s))]           Es [U (C2 (i, s))]
                                     =                     + (1 - )                     = 0,                            (30)
                          R1                 R1                           R1

where the marginal change in early and late depositors' utility can be expressed as


                                              F                                           N
 Es [U (Ct (i, s))]                         Ct  (i, s)                                 Ct   (i, s)
                    = q F EF
                           s U
                                       F
                                      Ct (i, s)          + 1 - q F ENs
                                                                            N
                                                                         U Ct (i, s)
      R1                                      R1                                         R1
                                                              s^                                                     s
                                   F
                      + (1 -  ) U Ct     ^) - U Ct
                                     (i, s          N
                                                      (i, s
                                                          ^)      f (^
                                                                     s) +  U CtF
                                                                                  (i, s ) - U Ct   N
                                                                                                     (i, s )            f (s ) ,
                                                             R1                                                      R1

where EF          N
       s [·] and Es [·] respectively denote conditional expectations over failure and no-failure states.
                                                               N (i,s)
                                                              Ct                F (i,s)
                                                                               Ct
The intensive margin effects are captured by                   R1        and    R1 .      We show in Section A of the Online
                                 N (i,s)
                                Ct
Appendix that the term           R1          takes on positive values for early depositors and negative values for late
depositors. These effects capture the ex-ante risk sharing gains between early and late types generated
                                       F (i,s)
                                      Ct
by a higher deposit rate.21            R1         is positive for fully insured depositors, but can turn negative for
                                                          ¡    F (i,s)
                                                              Ct
partially insured depositors. We show that                     R1 dG (i)        is weakly positive, which can be interpreted
as a form of moral hazard, at least on aggregate. Intuitively, banks internalize that an increase in the
deposit rate increases the consumption of insured depositors in failure states, at the expense of taxpayers.
On the extensive margin, banks take into account that offering a high deposit rate makes bank failures
                                                                         s^          s
more likely. This is captured by the positive sign of                    R1    and   R1 ,   which, combined with the sign of
  20
     Our model can be augmented to allow banks to set different deposit rates R1 (i) for different types of depositors -- see
Jacewitz and Pogach (2018) for evidence consistent with this possibility.
  21
     When s  s and s   ^  s, there are no bank failures in equilibrium, and Equation (30) defines the optimal arrangement
that equalizes marginal rates of substitution across types with the expected marginal rate of transformation, determined
by 2 (s). In that case, banks set R1 exclusively to provide insurance between early and late types across deposit levels.


                                                                   27
   F (i, s) - U C N (i, s) , which we show to be negative, makes increasing R less desirable.
U Ct             t                                                           1

   In principle, the equilibrium deposit rate R1 can increase or decrease with the level of coverage  ,
due to conflicting income effects and direct effects on the size of the failure/no-failure regions. However,
                                                                                                   dR1
in most cases, it is reasonable to expect R1 to increase with  , that is,                           d    > 0. In a global games
framework, Allen et al. (2018) explicitly find this result in a special case of our model. Intuitively, we
expect competitive banks to offer higher deposit rates when the level of coverage is higher, since they
know that the existence of deposit insurance partially shields depositors' consumption. This result is a
form of increased moral hazard by banks. We can now characterize the directional test for how social
welfare varies with the level of coverage.
Proposition 4. (Directional test for  without ex-ante regulation) The change in welfare induced
by a marginal change in the level of deposit insurance dW
                                                        d when R1 is determined by competitive banks
as described in Equation (39) is given by
                ¢                                                              ¢
 dW    q F            U C N (j, s ) - U C F (j, s )                   F                       C F (j, s)      Vm (, , R1 ) dR1
    =-                                                       dj + q       EF
                                                                           s       m (j, s)              dj +                  ,
  d                          U (C F (j, s ))                                                                     R1         d
                                                                                                                Fiscal Externality

                                                                                                                                     (31)

where EF                                                                     F
       s [·] stands for a conditional expectation over bank failure states, q denotes the unconditional
                                           Vm ( )
probability of bank failure, and             R1     can be expressed, in terms of a risk-neutral approximation, as
Vm (,,R1 )
  R1            -  Es [T (s
                          R1
                            )+(T (s))]
                                       .   If dW
                                               d    > (<) 0, it is optimal to locally increase (decrease) the level of
coverage.

   It is clear that when banks choose their deposit rate freely, a new set of effects must be accounted
for to understand the welfare impact of changes in the level of coverage. The derivation of Equation
(31) repeatedly exploits the fact that banks choose the value of R1 to provide insurance across types
optimally, while taking into account how that may change the likelihood of bank failure. The third
term of Equation (31) corresponds to the impact of the distortions on banks' behavior induced by the
change in the level of deposit insurance. As shown in Section A.2 of the Appendix, the fiscal externality
dimension features both an intensive and extensive margin. At the intensive margin, an increase in R1
increases the level of claims that must be satisfied in failure states. At the extensive margin, an increase
in R1 increases the set of states in which bank failures occur and fiscal costs must be incurred. Under
                                                                                                Vm (,,R1 )
a risk-neutral approximation similar to the one used in Proposition 2,                            R1          -  Es [T (s
                                                                                                                        R1
                                                                                                                          )+(T (s))]
                                                                                                                                     ,
which corresponds to the direct impact on tax revenue and deadweight losses induced by a change in
the deposit rate.
   We also show in the Appendix that the fiscal externality term is negative, so the third term in
Equation (31) increases the marginal cost of increasing the deposit insurance limit. Because it directly
affects the funds that need to be raised by the government, we refer to it as a fiscal externality. It is
worth emphasizing how "moral hazard" considerations affect our results in the following remark.
Remark. Banks' changes in behavior (often referred to as moral hazard) only affect social welfare directly
through the fiscal externality term. We indeed expect banks to quote higher deposit rates when the

                                                               28
level of deposit insurance is higher, since they know the presence of deposit insurance partially shields
depositors' consumption. However, because banks are competitive and maximize depositors' welfare,
only the fiscal consequences of their change in behavior, which materialize when the fiscal authority
actually has to pay for deposit insurance, matter. This result remains valid even when banks make
endogenous liquidity and investment choices -- see Section 5. Therefore, accounting for banks' moral
hazard simply augments the directional test for  by including a fiscal externality component. Indirectly,
changes in bank behavior affect i) the level of gains from reducing bank failures (numerator of Equation
(27)), ii) the region in which deposit insurance is paid (denominator of Equation (27)), and iii) the value
attached to a dollar in the different states (captured by depositors' and taxpayers' marginal utilities),
but these effects are subsumed into the identified sufficient statistics.


3.3    Optimal Ex-Ante Regulation

By comparing the optimal deposit rate chosen by the regulator and by competitive banks, we can provide
insights into the form of the optimal ex-ante regulation of deposit rates.

Proposition 5. (Optimal ex-ante deposit rate regulation) The optimal corrective policy modifies
banks' optimal choice of deposit rates by introducing a wedge in their deposit rate decision given by

                                          Vm (, , R1 )   Es [T (s) +  (T (s))]
                                R1 = -                                         ,
                                             R1                  R1

which is set to counteract the fiscal externality term defined in Proposition 4.

    Proposition 5 shows how to correct banks' deposit rates so that they internalize the fiscal externality
that their choices generate. Importantly, the existing literature has not previously identified this fiscal
externality as the relevant object of interest that defines the optimal ex-ante regulation of banks.
Consistent with Equation (31), an increase in the deposit rate offered by banks varies overall welfare
               Vm (,,R1 )
according to     R1       .   Proposition 5 shows that this object can be expressed as the marginal change
in the expected funding shortfall, augmented to include the cost of public funds. We show in Section A.2
of the Appendix that this derivative accounts for the increased resource loss faced by taxpayers in the
case of bank failure and the induced change in the unconditional probability of bank failure. Note that,
even if there are no fiscal costs, implying  (T ) = 0, there is a role for corrective regulation emerging
from the fact that banks do not internalize the timing of taxation borne by taxpayers.22
    In general, the implementation of the optimal ex-ante corrective policy is not unique, although in this
particular case a single instrument affecting the choice of deposit rate is sufficient. Because the funds used
to pay for deposit insurance are raised through distortionary taxation, any Pigovian corrective policy
in which the deposit insurance authority raises revenue may generate a "double-dividend" (Goulder,
1995). That is, a policy that corrects the ex-ante behavior of banks and at the same time reduces
  22
     The exact expression for V m ( )
                               R1
                                      , given in Equation (39) in the Appendix, shows that the optimal corrective policy
must in general account for aggregate and systematic risk. In the context of optimally setting deposit insurance premia,
a similar argument has been emphasized by Pennacchi (2006), Acharya, Santos and Yorulmazer (2010), and Lucas (2019),
among others.

                                                          29
the need for raising revenue when required improves welfare along two different margins. The double-
dividend logic supports an implementation of the optimal corrective policy through a deposit insurance
fund financed with deposit insurance premia paid by participating banks. However, if the return of the
deposit insurance fund is less than the return earned by the banks themselves, it may be preferred to set
a different type of ex-ante corrective policy, like a deposit ceiling. It is worth highlighting the distinction
between the corrective role of ex-ante policies (optimal corrective deposit insurance premium) versus
their revenue-raising role (fairly-priced deposit insurance premium) in the following remark.

Remark. Optimal corrective regulation vs. fairly-priced deposit insurance. The existing literature has
emphasized the study of deposit insurance schemes that are fairly-priced or actuarially fair. A deposit
insurance fund is said to be actuarially fair if deposit insurance premia are such that the deposit insurance
fund breaks even in expectation. Our formulation shifts the emphasis from setting deposit insurance
premia that cover the expected fiscal cost to implementing regulations that distort banks' choices at the
margin. This distinction is often blurred in existing discussions of deposit insurance premia. In Section
B of the Online Appendix, we show how to account for risk choices in a more general framework, allowing
for a form of risk-based deposit insurance.

    Finally, note that we have considered two extreme scenarios. In one, there is no ex-ante regulation,
so banks freely choose their deposit rate. In the other one, regulation is perfectly targeted. In practice,
the set of policy instruments available to policymakers may be constrained. In that case, our results in
this paper are key inputs for the optimal second-best policy (Dávila and Walther, 2020).


4     Quantitative Application: Revisiting the 2008 Change in Coverage
On October 3, 2008, the level of coverage in the US changed from $100, 000 to $250, 000. In this section,
we apply our framework to that particular scenario. That is, we describe how a policymaker, armed
with our framework, would have set the optimal level of coverage in early 2008, sometime before the
moment in which the change in coverage took place. We study this specific scenario because it is the
one for which we can obtain the most credible measures of the relevant sufficient statistics.23
    Initially, in Section 4.1, we describe how to measure the empirical counterparts of the sufficient
statistics identified in Proposition 2 and implement the appropriate directional test for whether to
increase or decrease the level of coverage.24 We explain why our test finds that an increase in the level
of coverage was desirable and discuss the associated welfare gains.
    Next, in Section 4.2, using these sufficient statistics -- along with additional information -- as
calibration targets for our structural model, we explore the quantitative results that the model generates.
We first provide a welfare decomposition in terms of the marginal benefits and costs identified in Section
2. Then, we conduct sensitivity analysis on the model parameters and describe how the optimal level
  23
     All measures of the sufficient statistics are in principle state- and time-dependent. The advantage of focusing on a
specific scenario is that we can build credible measures for that particular situation.
  24
     Note that we abstract from changes in bank behavior associated with changes in the level of coverage. Given our results
in Section 3, we should interpret our results as the marginal welfare change associated with a change in coverage which is
implemented along with the optimal ex-ante regulation.

                                                            30
of coverage varies for alternative scenarios/sets of parameters. Finally, we describe the distributional
consequences of changing the level of coverage.
       We draw four main conclusions. First, we find that the welfare gains from increasing the level of
coverage when starting from low levels of coverage are very large. This result implies that having some
form of deposit insurance is highly valuable. Second, given our assumptions, we find that the optimal
level of coverage in the scenario that we consider would have been $381, 000. This magnitude is larger
than the $250, 000 that was chosen, but is perhaps more aligned with the extended guarantees that were
implemented soon after. Third, we explain why a drop in confidence (modeled as an increase in the
probability of a sunspot) is associated with a higher optimal level of coverage. We also explain why an
increase in the riskiness of bank investments is associated with a lower optimal level of coverage. Finally,
we find that increasing the level of coverage increases the welfare of most depositors most of the time
but not always. In particular, there are situations in which large depositors may be worse off when the
level of coverage increases.


4.1         Direct Measurement of the Sufficient Statistics

Throughout the whole Section 4, we focus on measuring social welfare for a hypothetical representative
bank.25 In order to avoid relying on account- or depositor-level information, we make use of the test
characterized in Proposition 2, which expresses the change in social welfare induced by a change in the
level of coverage in terms of variables aggregated at the bank level. Moreover, to better map the model
to observables, we focus on the marginal welfare change (expressed in dollars) per deposit account, given
       dW
                            ¡
by      d   /G, where G =       dG (i) denotes the mass of deposit accounts in our representative bank.
                                                                              dW
       Formally, starting from Proposition 2, we can express                   d   /G as follows:
                                  ¡                                                                     ¡                
       dW
                  log q F             C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj
                                                                              T + |F                        iPI dG (i)
        d
           q F -                                                        -q             EF
                                                                                        s  (·) |T > 0
                                                                                                                         ,   (32)
        G                                           G                                                          G

                                                                    log q F        q F /q F
where q F denotes the probability of bank failure,                    ¡       
                                                                          denotes the semi-elasticity of bank
                                                           (C N (j,s )-C F (j,s ))dj
failure with respect to a change in the level of coverage,            G
                                                                                     corresponds to the resource
                                                     + |F
losses per account in case of failure, q T                  corresponds to the probability of facing a funding shortfall
conditional on bank failure,          EF   [ (·) |T > 0] denotes the average marginal cost of public funds whenever
                                      ¡s
                                      iPI   dG(i)
these have to be paid, and                 G
                                                    is the share of partially insured deposit accounts. Consequently,
        dW
once     d   /G is measured, we can scale up or down the size of the welfare gains/losses associated with a
change in the level of coverage according to the number of deposit accounts in a given bank.
       We interpret the horizon of the model as a one-year period in the data. We summarize our preferred
measures of the sufficient statistics required to compute Equation (32) in Table 1. Next, we describe the
data sources that support those choices. Note that we factor out the probability of failure q F in Equation
  25
    Ideally, if more disaggregated data were available, one would first measure the relevant sufficient statistics for each bank
and then aggregate these measures to conduct system-wide assessments. Differences in bank-specific sufficient statistics
would account for differences in banks' funding, e.g., wholesale vs. retail, and the composition of banks' investments, among
other characteristics.

                                                                  31
                                    Table 1: Direct Measurement: Sufficient Statistics
                          Description                                                        Variable                Value
                          Probability of bank failure                                          qF                    2.5%
                                                                                                log q F                 0.3
                          Sensitivity of log-failure probability to DI limit                                        - 150 ,000
    Mg. Benefit                                                                   ¡
                          Resource losses per account after failure                   (C N (j,s )-C F (j,s ))dj/G   $13,810
                                                                                                  +
                          Conditional probability of funding shortfall                        q T |F                    1
    Mg. Cost              Expected net marginal cost of public funds                    EF
                                                                                         s ¡ [ (·) |T > 0]            0.15
                          Share of partially insured deposit accounts                       iPI dG(i)/G              0.064
Note: Table 1 includes the baseline measures of the relevant sufficient statistics. The probability of bank failure as well as
the sensitivity of the probability of bank failure to a change in the coverage limit are based on CDS data, as described in the
text. The measure of resource losses per account after failure combines information from Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017) with
estimates from Granja, Matvos and Seru (2017) and Bennett and Unal (2015). The choice of the conditional probability
of funding shortfall is based on the behavior of the Deposit Insurance Fund, as explained in the text. The marginal cost
of public funds is consistent with Kleven and Kreiner (2006) and Dahlby (2008). The share of partially insured depositors
comes from Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017).


(32), which allows us to express the marginal benefit of increasing coverage in terms the semielasticity
 log q F                  q F
           , instead of         .

Probability of bank failure Measures of bank failure probabilities can be based on historical
occurrences of bank failures or extracted from the expectations of market participants who trade
CDS (Credit Default Swaps) on banks.                 A direct estimate of historical bank failure probabilities,
using the FDIC Historical Statistics on Banking between 1934 and 2017, yields estimates of yearly
failure probabilities of roughly 0.42%. This historical estimate is implausibly low to describe the actual
probability of failure in early 2008.
    We also use CDS data (from Markit) to compute yearly implied default probabilities for the sample
of banks for which this instruments is traded -- see Section D of the Online Appendix for a detailed
explanation of our calculations with CDS data. We find an average implied default probability across
banks and trading dates between January and June of 2008 of 1.23%.26 However, the average implied
default probability across banks on the date of the policy change, October 3, 2008, was 6.67%. Given
these estimates, we select 2.5% as our baseline measure for q F .

Marginal benefit Here we describe the measures of the sufficient statistics that determine the
marginal benefit of changing the level of coverage. First, by using the change in the implied probability
of failure around the change in the level of coverage from $100, 000 to $250, 000 we can provide a sense of
how failure probabilities react to changes in the level of coverage. In the Online Appendix, we document
that the average proportional reduction in the implied probability of failure among the banks for whom
failure probabilities went down was roughly 13%, and that average failure probabilities moved from 6.67%
to 6.11%. Unfortunately, this approach is fraught with difficulties since the change in the level of coverage
is not random and is only one of the measures in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act passed on
that date. We also document average proportional reductions in failure probabilities on October 14,
  26
     For reference, the average implied default probability during the post-crisis period 2012-2014 was 1.58%, while the
average between 2004 and 2014 is 1.1%.


                                                              32
2008 of roughly 53%, in which the FDIC guaranteed in full noninterest-bearing transaction accounts.
Given these estimates, we suppose that a change in the level of coverage of $150, 000 is associated with
a proportional reduction of 30% in the probability of bank failure, that is, we set

                                             log q F      0.3
                                                     =-          = -2 × 10-6 .                                         (33)
                                                        150, 000

       Next, we must compute the consumption difference at the bank level between failure and no-failure
                                                                                                            (T (s ))
equilibria. To do so, we leverage Lemma 1. First, to simplify the computation, we set                       1 (s )D0
                                                                                                                        0
and
¡
      R1  0, which barely affects the final calculation. In that case, we can express the term
  (C N (j,s )-C F (j,s ))dj
             G
                            as a function of three terms, as in Equation (34) below. First, we need the net
return on assets, 2 (s ) - 1, which the FDIC reports to be roughly 1%. Second, we need the deadweight
losses of default, 1 -  (s ), which we set to 0.28, consistent with the recovery rate on bank assets
after failure of 72% estimated in Granja, Matvos and Seru (2017) -- see also Bennett and Unal (2015).
                                                                          1 (s )D0
Finally, we need the ratio of bank assets to deposit accounts,                G
                                                                                   ,   which we take from Martin, Puri
and Ufier (2017). They report that the bank they study has roughly 42, 000 accounts and 2 billion in
                                                              $2B
assets, which implies an assets-to-accounts ratio of         42,000   = $47, 619. Therefore, our best measure of the
resource losses per account after failure is

                  ¡                                                                
                      C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj                                      
                                                                                    1 (s ) D 0
                                                     = 2 (s ) - 1 + 1 -  (s )                     = $13, 810.          (34)
                                                       
                                   G                                                      G
                                                           0.01           0.28
                                                                                          $2B
                                                                                         42,000



Marginal cost We now turn to the marginal cost estimates. First, we approach the measurement
         + |F                                                             + |F
of q T          and EF
                     s [ (·) |T > 0] as a joint task. By setting q
                                                                   T             to 1 and EF
                                                                                           s [ (·) |T > 0] = 0.15, our
choices imply that every marginal dollar promised to partially insured depositors is associated with an
average deadweight loss of 15%. We set our measure for the net marginal cost of public funds to be
somewhat higher than the 13% estimate for the US from Kleven and Kreiner (2006).27 Our choice of
     + |F
qT          = 1 is based on the evidence -- included in the Online Appendix -- that the Deposit Insurance
Fund faced a negative balance in 2009 and 2010, which we interpret as widespread funding shortfalls.
As we discuss in Section 5, managing a deposit insurance fund in general may be costly, which implies
                         + |F
that by setting q T             = 1, we can map the cost of transferring resources to partially insured depositors
in case of failure to the choice of EF
                                     s [ (·) |T > 0]. Finally, we use 6.4% as the percentage of partially
insured deposit accounts, based on the description of the bank studied in Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017),
which is, somewhat surprisingly, the only source to our knowledge that reports this information.

Test implementation/Welfare gains Combining the measures of the sufficient statistics that we
have just introduced, we can use Equation (32) to compute the marginal welfare gain of changing the
level of coverage. First, we find that the marginal welfare gain per deposit account associated with a
  27
    The estimate of 13% is within the lower end of estimates. Through alternative methods, Ballard, Shoven and Whalley
(1985) find a range of estimates between 0.17 and 0.56. See Dahlby (2008) for a comprehensive review of the literature.



                                                            33
one-dollar increase in the level of coverage, measured using our framework as of early 2008, is given by

                     dW
                                        0.3
                      d
                          = 0.025              × 13, 810 - 0.15 × 0.064 = $4.5 × 10-4 ,                      (35)
                     G                150, 000

where each of the elements in Equation (35) come either directly from Table 1 or indirectly through
Equations (33) and (34). Since (35) has a positive sign, our approach implies that an increase in the
level of coverage would have been welfare improving.
   To gauge the magnitude of the gains, it is natural to normalize the marginal welfare gains by the
level of assets of a bank instead of the number of accounts. Relying again on the information in Martin,
                                                  dW
Puri and Ufier (2017), we can express              d
                                               assets   for a representative bank as follows:

                                   dW                  dW
                                                                    G
                                    d
                                              =         d
                                                              ×          = $9.46 × 10-9 ,                    (36)
                                 assets                G          assets
                                                  $4.5×10-4       42,000
                                                                   $2B



which implies that the marginal welfare gain per dollar of banks assets associated with a one-dollar
increase in the level of coverage is $9.46 × 10-9 . Therefore, Equation (36) implies that an increase in
coverage of $100, 000 is associated with a welfare gain of 0.000946 (9.46bps) per dollar of bank assets.
   Finally, we can use our estimate of the marginal welfare gain per level of assets in Equation (36) to
find an estimate for the whole banking sector. Given that the level of assets for the whole banking sector
in 2008 was of roughly $14 trillion, we can compute the welfare gain of a dollar increase in the level of
coverage for the whole banking sector as follows:

                                                   dW
                         dW
                                          =         d
                                                            × total bank assets = $1.32 × 105 .              (37)
                          d   all banks           assets
                                                                           $14T
                                              $9.46×10-9


Therefore, Equation (37) implies that an increase in coverage of $100, 000 is associated with a welfare gain
of $13.2 billion for the whole banking sector. We should note that the $13.2 billion estimate measures
yearly flow welfare gains, which makes it a non-negligible magnitude. However, we should also note
our measurement exercise is local, so extrapolating far away from the pre-existing level of coverage may
overestimate the potential gains from increasing coverage. For that reason, it may be useful to rely on
a fully specified model, as we do next.
   Since one of our goals is to guide future measurement efforts, we conclude with the following remark.

Remark. Implications for future measurement.                      There are three objects that warrant additional
measurement efforts. First, the main challenge of the direct measurement approach is to find appropriate
                                  log q F
values for the semi-elasticity              . Changes in the level of coverage are often a response to banks'
distress, which obviously biases naive estimates of this semi-elasticity. Our approach suggests that
finding quasi-experimental variation in  , perhaps exploiting a change in the level of coverage unrelated
to bank profitability and failure probabilities, can be highly informative for policymakers. Second, better
measures of bank assets relative to the number of deposit accounts can be highly informative. This ratio

                                                                  34
is important since the marginal benefit of increasing the level of coverage is linked to the level of bank
assets while the marginal cost is linked to the number of (partially insured) accounts. Finally, having
more detailed information on the composition of fully insured and partially insured accounts is important.
While it is common to report measures of uninsured and insured deposits as a whole, our results show
that what is relevant at the margin is whether an account is partially insured or not, not as much the
amount of total insured and uninsured deposits. We hope that our results spur further effort to measure,
report, and monitor the relevant sufficient statistics that we have identified.


4.2      Model-Based Quantification

While the direct measurement approach has the advantage of sidestepping the need to fully specify model
primitives, it cannot be used, for instance, to think about the optimal level of coverage, at least given the
current sets of measures available.28 We now describe how our results can be used in the context of a fully
specified quantitative model. We first explain the calibration of the model, followed by a decomposition
of the welfare impact of policy changes. In both cases, we rely on our theoretical characterization of
sufficient statistics. By explicitly computing the sufficient statistics in a fully specified model, we provide
an intermediate step between primitives and welfare assessments.29 Finally, we conduct sensitivity
analysis on the model parameters and describe the distributional consequences of changing the level of
coverage.

Calibration Here we describe our choice of functional forms and parameter values, which we report in
Table 2. A period in the model coincides with a year. For the purpose of reporting the model parameters,
we choose $100, 000 as the unit of account. That is, for instance,  = 1 corresponds to a level of coverage
of $100, 000.
       We combine a mix of externally chosen parameters and internally calibrated targets. As in the
direct measurement exercise, we choose targets consistent with the early-2008 period, so the model is
calibrated for a level of coverage of  = 1. Importantly, as shown in Table OA-1 in the Online Appendix,
our calibration is designed to match the measures of sufficient statistics reported in Table 1 that we used
for the direct measurement exercise.
       First, we describe the parameters that relate to depositors. We assume that the distribution of deposit
accounts/balances is log-normally distributed, with parameters (µD , D ) and a truncated support D, D .
                                                                          ¡
By following this approach, we are effectively normalizing G =                iI   dG (i) = 1, so our welfare calculations
can be interpreted on a per-account        basis.30   We choose µD = -3.8, D = 2.2, and D, D = [0.01, 1.5] to
jointly match i) a share of partially insured accounts of 6.4% reported in Martin, Puri and Ufier (2017),
ii) a share of insured deposits of 62% reported by the FDIC, and iii) a median and mean deposit balance
  28
     The direct measurement approach could be used to find the optimal level of coverage if one were able to construct
measures of the sufficient statistics for different levels of coverage.
  29
     The results from this approach should be of interest to the growing quantitative structural literature on banking, since
our characterization allows us to provide further insights into how to interpret the normative implications of calibrated
structural models.
  30
     The only source of heterogeneity among depositors in the quantitative model is the level of deposits, so there is a
one-to-one mapping between i and D0 (i).


                                                             35
                                        Table 2: Parameter Values -- Calibration

                                                                             Parameter    Value
                                Depositors   Distribution of Deposits           µD        -3.8
                                                                                D         2.2
                                             Endowment Early Depositors       y1 (i, s)   3
                                             Endowment Late Depositors        y2 (i, s)   3.13
                                             Early Depositor Share                        0.05
                                             Sunspot Probability                          0.3
                                             Utility Curvature                            1.5
                                Banks        Return on Assets                    µs       0.08
                                                                                 s        0.033
                                                                                          0.25
                                             Interest Rate                      R1        0.02
                                             Default Recovery Rate               1        1.051
                                                                                 2        0.147
                                                                                 3        1
                                Taxpayers    Deadweight Loss                     1        0.13
                                                                                 2        5.5
                                             Endowment Taxpayers              Y (, s)     5.02

Note: The bounds on the distribution of deposits are D, D = [0.01, 15]. The bounds on the distribution of returns are
[s, s] = [1, 1.35].


of $6, 000 and $30, 000, on the larger end of values from the Survey of Consumer Finances, which only
includes households.
     We further assume that depositors' outside sources of wealth scale proportionally with the level
of their deposits, that is, Y1 (i, s) = y1 (s) D0 (i) and Y2 (i, s) = y2 (s) D0 (i). We set y1 (s) = 3 and
y2 (s) = 3.075, implying that deposits account for roughly 25% of a depositor's endowment and that the
first-best equilibrium rate set by a utilitarian bank is 1.6%. Without direct evidence on withdrawals, we
choose a small share of early depositors,  = 0.05, letting the other parameters modulate the likelihood
of bank failure.
     When needed, we assume that depositors have isoelastic utility with an elasticity of intertemporal
                                             c1-
substitution          1
                      ,   that is, U (c) =   1- .   In our baseline parametrization, we set  = -c U
                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                       (c)
                                                                                                       (c)   = 1.5, a
conventional choice. As discussed in Section D of the Online Appendix, the choice of  does not affect
most of the conclusions in this section, since we measure welfare changes as described in Proposition 2.
     Next, we describe how we jointly select the probability of a sunspot and the parameters that relate
to banks. We initially normalize the date 2 return to be 2 (s) = s and assume that the date 1 return
takes the form
                                                    1 (s) = 1 +  (s - 1) ,

which is consistent with the assumptions on 1 (s) made in Section 2. We assume that the state s is
log-normally distributed with a truncated support [s, s] = [1, 1.35]. While the choice of s barely affects
the results, the choice of s does matter to pin down the likelihood of fundamental failures. We jointly


                                                               36
choose µs = 0.08, s = 0.033,  = 0.25, s = 1, and  = 0.3 to target the following five moments:
i) a probability of failure without deposit insurance ( = 0) of 15%, consistent with pre-FDIC failure
rates; ii) a probability of failure at the preexisting level of coverage ( = 1) of 2.5%, as in our direct
measurement approach; iii) a probability of fundamental failure of 2%, consistent with the observed
failure rates in 2009/2010; iv) a sensitivity of the log-failure probability to the deposit insurance limit of
-0.2, targeting our measure in Section 4.1; and v) a level of resource losses per account after failure of
0.138, also targeting our measure in Section 4.1.
       We parametrize the recovery rate/deadweight losses of bank failure according to

                                                  (s) = 1 (s - 3 )2 ,

where we set 1 , 2 , and 3 so that  (s) = 0,  (s) = 1, and so that the average deadweight loss is
equal to 28%, as measured by Granja, Matvos and Seru (2017). We set R1 = 1.02, consistent with rates
on savings accounts in early 2008.31
       Finally, we consider a marginal cost of public funds  (T ) of the exponential-affine form:

                                                           1 2 T
                                                  (T ) =     e   -1 ,
                                                           2

for which the parameter 1 =  (0) represents the marginal cost of public funds for a small intervention
                                (T )
and the parameter 2 =           (T )   modulates how quickly the cost of public funds increase with T . We
set 1 = 0.13, consistent with the estimate in Kleven and Kreiner (2006), and 2 = 5.5, to match
an average marginal cost of public funds of 0.15. When needed, we assume that the endowment of
taxpayers Y (, s) is equivalent to the total endowment of early depositors in the 97.5th percentile of the
distribution, consistent with the fact that most taxes are paid by individuals in the top 5% of the income
distribution. As in the case of  , the choice of Y (, s) does not impact the results of this section.

Optimal Level of Coverage/Welfare Decomposition Given our calibration, Figure 6 illustrates
                                          dW
how the marginal welfare change,           d ,   and its determinants vary with the level of coverage  . In the
body of the paper, we report and describe at all times money-metric welfare gains/losses, as described
in Equation (21). There are three findings worth highlighting.
       First, the marginal welfare gains from increasing the level of coverage are remarkably high for very
low levels of coverage, which implies that the welfare gains from having a deposit insurance system at
all are very large. Intuitively, when  is low, the marginal impact of  on reducing the probability of
          q F
failure         is large, since the behavior of many small depositors is affected at the margin, which directly
increases the marginal benefit of increasing the level of coverage. Also, the funding shortfall is small
when the level of coverage is low, since banks' resources are often enough to cover the claims of insured
depositors, which contributes to a low marginal cost of increasing the level of coverage. Put together,
both channels make the welfare gains from increasing  when   0 very large. This should not be
  31
   While we focus on the case in which the deposit rate is predetermined, there is scope to further explore the quantitative
implications of the model under perfect and imperfect regulation.



                                                            37
 0.001                                                           0.05                                      0

                                                                0.045                                 -0.0002
0.0008                                                           0.04                                 -0.0004

                                                                0.035                                 -0.0006
0.0006
                                                                 0.03                                 -0.0008

                                                                0.025                                  -0.001
0.0004
                                                                 0.02                                 -0.0012

                                                                0.015                                 -0.0014
0.0002
                                                                 0.01                                 -0.0016

    0                                                           0.005
                                                                                                      -0.0018
                                                                   0
         0         1     2        3        4     5      6               0   1   2    3   4   5   6              0   1   2   3   4   5   6




  0.15                                                            0.3                                      0



                                                                 0.25
                                                                                                     -0.00005


   0.1                                                            0.2
                                                                                                      -0.0001

                                                                 0.15

                                                                                                     -0.00015
  0.05                                                            0.1


                                                                                                      -0.0002
                                                                 0.05



    0                                                              0                                 -0.00025
         0         1     2        3        4     5      6               0   1   2    3   4   5   6              0   1   2   3   4   5   6




                                                            Figure 6: Social Welfare Decomposition
Note: The top left panel in Figure 6 shows the change in social welfare induced by a marginal change in the level of
deposit insurance coverage, dW   d
                                   , as described in Equation (26). The top middle and right panels respectively show the
                                  dVm (i,,R1 )
welfare change for depositors,         d
                                               dG (i), and taxpayers, dVm (d
                                                                           ,,R1 )
                                                                                  . The bottom left panel shows the probability
of failure, q F (, R1 ), and the probability of fundamental failure F (^s (R1 )). The bottom middle and right panels show the
                                                                                            F ¡
marginal benefit and marginal cost of increasing the level of coverage, given by - q       
                                                                                                 C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj and
               ¡   C F (j,s)
q F EF
     s               
                             dj       , respectively.



surprising, given that arguably no other financial regulation has had a more significant impact than the
introduction of deposit insurance.
             Second, the marginal welfare gains from decreasing the level of coverage are small for levels of coverage
higher than the optimum. This result implies that, in case of doubt, the losses from overshooting on the
level of coverage are smaller than the losses from setting a level that is too low.
             Third, we find that the optimal level of coverage given our calibration is  = $381, 000, which is
a level of coverage larger than the actual level of coverage chosen by policymakers on October 2008,
although it is roughly of the same order of magnitude. There are several observations that may explain
the discrepancy between our solution and the policy chosen. First of all, there is no reason to believe
that policymakers followed our framework or, even if they inadvertently considered the same tradeoffs,
reached the same conclusions we did on the measurement of the relevant inputs. Second, it is the case
that other guarantees were implemented around that time, which may explain why we find a higher value
for the optimal level of coverage when it is the single policy instrument. Third, our model abstracts
from joint accounts, for which coverage limits are higher. With adequate information on joint accounts,
it would be possible to re-calibrate our model and find optimal levels of coverage for single and joint


                                                                                    38
 0.001                                                      0.01                                      0

                                                         0.009                                   -0.0002

0.0008                                                   0.008                                   -0.0004

                                                         0.007                                   -0.0006
0.0006                                                                                           -0.0008
                                                         0.006
                                                                                                  -0.001
                                                         0.005
0.0004
                                                                                                 -0.0012
                                                         0.004
                                                                                                 -0.0014
                                                         0.003
0.0002
                                                                                                 -0.0016
                                                         0.002
                                                                                                 -0.0018
    0                                                    0.001
                                                                                                  -0.002
                                                              0
         0      1       2      3       4    5      6               0   1   2    3   4   5   6              0   1   2   3   4   5   6




                                                            0.01                                      0

                                                         0.009
   0.1
                                                         0.008                                  -0.00005


  0.08                                                   0.007
                                                                                                 -0.0001
                                                         0.006

  0.06                                                   0.005
                                                                                                -0.00015
                                                         0.004
  0.04
                                                         0.003
                                                                                                 -0.0002
                                                         0.002
  0.02
                                                         0.001
                                                                                                -0.00025
    0                                                         0
         0      1       2      3       4    5      6               0   1   2    3   4   5   6              0   1   2   3   4   5   6




                                           Figure 7: Sensitivity Analysis: Sunspot Probability ( )
Note: The top left panel in Figure 7 shows the change in social welfare induced by a marginal change in the level of deposit
insurance coverage, dW    , as described in Equation (26), for   {0.2, 0.3, 0.4}. The top middle and right panels respectively
                       d                    ¡
show the welfare change for depositors, dVm (d    i,,R1 )
                                                          dG (i), and taxpayers, dVm (d
                                                                                      ,,R1 )
                                                                                             . The bottom left panel shows the
                         F
probability of failure, q (, R1 ), and the probability of fundamental failure F (^s (R1 )). The bottom middle and right panels
                                                                                                 F ¡
show the marginal benefit and marginal cost of increasing the level of coverage, given by - q   
                                                                                                     C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj
                    ¡   C F (j,s)
and q F EF
         s                
                                  dj   , respectively. The optimal levels of coverage are  = 2.1,  = 3.81, and  = 7.24 for  = 0.2,
 = 0.3, and  = 0.4, respectively.


accounts.
             In the remaining of this section, we explore the sensitivity of our quantitative results to changes
in the sunspot probability and the riskiness of bank returns. By exploring these scenarios, we can
explain how the optimal policy varies with financial or business cycle conditions.32 In Section D of the
Online Appendix, we also explore the sensitivity of our results to the cost of public funds, which can be
interpreted as fiscal shock. Finally, we describe the distributional implications of changing the level of
coverage for depositors with different deposit balances.

Sensitivity Analysis:                           Sunspot Probability Figure 7 illustrates how changes in the level of
confidence in the economy, captured by the sunspot probability  (a high value of  has the interpretation
of low confidence), affect the desirability of changing the level of coverage. Given our calibration, changes
                                                       dW
in  have a very strong impact on                        d     and, ultimately, on the optimal level of coverage. When  is high,
the likelihood of a run in the multiple equilibria region is large, which makes increasing the level of
coverage a very powerful tool, increasing the marginal benefit of higher coverage. While the marginal
    32
    Note that we do not re-calibrate the model when conducting the sensitivity analyses, so our results can be interpreted
as comparative statics exercises.


                                                                               39
 0.001                                                    0.01                                                       0

                                                         0.009

0.0008                                                                                                          -0.0005
                                                         0.008

                                                         0.007
                                                                                                                 -0.001
0.0006
                                                         0.006

                                                         0.005                                                  -0.0015
0.0004
                                                         0.004

                                                         0.003                                                   -0.002
0.0002
                                                         0.002
                                                                                                                -0.0025
    0                                                    0.001

                                                            0
         0           1    2     3     4    5     6               0         1      2      3     4    5    6                0   1   2   3   4   5   6




                                                          0.01                                                       0
  0.09
                                                         0.009
                                                                                                               -0.00005
  0.08
                                                         0.008
  0.07                                                                                                          -0.0001
                                                         0.007
  0.06
                                                         0.006                                                 -0.00015
  0.05
                                                         0.005
                                                                                                                -0.0002
  0.04                                                   0.004
                                                                                                               -0.00025
  0.03                                                   0.003

  0.02                                                   0.002                                                  -0.0003

  0.01                                                   0.001
                                                                                                               -0.00035
    0                                                       0
         0           1    2     3     4    5     6               0         1      2      3     4    5    6                0   1   2   3   4   5   6




                                           Figure 8: Sensitivity Analysis: Banks' Riskiness (s )
Note: The top left panel in Figure OA-7 shows the change in social welfare induced by a marginal change in the level
of deposit insurance coverage, dW , as described in Equation (26), for s  {0.028, 0.033, 0.038}. The top middle and
                                d                                   ¡ dVm (i,,R1 )
right panels respectively show the welfare change for depositors,          d
                                                                                   dG (i), and taxpayers, dVm (d
                                                                                                               ,,R1 )
                                                                                                                      . The
                                                     F
bottom left panel shows the probability of failure, q (, R1 ), and the probability of fundamental failure F (^ s (R1 )). The
bottom middle and right panels show the marginal benefit and marginal cost of increasing the level of coverage, given by
             F   ¡                                                   ¡   C F (j,s)
- q
  
                     C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) dj and q F EF
                                                           s               
                                                                                   dj   , respectively. The optimal levels of coverage are  = 5.62,
 = 3.81, and  = 2.97 for s = 0.028, s = 0.033, and s = 0.038, respectively.


cost of increasing  also grows, because -- all else equal -- failure is more likely, the increase in the
marginal benefit is substantially larger, which implies that the optimal level of coverage is in increasing
in  .

Sensitivity Analysis: Banks' Riskiness By studying how the predictions of our framework change
with the riskiness of banks' investments we aim to capture different business cycle conditions, in the
form of a risk shock to banks' investment. Figure 8 illustrates how changes in the level of s affect the
desirability of changing the level of coverage. A higher value of s unambiguously reduces the welfare
of taxpayers, since negative realizations of s, in which bank failures are more prevalent and costly, are
more likely to occur. However, a higher value of s has an ambiguous impact on depositors' welfare,
depending on the level of  . When the level of coverage is low, the increased volatility generates worse
and more frequent failures, lowering depositors' welfare (for scaling reasons, this region is not visible in
Figure 8). When the level of coverage is high, depositors benefit from the increase in volatility, since they
receive all the upside when bank returns are high, but are shielded from bank failure by the generous
level of coverage. Given our calibration, the net welfare effects on taxpayers' and depositors' imply that
high riskiness of banks' investments is associated with lower levels of the optimal coverage limit.

                                                                                        40
Distributional Considerations Even though we have purposefully focused on reaching conclusions
based on aggregate outcomes at the bank level since those are appealing from a practical perspective,
varying the level of coverage has different distributional implications for different individuals. Before
concluding, we would like to illustrate some of the distributional considerations of our policy.
         Figure 9 illustrates the money-metric marginal welfare change for depositors with different balances,
dVm (i,,R1 )                      dVm (,,R1 )                                                       dVm (i,,R1 )
     d       ,   and taxpayers,        d      .   Several insights are worth highlighting. First,        d         is strictly
positive for most depositors most of the time, but not always. While depositors as a whole are better
off by increasing the level of coverage, since they receive a net transfer from taxpayers, it is conceivable
that some large depositors can be made worse off by increasing the level of coverage at times. This may
occur to the largest depositors in situations in which an increase in  substantially reduces the recovery
rate on partially insured deposits F (s). For instance, Figure 9 shows that an increase in the level of
coverage when  is roughly 0.6 makes the depositor in the middle bottom plot locally worse off.
                         dVm (,,R1 )
         Second, since        d        is weakly negative for taxpayers, a Pareto improvement could only be
potentially reached in a scenario in which for sufficiently low levels of coverage the funding shortfall
is zero across all states. In our model, taxpayers are worse off for any level of deposit insurance since the
funding shortfall is non-zero for some states when  = 0, but quantitatively the funding shortfall is very
small for low levels of coverage, which implies that there should always be support for having a positive
level of coverage when welfare is reasonably aggregated.
         Finally, Figure 9 illustrates how depositors that become fully insured turn out to be effectively
                                       dW
inframarginal in determining            d   and  .33 This is an important takeaway from modeling a rich cross-
section of depositors. In other words, changes in the level of coverage mostly affect at the margin
those deposit accounts that are partially insured, so information about these depositors is critical when
considering changes in the level of coverage.


5         Extensions
Before concluding, we explain how our framework accommodates additional features relevant for the
determination of deposit insurance. First, we describe the conclusions from the three formal extensions
executed in the Online Appendix. There we show that Proposition 1 continues to be valid exactly or
suitably modified once we relax several of the model assumptions. Next, we discuss how to integrate
additional channels within our framework.


5.1        Formal Extensions

In Section B of the Online Appendix, we explicitly incorporate flexible investment decisions by banks
and multiple portfolio choices for depositors. We also consider an alternative equilibrium selection
mechanism, and allow for aggregate spillovers.
    33
    We say effectively because the marginal benefit of an increase in coverage is strictly positive even for fully insured
depositors. This occurs because an increase in coverage reduces the probability of failure and fully insured depositors are
better off when banks do not fail, as implied by Equation (17). This effect is quantitatively very small, as Figure 9 shows.


                                                               41
 0.2                                              0.08                                                                        0.1

0.18                                                                                                                         0.09
                                                  0.07
0.16                                                                                                                         0.08
                                                  0.06
0.14                                                                                                                         0.07
                                                  0.05
0.12                                                                                                                         0.06

 0.1                                              0.04                                                                       0.05

0.08                                                                                                                         0.04
                                                  0.03
0.06                                                                                                                         0.03
                                                  0.02
0.04                                                                                                                         0.02
                                                  0.01
0.02                                                                                                                         0.01

  0                                                 0                                                                          0
       0   0.05    0.1     0.15        0.2               0   0.05       0.1   0.15    0.2   0.25   0.3       0.35   0.4             0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1




0.12                                               0.5                                                                         0

                                                                                                                          -0.0002
 0.1                                               0.4
                                                                                                                          -0.0004

                                                                                                                          -0.0006
0.08                                               0.3
                                                                                                                          -0.0008

0.06                                               0.2                                                                     -0.001

                                                                                                                          -0.0012
0.04                                               0.1
                                                                                                                          -0.0014

0.02                                                0                                                                     -0.0016

                                                                                                                          -0.0018
  0                                               -0.1
       0   0.5     1       1.5         2                 0          1           2           3            4          5               0   2     4     6     8     10




                                              Figure 9: Distributional Considerations
Note: The top panels and the left and middle bottom panels in Figure 9 show the change in welfare induced by a
marginal change in the level of deposit insurance coverage, dVm (d      i,,R1 )
                                                                                , for different depositors with deposit balances
{0.02, 0.2, 0.62, 1.25, 14.59}, which correspond to percentiles {0.25, 0.75, 0.9, 0.95, 0.99} in the distribution of deposits. The
bottom right panel shows the change in welfare induced by a marginal change in the level of deposit insurance coverage for
taxpayers, dVm (d ,,R1 )
                         .


Banks' Moral Hazard:                         General Portfolio and Investment Decisions In our baseline
formulation, neither depositors nor banks make portfolio decisions. Including both sets of decisions
is important to allow banks or depositors to adjust their risk-taking behavior in response to changes in
the level of coverage -- these effects are also often referred to as moral hazard. We show that introducing
a consumption-savings decision and portfolio choices for depositors does not modify the set of sufficient
statistics already identified under perfect regulation. However, allowing unregulated banks to make
investment choices requires accounting for a new set of fiscal externality terms. The new set of fiscal
externalities, which capture the direct effects of banks' changes in behavior on taxpayers' welfare should
be targeted with asset-side and liability-side regulation.

Alternative Equilibrium Selection Mechanisms In the baseline model, we assume that depositors
coordinate following an exogenous sunspot. However, it is well-known that incorporating dispersed
information among depositors would yield a unique equilibrium -- see Goldstein and Pauzner (2005).
Even though studying a global game model, as in Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) or Allen et al. (2018),
is appealing because the probability of failure is endogenously determined by fundamentals, we show
that the particular information structure considered and the equilibrium selection procedure only enter
                         dW
in the expression of      d       through the sufficient statistics identified in this paper.


                                                                                     42
General Equilibrium Spillovers/Macroprudential Considerations In our baseline formulation,
bank decisions do not affect equilibrium prices or other aggregate variables, so our analysis can be defined
as microprudential. However, when the decisions made by banks affect aggregate variables, for instance,
asset prices, further exacerbating the possibility of a bank failure, the optimal deposit insurance formula
should incorporate a macroprudential correction. In our extension, we model liquidation spillovers as
a tractable way to capture equilibrium interactions in interbank markets. Importantly, we show that
ex-ante regulation can directly target the wedges caused by aggregate spillovers, so the characterization
     dW
of    d   remains valid under perfect ex-ante regulation.


5.2       Additional Channels

Here we discuss how additional features relevant for the determination of the optimal level of coverage
can be incorporated into our framework. While explicitly modeling each one of them is beyond the scope
of the paper, we discuss here how they may affect our main characterization. Even though extending our
model along several of these dimensions may require additional information to account for the welfare
impact of deposit insurance policies, the channels identified in this paper do not vanish.

Lender of Last Resort/Bailout In our baseline formulation, we exclusively consider the level of
deposit insurance coverage as a single policy instrument. In practice, in addition to the level of coverage,
banks often receive alternative forms of government support through lender of last resort policies or
bailouts. Within our framework, we can interpret this form of intervention as a state-contingent policy
that increases the resources available to banks in certain states. Formally, we can consider the counterpart
to Equation (3):

                       Bank Failure,      if 2 (s) 1 (s) D0 -  (s) +  (s) < D1 (s)
                       No Bank Failure, if 2 (s) 1 (s) D0 -  (s) +  (s)  D1 (s) ,

where  (s) captures the size of the ex-post intervention in state s. Propositions 1 and 3, and the
associated sufficient statistics, remain valid in this case when  (s) is predetermined or when it can be
optimally designed. However, for our results to be meaningful, it must be the case that the lender of
last resort policy is imperfect and unable to fully eliminate the existence of coordination failures.

Deposit Insurance Fund In our baseline model, we assume that the funds needed to pay for deposit
insurance are raised directly from taxpayers. However, in many deposit insurance systems, including the
US's, a deposit insurance fund provisioned by contributions of insured banks is responsible for paying
insured depositors in case of failure. In that case, we should interpret the marginal cost of public funds
 (·) as the deadweight losses associated with keeping resources in a deposit fund (commonly invested in
low-maturity treasuries and other low-yield securities) and transferring them to banks, relative to keeping
these funds inside the banks. At the margin, one would expect that the costs of raising funds through
bank contributions and otherwise are roughly equal, which justifies our simplification. We include a brief
formal extension with a deposit insurance fund in Section C of the Online Appendix.


                                                     43
Multiple Deposit Accounts Our baseline model does not explicitly allow a given depositor to have
multiple accounts in different banks, although, in practice, deposit limits are defined at the account level
in most countries. However, as long as there is a cost of switching/opening deposit accounts, making
deposits partially inelastic, which is consistent with the evidence in Egan, Hortaçsu and Matvos (2017),
Proposition 1 remains valid once suitably reinterpreted. In this case, as we discuss in Section 2, the
relevant marginal cost of varying  needs to account for the insured/partially insured status of a given
account, not the status of an individual depositor. See Shy, Stenbacka and Yankov (2016) for a model
in which depositors can explicitly open multiple deposit accounts.

Equityholders/Debtholders/Liquidity Benefits Since we build on the Diamond and Dybvig
(1983) framework, our baseline formulation does not explicitly incorporate a role for equityholders and
debtholders, and does not allow for demand deposits to have a non-pecuniary liquidity benefit. Allowing
for richer funding structures would call for extending Propositions 1 through 4 to include all stakeholders.
Beyond that, on aggregate, the sufficient statistics that we identify already capture differences in capital
structure choices across banks. For instance, one would expect banks with more fragile capital structures
-- perhaps more likely to face debt rollover concerns -- to be more likely to fail and potentially more
sensitive to interventions.

Departures from Bank Value Maximization: Imperfect Competition and Agency Frictions
Both imperfect competition and agency frictions that depart from value maximization will introduce
additional terms when extending Propositions 1 through 4, although how these would impact the optimal
level of coverage is a priori indeterminate. For instance, increasing the level of coverage when banks have
market power can at the same time encourage bank managers to make safer investment decisions to
preserve their franchise value but also to make less careful investment and funding choices. Similarly, if
non-competitive banks happened to fund projects with negative net present values, ex-ante regulation
would be needed. In general, if there are specific regulatory tools designed to ex-ante correct for the
impact of imperfect competition or managerial distortions, it would be optimal to make use of them,
allowing us to rely again on our baseline characterization.

Unregulated Sector        Throughout the paper, every bank is subject to deposit insurance and ex-
ante regulation. Our framework implies that all sectors subject to coordination failures would benefit
from deposit insurance guarantees. In general, the optimal level of coverage must account for whether
depositors are able to shift funds from the regulated deposit sector into other unregulated sectors, and
vice versa. In models with imperfect instruments -- see Plantin (2014) and Ordoñez (2018) in the
context of shadow banking, or Dávila and Walther (2020) more generally -- the optimal policy absent
an unregulated sector that we characterize in this paper is a key input to the overall optimal policy when
some agents or activities cannot be perfectly regulated.




                                                    44
6      Conclusion
We have developed a framework to study the tradeoffs associated with the optimal determination of
deposit insurance coverage. Our analysis identifies the set of variables that have a first-order effect on
welfare and become sufficient statistics for assessing changes in the level of deposit insurance coverage.
Our results provide a step forward towards building a microfounded theory of measurement for financial
regulation that can be applied to a wide variety of environments.
     There are several avenues for further research that build on our results.            From a theoretical
perspective, exploring alternative forms of asset- or liability-side competition among banks or introducing
dynamic considerations are non-trivial extensions that are worth exploring. However, the most promising
implications of this paper for future research come from the measurement perspective. Recovering robust,
well-identified, and credible estimates of the sufficient statistics that we have uncovered in this paper,
in particular, the sensitivity of bank failures to changes in the level of coverage and the relevant fiscal
externalities associated with such a policy change, has the potential to directly discipline future regulatory
decisions.


References
Acharya, Viral, Joao Santos, and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2010. "Systemic Risk and Deposit Insurance
    Premiums." Economic Policy Review, 16(1): 89­99.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 1998. "Optimal Financial Crises." The Journal of Finance, 53(4): 1245­
    1284.
Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale. 2007. Understanding Financial Crises. Oxford University Press, USA.
Allen, Franklin, Elena Carletti, Itay Goldstein, and Agnese Leonello. 2018. "Government Guarantees
    and Financial Stability." Journal of Economic Theory, 177: 518­557.
Ballard, Charles L, John B Shoven, and John Whalley. 1985. "General equilibrium computations of the
    marginal welfare costs of taxes in the United States." The American Economic Review, 75(1): 128­138.
Bennett, Rosalind L., and Haluk Unal. 2015. "Understanding the Components of Bank Failure Resolution
    Costs." Financial Markets, Institutions & Instruments, 24(5): 349­389.
Bonfim, Diana, and Joao Santos. 2020. "The Importance of Deposit Insurance Credibility." Bank of Portugal
    Working Paper.
Boyd, John H., and Gianni De Nicolo. 2005. "The Theory of Bank Risk Taking and Competition Revisited."
    The Journal of Finance, 60(3): 1329­1343.
Brunnermeier, Markus, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2014. Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro
    Modeling. University of Chicago Press.
Chan, Yuk-Shee, Stuart I. Greenbaum, and Anjan V. Thakor. 1992. "Is Fairly Priced Deposit Insurance
    Possible?" The Journal of Finance, 47(1): 227­245.
Chari, V. V. 1989. "Banking Without Deposit Insurance or Bank Panics: Lessons from a Model of the US
    National Banking System." Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 13(3): 3­19.
Chari, V. V., and R. Jagannathan. 1988. "Banking Panics, Information, and Rational Expectations
    Equilibrium." Journal of Finance, 43(3): 749­761.




                                                         45
Chetty, Raj. 2009. "Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and Reduced-Form
  Methods." Annual Review of Economics, 1: 451­488.
Cooper, Russell, and Hubert Kempf. 2016. "Deposit insurance and bank liquidation without commitment:
  Can we sleep well?" Economic Theory, 61(2): 365­392.
Cooper, Russell, and Thomas Wayne Ross. 2002. "Bank Runs:                        Deposit Insurance and Capital
  Requirements." International Economic Review, 43(1): 55­72.
Corbae, Dean, and Pablo D'Erasmo. 2019. "Capital Requirements in a Quantitative Model of Banking
  Industry Dynamics." NBER Working Paper.
Corbae, Dean, and Ross Levine. 2018. "Competition, Stability, and Efficiency in Financial Markets." Working
  Paper.
Dahlby, Bev. 2008. The Marginal Cost of Public Funds. The MIT Press.
Dávila, Eduardo. 2020. "Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Bankruptcy Exemptions." The Review of Economic
  Studies, 87(2): 870­913.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Ansgar Walther. 2020. "Corrective Financial Regulation with Imperfect Instruments."
  Working Paper.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Anton Korinek. 2018. "Pecuniary Externalities in Economies with Financial Frictions."
  The Review of Economic Studies, 85(1): 352­395.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache. 2002. "Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking System
  Stability? An Empirical Investigation." Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(7): 1373­1406.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Edward J. Kane, and Luc Laeven. 2014. "Deposit Insurance Database." NBER
  Working Paper.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Anil K. Kashyap. 2016. "Liquidity Requirements, Liquidity Choice, and
  Financial Stability." Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2: 2263­2303.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity." Journal
  of Political Economy, 91(3): 401­419.
Duffie, Darrell, Robert Jarrow, Amiyatosh Purnanandam, and Wei Yang. 2003. "Market Pricing of
  Deposit Insurance." Journal of Financial Services Research, 24(2­3): 93­119.
Egan, Mark, Ali Hortaçsu, and Gregor Matvos. 2017. "Deposit Competition and Financial Fragility:
  Evidence from the US Banking Sector." American Economic Review, 107(1): 169­216.
Ennis, Huberto M., and Todd Keister. 2009. "Bank Runs and Institutions: The Perils of Intervention."
  American Economic Review, 99(4): 1588­1607.
Ennis, Huberto M., and Todd Keister. 2010. "Banking Panics and Policy Responses." Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 57(4): 404­419.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Iván Werning. 2016. "A Theory of Macroprudential Policies in the Presence of Nominal
  Rigidities." Econometrica, 84(5): 1645­1704.
Freixas, Xavier, and Emmanuelle Gabillon. 1999. "Optimal Regulation of a Fully Insured Deposit Banking
  System." Journal of Regulatory Economics, 16(2): 111­134.
Freixas, Xavier, and Jean Charles Rochet. 1998. "Fair Pricing of Deposit Insurance. Is it Possible? Yes. Is
  it Desirable? No." Research in Economics, 52(3): 217­232.
Freixas, Xavier, Antoine Martin, and David Skeie. 2011. "Bank Liquidity, Interbank Markets, and Monetary
  Policy." Review of Financial Studies, 24(8): 2656­2692.
Gertler, Mark, and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. 2015. "Banking, Liquidity and Bank Runs in an Infinite-Horizon
  Economy." American Economic Review, 105(7): 2011­2043.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, and Tanju Yorulmazer. 2010. "Liquidity, Bank Runs, and Bailouts: Spillover

                                                      46
  Effects during the Northern Rock Episode." Journal of Financial Services Research, 37(2­3): 83­98.
Goldstein, Itay. 2012. "Empirical Literature on Financial Crises: Fundamentals vs. Panic." In The Evidence and
  Impact of Financial Globalization. Chapter 36, 523­534. Academic Press.
Goldstein, Itay, and Ady Pauzner. 2005. "Demand­Deposit Contracts and the Probability of Bank Runs."
  The Journal of Finance, 60(3): 1293­1327.
Gorton, Gary. 1988. "Banking Panics and Business Cycles." Oxford Economic Papers, 40(4): 751­781.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. "Environmental Taxation and the Double Dividend:                A Reader's Guide."
  International Tax and Public Finance, 2(2): 157­183.
Granja, Joao, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru. 2017. "Selling Failed Banks." The Journal of Finance,
  72(4): 1723­1784.
Green, Edward J., and Ping Lin. 2003. "Implementing Efficient Allocations in a Model of Financial
  Intermediation." Journal of Economic Theory, 109(1): 1­23.
Hachem, Kinda Cheryl, and Zheng Michael Song. 2017. "Liquidity Rules and Credit Booms." NBER
  Working Paper.
Haubrich, Joseph G., and Andrew W. Lo. 2013. Quantifying Systemic Risk. University of Chicago Press.
Hazlett, Denise. 1997. "Deposit Insurance and Regulation in a Diamond-Dybvig Banking Model with a Risky
  Technology." Economic Theory, 9(3): 453­470.
Hull, John C. 2013. Options Futures and Other Derivatives. Pearson.
Ioannidou, Vasso P., and María Fabiana Penas. 2010. "Deposit Insurance and Bank Risk-Taking: Evidence
  from Internal Loan Ratings." Journal of Financial Intermediation, 19(1): 95­115.
Iyer, Rajkamal, and Manju Puri. 2012. "Understanding Bank Runs: The Importance of Depositor-Bank
  Relationships and Networks." American Economic Review, 102(4): 1414­1445.
Jacewitz, Stefan, and Jonathan Pogach. 2018. "Deposit Rate Advantages at the Largest Banks." Journal of
  Financial Services Research, 53(1): 1­35.
Jacklin, C. J., and S. Bhattacharya. 1988. "Distinguishing Panics and Information-Based Bank Runs: Welfare
  and Policy Implications." The Journal of Political Economy, 96(3): 568­592.
Kareken, John H., and Neil Wallace. 1978. "Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A Partial-Equilibrium
  Exposition." Journal of Business, 51(3): 413­438.
Kashyap, Anil K, Dimitrios P Tsomocos, and Alexandros Vardoulakis. 2019. "Optimal Bank Regulation
  in the Presence of Credit and Run Risk." NBER Working Paper.
Keister, Todd. 2016. "Bailouts and Financial Fragility." Review of Economic Studies, 83(2): 704­736.
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen, and Claus Thustrup Kreiner. 2006. "The marginal cost of public funds: Hours
  of work versus labor force participation." Journal of Public Economics, 90(10): 1955­1973.
Lucas, Deborah. 2019. "Measuring the Cost of Bailouts." Annual Review of Economics, 11: 85­108.
Martin, Christopher, Manju Puri, and Alexander Ufier. 2017. "On Deposit Stability in Failing Banks."
  FDIC Working Paper.
Martinez-Miera, David, and Rafael Repullo. 2010. "Does Competition Reduce the Risk of Bank Failure?"
  Review of Financial Studies, 23(10): 3638­3664.
Matutes, Carmen, and Xavier Vives. 1996. "Competition for Deposits, Fragility, and Insurance." Journal of
  Financial Intermediation, 5(2): 184­216.
Matvos, Gregor. 2013. "Estimating the Benefits of Contractual Completeness." Review of Financial Studies,
  26(11): 2798­2844.
Merton, Robert C. 1977. "An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan Guarantees an
  Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory." Journal of Banking & Finance, 1(1): 3­11.

                                                      47
Mitkov, Yuliyan. 2020. "Inequality and Financial Fragility." Journal of Monetary Economics, 115: 233­248.
Ordoñez, Guillermo. 2018. "Sustainable Shadow Banking." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
  10(1): 33­56.
Peck, James, and Karl Shell. 2003. "Equilibrium Bank Runs." Journal of Political Economy, 111(1): 103­123.
Pennacchi, George G. 1987. "A Reexamination of the Over-(or Under-) Pricing of Deposit Insurance." Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking, 19(3): 340­360.
Pennacchi, George G. 2006. "Deposit Insurance, Bank Regulation, and Financial System Risks." Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 53(1): 1­30.
Plantin, Guillaume. 2014. "Shadow Banking and Bank Capital Regulation." The Review of Financial Studies,
  28(1): 146­175.
Rochet, Jean Charles, and Xavier Vives. 2004. "Coordination Failures and the Lender of Last Resort: Was
  Bagehot Right After All?" Journal of the European Economic Association, 2(6): 1116­1147.
Saez, Emmanuel, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2016. "Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal
  tax theory." American Economic Review, 106(1): 24­45.
Schilling, Linda. 2018. "Optimal Forbearance of Bank Resolution." Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper.
Shy, Oz, Rune Stenbacka, and Vladimir Yankov. 2016. "Limited deposit insurance coverage and bank
  competition." Journal of Banking and Finance, 71: 95­108.
Sraer, David, and David Thesmar. 2018. "A Sufficient Statistics Approach for Aggregating Firm-Level
  Experiments."
Uhlig, Harald. 2010. "A Model of a Systemic Bank Run." Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(1): 78­96.
Wallace, Neil. 1988. "Another Attempt to Explain an Illiquid Banking System: The Diamond and Dybvig Model
  with Sequential Service Taken Seriously." Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 12(4): 3­16.
Wallace, Neil. 1990. "A Banking Model in which Partial Suspension is Best." Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
  Quarterly Review, 14(4): 11­23.



                                                     Appendix
A     Proofs and Derivations

A.1     Proofs: Section 2

Proposition 1. (Exact directional test)
                                                                                                                  N (i,s)
                                                                                                                 Ct
            dV (i,,R1 )         dEs [U (Ct (i,s))]
Note that       d         = E          d             . Exploiting the envelope theorem and the fact that                    = 0,
it is the case that
                                                                                       F (i,s)
                                                                                      Ct
                                                               =q F EF     F
                                                                     s U (Ct (i,s))     

                                ¢   s
                                    ^                    F (i, s)              ¢     s                    F (i, s)
      dEs [U (Ct (i, s))]                    F          Ct                                    F          Ct
                          =             U   Ct   (i, s)           dF (s) +               U   Ct (i, s)             dF (s)
             d                  s                                                s
                                                                                 ^                         
                                                                                   s
                                F
                           + U Ct (i, s ) - U Ct
                                               N
                                                 (i, s )                 f (s )      ,
                                                                                   

                                                       q F               
where q F is defined in Equation (12) and                    = f (s ) s
                                                                       .



                                                                48
      The marginal impact of varying  on taxpayers' welfare is similarly given by

                                                                                                 C            F
                                                                               =q F EF     F
                                                                                     s U (C (,s))  (,s)

                                   ¢     s
                                         ^                                                          ¢     s
           dV (, , R1 )                               F      C F (, s)                                                              C F (, s)
                        =                    U       C (, s)           dF (s) +                               U    C F (, s)                  dF (s)
               d                     s                                                                s
                                                                                                      ^                                
                                                                                                        s
                               + U C F (, s ) - U C N (, s )                                f (s )        .
                                                                                                        
                                             dVm (i,,R1 )                                                                      dVm (,,R1 )
Therefore, we can express                         d              for a given depositor i (early or late) or                         d        as follows:
                                                                                                                                                         
        dVm (j, , R1 )              q F          U C N (j, s ) - U C F (j, s )                                   C F (j, s) C F (j, s)
                                                                                                                       U
                       =-                                                                           + q F EF                           .
                                                                                                           s
                           
             d                                                   U (C F (j, s ))                              U (C F (j, s )) 

Given these, Equation (22) in Proposition 1 follows immediately.

Lemma 1. (Aggregate consumption difference between failure and no-failure equilibria)
                                               N (i, R ), C N (i, R ), and C F (i, , R ), as well as,  (s)
Equation (23) follows from the definitions of C1      1    2       1        t         1               F

and N (s). See Section A of the Online Appendix for a step-by-step derivation.

Lemma 2. (Aggregate consumption change induced by a change in coverage in failure
states)
                  ¡       F (i,s)
                         Ct                               ¡
Note that          iI             dG (i)             =       iPI   dG (i) whenever T (s) > 0; it is 0 otherwise. Note also that
C F (,s)                                         ¡
              = - (1 +  (T (s)))                 iPI          dG (i) whenever T (s) > 0; it is 0 otherwise. Equation (24) follows
immediately from these two observations.                                       See Section A of the Online Appendix for a step-by-
                                                                                                                                                         + |F
step derivation.            Note also that Equation (25) follows from Equation (24) after defining q T                                                          =
¡s
 ^                         ¡ s
 s   I[T (s)>0]dF (s)+     s
                           ^     I[T (s)>0]dF (s)
            ¡s
             ^             ¡ s                           , where I [·] denotes the indicator function.
             s   dF (s)+   s
                           ^     dF (s)


Proposition 2. (Approximate directional test for a change in the level of coverage)

Note that we can linearly approximate U C N (j, s ) around C F (j, s ) as follows:


                      U C N (j, s )  U C F (j, s ) + U                                  C F (j, s )       C N (j, s ) - C F (j, s ) .                       (38)

Hence, Equation (26) follows immediately from Equation (22) after substituting Equation (38), setting
 (j ) = 1, j , and m (j, s) = 1, j , s.


A.2        Proofs: Section 3

Proposition 3. (Directional test for  under perfect ex-ante regulation)
                                                                                                                                                         dW
For a planner that aggregates welfare using uniform generalized social welfare weights,                                                                   d      =
¡    dVm (j,,R1 )                 dVm (j,,R1 )
                                                               dV (j,,R1 )
                                                                                     dV (i,,R1 )              dEs [U (Ct (i,s))]                 dEs [U (Ct (i,s))]
          d       dj ,   where         d                 =          d
                                                              U (C F (j,s ))
                                                                               and       d         = E               d             , and where          d

                                                                                     49
is given by
                                ¢           s
                                            ^                              F                            ¢       s                          F
dEs [U (Ct (i, s))]                                       F              dCt  (i, s)                                          F          dCt  (i, s)
                    =                           U        Ct (i, s)                   dF (s) +                       U        Ct (i, s)               dF (s)
       d                            s                                        d                              s
                                                                                                            ^                                d
                                                     ¢       s          s          N     N                              ¢
                                                     (i, s)           N      N   dCt   dCt  (i, s)
                        + (1 -  )                           dF (s) +
                                                                 U   Ct   U Ct
                                                                        (i, s) (i, s)              dF (s)
                                s
                                ^                   d                 s                    d
                                                                   ds
                                                                    ^                                             ds
                             F
                        + U Ct     ^) - U Ct
                               (i, s       N
                                                 ^) (1 -  ) f (^
                                             (i, s              s)    + U Ct F
                                                                               (i, s ) - U Ct   N
                                                                                                   (i, s ) f (s )    ,
                                                                   d                                              d
                                                                                                                  F (i,s)
                                                                                                                dCt                 F (i,s)
                                                                                                                                   Ct          F (i,s)
                                                                                                                                              Ct                 N (i,s)
                                                                                                                                                               dCt
                                                                                                                                                       dR1
and the impact on consumption can be decomposed as                                                                 d            =           + R   1     d  and    d      =
 N (i,s)
Ct                                                                                                                                                                  
         dR1                                                                                                                             ^ dR1                   s dR1
 R1       d ,                                      ^ and s satisfies
                while the impact on the thresholds s                                                                             ds
                                                                                                                                  ^    s             ds     s
                                                                                                                                 d = R1 d , and d =  + R1 d .
                                                                                    dV (,,R1 )
     In the case of taxpayers, we can express                                           d               as follows:
                       ¢        s
                                ^                                                               ¢       s
 dV (, , R1 )                                        F  dC F (, s)                                                                   dC F (, s)
              =                     U           C (, s)            dF (s) +                                 U           C F (, s)               dF (s)
     d                      s                               d                                       s
                                                                                                    ^                                    d
                                                                                                                ds
                                                                                                                 ^                                                           ds
                              ^) - U C N (, s
                   + U C F (, s             ^)                                     (1 -  ) f (^
                                                                                              s)                   + U C F (, s ) - U C N (, s )                  f (s )        ,
                                                                                                                d                                                            d

                                                    dC F (,s)            C F (,s)    F (,s)                                                                       dC N (,s)
where it is the case that                              d             =            + CR  1
                                                                                            dR1
                                                                                             d .                    Note that we rely on the fact that               d        = 0.
                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                    ¡   Vm (j,,R1 )                 Vm (j,,R1 )
                                                                                                                                                                       V (j,,R1 )
                                                                                                                                                                          R1
     Under the optimal regulation, R1 must satisfy                                          R1              =             R1        dj ,   where      R1          =   U (C F (j,s ))
      V (i,,R1 )                         Es [U (Ct (i,s))]
and     R1         = E                        R1                         = 0, and where

                                    ¢       s
                                            ^                            F                              ¢       s                         F
 Es [U (Ct (i, s))]                                       F             Ct (i, s)                                             F          Ct (i, s)
                    =                           U        Ct      (i, s)           dF (s) +                          U        Ct (i, s)             dF (s)
      R1                                s                                R1                                 s
                                                                                                            ^                             R1
                                                         ¢   s                  s N               N                      ¢
                                                             (i, s)   N          Ct   N         Ct  (i, s)
                        + (1 -  )      U      (i, s)                dF (s) +
                                                                     Ct           U Ct   (i, s)            dF (s)
                                   s
                                   ^                      R   1               s                  R   1
                                                                        s                                              s^
                        + U Ct F
                                  (i, s ) - U Ct  N
                                                     (i, s ) f (s )          + U Ct F
                                                                                           ^) - U Ct
                                                                                       (i, s         N
                                                                                                            ^) (1 -  )
                                                                                                        (i, s             f (^
                                                                                                                             s) .
                                                                        R1                                             R1

In the case of taxpayers:
                    ¢       s
                            ^                                                               ¢       s
V (, , R1 )                                      F  C F (, s)                                                                       C F (, s)
            =                   U           C (, s)           dF (s) +                                  U           C F (, s)                 dF (s)
   R1                   s                            R1                                         s
                                                                                                ^                                    R1
                                                                                                s                                                                       s^
                + U C F (, s ) - U C N (, s )                                       f (s )         + U C F (, s
                                                                                                              ^) - U C N (, s
                                                                                                                            ^)                                (1 -  )      f (^
                                                                                                                                                                              s) ,
                                                                                                R1                                                                      R1

                                                             C N (,s)
where we use the fact that                                    R1         = 0. Therefore, given the optimal ex-ante regulation, we can express
dW
 d    as follows:

                   ¢            ¢                                                    ¢ s U C F (j, s)
                                                                                                                                                                      
        dW                              s
                                        ^       U  C F (j, s) C F (j, s)                                 C F (j, s)
           =                                                             dF ( s ) +                                 dF (s) dj
         d                          s           U (C F (j, s ))                       s
                                                                                      ^  U (C F (j, s ))   

                                                                                            U    (C F (j,s)) C F (j,s)
                                                                                  =q F EF
                                                                                        s   U   (C F (j,s ))   

                                                     ¢
                                                                                                                          
                       s                                         U C F (j, s ) - U C N (j, s )
              + f (s )                                                                                                     dj,
                                                                            U (C F (j, s ))



                                                                                            50
which corresponds exactly to Equation (28) in the text.


Proposition 4. (Directional test for  without ex-ante regulation)
                                                                          ¡      Vm (i,,R1 )
Without ex-ante regulation, R1 is given by the solution to                iI       R1        dG (i)   = 0, characterized above.
                                        dW
   Therefore, we can express             d   as follows:
                            ¢                              ¢
                     dW        dVm (j, , R1 )           Vm (i, , R1 )          Vm (, , R1 )
                        =                     dj =                    dG (i) +
                      d             d               iI                             
                             ¢
                                 Vm (i, , R1 )            Vm (, , R1 ) dR1
                         +                       dG (i) +
                              iI       R  1                   R1            d
                           ¢
                                Vm (i, , R1 )            Vm (, , R1 ) Vm (, , R1 ) dR1
                         =                      dG (i) +               +                    ,
                            iI                                                 R1      d

        Vm (,,R1 )
where     R1         is given by

                                                                                                                
 Vm (, , R1 )         U C F (, s) C F (, s)     U C F (, s ) - U C N (, s )         s
                 F F 
              = q Es                         +                               f (s )
    R1                U (C F (, s )) R1                U (C F (, s ))               R1
                                                                                                                            (39)
                                                               
                        U C F (, s
                                 ^) - U C N (, s
                                               ^)                             s^
                +                                               (1 -  )          f (^
                                                                                    s) .
                                U   (C F     (, s ))                          R1

                                                                                                               Vm (,,R1 )
Under the same conditions used in the approximation in Proposition 2, we can express                             R1         as

                                        Vm (, , R1 )    Es [T (s) +  (T (s))]
                                                     -                        .
                                           R1                   R1

Note that Equation (A7) guarantees that this fiscal externality term is negative, as described in the
body of the paper.


Proposition 5. (Optimal ex-ante deposit rate regulation)

The choice of R1 under perfect ex-ante regulation is given by
                                    ¢
                                             Vm (i, , R1 )          Vm (, , R1 )
                                                           dG (i) +              = 0.
                                    iI         R1                      R1

The choice of R1 subject to a cost R1 per unit of R1 offered (-R1 R1 ) corresponds to
                                             ¢
                                                   Vm (i, , R1 )
                                                                 dG (i) - R1 = 0.
                                              iI     R1

Therefore, the optimal regulation is associated with a wedge R1 = - VmR
                                                                      (,,R1 )
                                                                        1
                                                                              , which, as shown above,
                            Vm (,,R1 )
can be approximated as        R1               -  Es [T (s
                                                         R1
                                                           )+(T (s))]
                                                                      .



                                                                51
