                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        VENTURE CAPITAL'S "ME TOO" MOMENT

                                      Sophie Calder-Wang
                                         Paul Gompers
                                        Patrick Sweeney

                                      Working Paper 28679
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28679


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




Support for this research was provided by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business
School. Paul Gompers has invested in and consulted for venture capital firms. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sophie Calder-Wang, Paul Gompers, and Patrick Sweeney. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Venture Capital's "Me Too" Moment
Sophie Calder-Wang, Paul Gompers, and Patrick Sweeney
NBER Working Paper No. 28679
April 2021
JEL No. G3,J01,J16,J7,K31

                                           ABSTRACT

In this paper, we document the historically low rate of hiring of women in the venture capital
sector. We find that the high-profile Ellen Pao v. Kleiner Perkins gender discrimination trial had
dramatic treatment effects. In difference-in-differences regressions, we find that the rate of hiring
of female venture capitalists increased substantially after the trial and that the hiring was more
pronounced in states that were more receptive to the exposure. We use the state-level mandated
maternity benefits as an instrument for the receptivity to the treatment effects of the Pao Trial.
We also show that the fraction of founders who are female increases after the Pao Trial, but that
the increase is driven entirely by the hiring of female venture capitalists. There is no increase in
the propensity of male venture capitalists to invest in female founders in the post-Pao Trial
period.

Sophie Calder-Wang                                Patrick Sweeney
University of Pennsylvania                        Harvard Business School
sophiecw@wharton.upenn.edu                        Baker Library 280
                                                  Boston, MA 02163
Paul Gompers                                      psweeney@hbs.edu
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu
1    Introduction


          Despite tremendous strides in female labor market participation as well as increasing

representation in many highly compensated sectors, venture capital remained immune to greater

gender diversity. The rate of hiring of new senior venture capital professionals in the United States

continually hovered around 8.5% and did not change noticeably from 1990 through 2015, hovering

near 8% for two and a half decades. Beginning in 2015, however, we find a dramatic increase in the

hiring of female venture capital investors. From 2015 onwards, the percentage of women hired in

the venture capital industry increased by 50%. We explore one potential cause of this increase by

exploring the role of the Pao v. Kleiner Perkins gender discrimination lawsuit in increasing

awareness of gender issues in the venture capital industry. The suit, filed in 2012 went to trial in

February 2015 and was decided by the jury on March 27, 2015. The high-profile trial was closely

followed in the media and drew significant attention among venture capital firms in the United

States.

          Our paper identifies two main results. First, we show that the Pao Trial caused a significant

increase in the hiring of female venture capitalists. Using a difference-in-differences analysis, we

show that the Pao trial increased the hiring of female venture capitalists. Using Google search trends

for the Ellen Pao trial as a measure of the exposure to the treatment, we find that states that were

more attentive to the results of the trial are those that experienced the higher increases in female

hiring. Using the level of state mandated maternity benefits as an instrument for the receptivity to

exposure to the gender inequity issues in the venture capital industry exposed by coverage of the

Pao Trial, we show that this receptivity had a dramatic impact on female hiring.




                                                    2
        Second, we explore the financing of female founders. Many industry observers have argued

that homophily in investing leads to gender funding biases and that hiring of more female venture

capitalists is a prerequisite for increasing the number of female founders receiving venture capital.

We show that the percentage of founders who are women increases in the 2015-2019 time period.

We then explore whether this increase is driven by the increased representation of female venture

capitalists in the industry or whether the Pao trial increased the propensity of male venture capitalists

to invest in female founders or both. We show that the increase in percentage of female founders is

driven by the hiring of female venture capitalists from 2015-2019. This increase in the financing of

female entrepreneurs is directly tied to the increased prevalence of female venture capitalists (i.e.,

female venture capitalists are significantly more likely to invest in female entrepreneurs), not to an

increased propensity of male venture capitalists to invest in female entrepreneurs. There is no

increase in investments by men in female entrepreneurs after the Pao Trial and no effect of Google

search trends or the level of state-mandated maternity benefits. Overall, our results are consistent

with the view that exposure to important social issues can affect inherent bias in hiring, but the

debiasing is dependent upon the receptivity to the exposure. The exposure effect of the Pao Trial,

however, was specific to the gender bias in hiring of female investors, not a general exposure to

gender bias issues broadly.

        Two of the most striking patterns in labor economics in the past half-century have been the

increase in female labor market participation along with the growing ethnic diversity of the

American workforce. Given the rising rate of labor participation among females in all parts of the

world, there has not been a larger factor affecting global labor supply and demand dynamics. As an

example of the magnitude, female labor market participation in the US has nearly doubled since




                                                    3
1950, going from 33% to 57% in 2016. 1 Further, the overall US increase has been shared broadly

across fields in the economy, including the professional fields of law, medicine, and business.

        In this paper, we document a sharply contrasting phenomenon in the venture capital

industry. After carefully documenting this contrasting trend, we examine potential labor supply

explanations that could help explain the substantial underrepresentation of woman and the recent

dramatic increase in female venture capitalists starting in 2015 by documenting the educational and

career backgrounds of those who become venture capitalists. In particular, we show that schooling

and work experience cannot explain the historically low representation of women in venture capital.

The supply of women with backgrounds that are similar to male hires is much larger than the

fraction of women hired into the venture capital industry. As such, we conclude that female labor

supply cannot explain the relatively modest representation of women in the venture capital sector.

        Our examination of the Pao Trial's effects is motivated by examining patterns of female

participation in the venture capital industry compared to other highly-compensated professions.

Figure 1 shows the evolution of female labor market participation in professional industries in the

US along with total US female labor market participation. The figure shows the relative fraction of

each category entering the labor force or a particular profession who are female. We believe looking

at flow variables (i.e., fraction of those entering a profession who are female) is more relevant to

changing participation barriers because the current stock of labor within a profession represents the

historical experience with past barriers to entry. As can be clearly seen, total female entry into the

labor market has stayed roughly constant over the 25 years: roughly 45-46% of the total US labor

force has remained female. Moreover, while the professional fields of medicine and law started the

period well below economy-wide levels of female participation (dark and light violet dashed lines,



1  United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016) http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2000/feb/wk3/art03.htm ,
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/LNS11300002).

                                                    4
respectively), they both have a steady increase over time. In fact, not only have the female

percentages fully converged, but at present, women's fraction entering law and medicine stand

slightly above the economy-wide rates of 46.85%; 49.64% for medicine and 49.72% for law. From

starting points of just 26.58% (for medicine) and 35.52% (for law) in the early 1990s, these increases

represent substantial shifts in terms of economic magnitude in a short period of time. Figure 1 also

shows the evolution of female entry into the venture capital industry. In stark contrast to other

professional fields, women in began the early 1990s at much lower levels and did not show nearly

the same convergence tendency, remaining at 8.61% during the 2010-2014 period. Starting in 2015,

the hiring of female venture capitalists increased dramatically, averaging 14.23% for the period 2015-

2019. This average, however, masks a year by year increase in this five year span of time. In 2015,

the percentage of new venture capitalists that were women was 12.87%. That percentage increased

steadily to 17.65% in 2019.

        The historical low representation of women in venture capital is also in sharp contrast to

other business sectors. Figure 2 compares the average rate of entry by women into venture capital

over 2010-2019 (a period of time that includes the recent upswing in hiring, with the two largest

finance and business-related professions for business school graduates over this time period:

consulting and investment banking. Over the past decade, 11.42% of new hires in venture capital

were women (from 2010-2014 8.61% of new hires were women). Over the same time period,

44.35% of new consultants were women and 33.85% of new investment bankers were women.

Even relative to other highly sought after business jobs, female hiring in venture capital has lagged

significantly.

        One potential demand-side explanation for the lack of female hires into the venture capital

industry is related to the notion of "homophily", which is the tendency of individuals to associate

with similar others. As surveyed in McPherson, Smith-Lovin, and Cook (2001), the notion that


                                                   5
"similarity breeds connection" has robust and profound effects in network structures of every type,

including "marriage, friendship, work, advice, support, information transfer, exchange, co-

membership, and other types of relationship." A direct implication of this "birds of a feather"

phenomenon is that venture capitalists prefer to hire, invest in, or co-invest with those that are

similar to themselves in characteristics such as gender and ethnicity.

        Indeed, Gompers, Mukharlyamov, and Xuan (2016) show that co-investment patterns in

venture capital are driven by social similarities, where venture capitalists who are more similar in

terms of gender, ethnicity, school background, and work history are more likely to collaborate. They

also show that this homophily driven collaboration reduces performance. 2 Moreover, Calder-Wang

and Gompers (2020) find that this hiring bias can be mitigated when the existing male senior

partners have daughters, i.e., having daughters increases the propensity to hire women into venture

capital firms.

        Since the typical venture capital firm is small in size, with a median of three partners in our

dataset, hiring decisions are made infrequently. Further, expansion in the VC industry has occurred

mostly at the extensive margin (i.e., the creation of new, small (three-partner) VC firms), as opposed

to the intensive margin (existing firm expansion). This could be due to optimal scale considerations

given the output (e.g., the information collection, processing, etc. could work best in small nimble

teams), or due to inefficiencies (e.g., industry-wide equilibrium fee structures provide incentives to

maintain small teams). Thus, aggregate new hiring in this industry is driven by the aggregated

decisions of small teams. From social psychology, small groups are both more likely to be

homophilous and more likely to have biases aggregate into expressed decision-making (Klocke




2Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) show that homophily also works at the school ties level in the investment
management arena between buy side analysts and CEOs.

                                                     6
(2007)). Thus, a slight preference over certain demographic characteristics could aggregate into a

sustained overall lack of diversity at an industry level.

        Put differently, in a firm making a single new hire, a slight gender preference may result in

the hiring of a man over a woman. Even though the gender preference can be thought of as a

continuous variable and any slight bias could be small, the hiring outcome is binary. In this setting,

even a very small bias towards hiring someone of the same gender or ethnicity could lead to

persistent low representation from those groups not already in the venture capital industry. The

aggregation of such binary outcomes across firms can result in the overall lack of diversity across an

entire industry.

        Our conjecture is that the high-profile nature of the Pao Trial, the fact that it was widely

covered in the broadcast and print media, potentially exposed venture capitalists to the issues of

females in the sector. As such, this exposure potentially "de-biased" hiring and led to an increase in

the propensity of firms to hire women. We test the exposure hypothesis by looking at how

"exposed" states were to the Pao Trial by looking at the state-level time series of Google search

trends for the "Ellen Pao Trial". This approach is similar to the approach taken by Kearney and

Levine (2015) who look at the effect of MTV's 16 and Pregnant television show on teen pregnancy

rates. They look at Google search trends as a proxy for exposure to the content of the show. In the

context of our setting, we find considerable heterogeneity in terms of search intensity towards the

Pao Trial across states with the dramatic peak in search intensity in March 2015. Google search

trends are reflective of the attentiveness to a particular issue and, as such, measure exposure to a

particular event. We show in our difference-in-differences setting, that after the court decision,

states with higher Google search trends for "Ellen Pao Trial" had the largest increase in hiring of

female venture capital investors.




                                                      7
        Given that there may be concern that Google search trends are somehow endogenous, we

examine the difference-in-differences using an Instrumental Variables approach. We use the state-

level mandated maternity benefits as an instrument for Google search trends for the Pao Trial. The

reduced-form regressions show a significant positive relationship between state mandated maternity

benefits and an increase in female hiring after the Pao trial. Similarly, the first stage of the IV

regression shows a strong predictive relationship between the state-level mandated maternity

benefits and Google search trends for the Pao Trial. Finally, the second stage results indicate that

exogenous exposure to the Pao Trial is associated with an increase in female venture capital hiring.

        Our final set of analyses look at the effect of hiring more female venture capitalists in

response to the Ellen Pao Trial verdict on investments in female-founded companies. We find that

the fraction of venture capital-backed companies that are founded by women increases after the Pao

Trial. This increase, however, is directly tied to the increase in hiring of female venture capitalists.

Female venture capitalists are significantly more likely to fund female-founded companies. This is

true controlling for industry and state as well. When we examine the propensity to invest in female

founders after the Pao Trial, we find that male venture capitalists do not change their propensity

subsequent to the verdict. Hence, the Pao Trial served as an exposure reducing bias in the hiring of

female venture capitalists, but did not carry over into investing in more female-founded companies.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes how we construct

the dataset for entrepreneurs and venture capitalists. Section 3 describes the time-series trends and

industry patterns along the dimensions of gender. Section 4 discusses the Pao Trial and examines its

effects on the hiring of female venture capitalists. Section 5 examines whether the hiring of more

female venture capitalists increased investments in female entrepreneurs and whether exposure to

the Pao Trial changed men's investments into female founded companies. Section 6 concludes.




                                                     8
2       Data Construction

           The core data used in this paper are derived from several different sources. We start with

VentureSource, a database that contains detailed information on venture capital investments. Our data

cover the period from 1990 through mid-2019. We start our analysis in 1990 because the data

become reasonably comprehensive at that point in time. For each portfolio company, we have the

identities of the individuals involved with the firm including founders, venture capital investors,

angel investors, board members, and early hires. We focus on the portfolio company founders as

well as the venture capitalists on the board of directors. Throughout the paper, we will refer to

company founders as "entrepreneurs". In addition to information about the people involved in the

company, we also have information on the portfolio company's location and industry. A founder

enters the data in the year in which they receive their first round of financing. 3 A venture capitalist

enters the data in the year they make their first investment for which they sit on the board of

directors.

           For each individual entrepreneur and venture capitalist in the dataset, we collect a broad

range of biographical information such as gender, ethnicity, education, and prior job experience. We

collect this information from a variety of sources, including a leading online resume website, web

searches, SEC filings, and news articles. The education information includes the academic institution

attended along with the specific type of degree granted. Degree types include undergraduate,

postgraduate non-business (Ph.D., M.S., J.D., and M.D.), and postgraduate business (MBA). For

prior job experience, we record the company names as well as job titles.

           Entrepreneur and venture capitalist genders are primarily determined based on first names.

In the cases of unisex names, we determine gender by reading news articles and web pages



3
    We do not have information on founding dates, hence, we time entry as the time of first funding.

                                                             9
mentioning or containing pictures of the individual. To identify ethnicity, we use the name-matching

algorithm developed by Kerr and Lincoln (2010) to determine the most likely ethnicity based on

their first and last names. Due to the ambiguity in identifying Black names, anyone who was

classified as White is then searched on the Internet for photos based upon the full name, the

company name, and the company location. The Black designation is then based upon a review of the

photos. Individual entrepreneurs and venture capitalists are classified into six non-overlapping

ethnic groups: White, East Asian, South Asian, Latinx, Black, and all others. In this paper, we group

East Asian and South Asian as Asian. Our overall match rates for both gender and ethnicity exceed

99%. 4

         In this paper, we choose to focus on entrepreneurs that have received venture financing.

Although this by no means captures the full spectrum of entrepreneurs, venture financing remains

an important source of entrepreneurial capital. For instance, Kaplan and Lerner (2010) found that

more than 60% of true IPOs had venture financing. Considering only 1/6 of 1% of all companies

are venture-backed, this represents a powerful source of high potential, fast-growing, innovative

companies. Further, venture-backed companies also have a large impact on the overall economy.

Gornall and Strebulaev (2015) found that companies previously backed by VCs account for 44% of

the research and development spending among US public companies. Thus, the demographic trends

of entrepreneurs who had access to venture capital represent those of a vital source of economy-

wide innovation.

         We determine the investment outcome using VentureSource and Refinitiv's SDC database, and

S&P CapitalIQ. Finally, we use historical copies of Pratt's Guide to Private Equity and Venture

Capital Sources and Pitchbook to manually code the locations of venture capital firm offices.



4 For entrepreneurs, 108 (0.3%) of them are missing gender and 189 (0.4%) of them are missing ethnicity. For VCs, 25
(0.2%) of them are missing gender and 40 (0.4%) of them are missing ethnicity.

                                                        10
3     Gender Trends for Venture Capital

3.1    Summary Statistics

         Table I provides a summary of the data for both entrepreneurs and venture capitalists in our

sample aggregated across the entire period from 1990 to mid-2019. Overall, we have data on 13,571

venture capitalists with a similar gender breakdown: 90.9% are men and 9.0% are women. 5 This type

of gender segregation has been documented anecdotally in the popular press. Gompers,

Mukharlyamov, Weisburst, and Xuan (2020) documented that nearly 80% of venture capital firms

had never hired a female investor. 6 7

         We also examine the time series changes in the entry into venture capital for women in our

data. For venture capitalists, because we can only identify a venture capitalist when they take a board

seat at a portfolio company given our data source, the entry date is recorded as the first time they do

so. 8 We cannot observe when the individual was actually hired at the venture capital firm. Similarly,

because typically only partner level venture capitalists get to sit on boards of a portfolio company,

we only observe senior hires.

         Compared to measuring the diversity of the entire stock of venture capitalists, we focus here

on measuring their entry rates. We choose to do this not only because it is challenging to observe

the stock (it is hard to observe when a venture capitalist retires), but also because the entry rate is a

more direct measure to track the changes in demographic trends. The stock of venture capitalists

will represent the sum of all the past barriers to entry and differences in supply. However, one must




5
  Note that the percentages don't add up to 100% because a small fraction of entrepreneurs and venture capitalists with
gender ambiguous names could not be found on web searches.
6 Moreover, we will see later that the female venture capitalists on average make fewer deals than their male counterparts,

representing 7.0% of the board seats taken up by venture capital investors.
7
  No other survey or popular press article has ever looked at the entire population of venture capitalists. Most accounts
have been relatively small, cross sectional surveys done for popular media consumption.
8 Since the average venture capitalist in our sample sits on the board of four startup companies, we only record the entry

of the venture capitalist based on their first deal.

                                                            11
take necessary precautions while comparing it with other stock variables such as the labor force

proportions.

        As described in the introduction, Figure 1 plots the gender breakdown of entering venture

capitalists from 1990 to mid-2019 (averaged over every five years) and shows that female investors

have made little progress over the first 25 years. Over this period, women represent more than 45%

of labor force participants. Meanwhile, the proportions of entering female venture capitalists

remained extremely low. For women venture capitalists (VCs), the rate was around 6% in the early

1990s and rose to around 9% in the late 1990s, but stayed at that level until 2015, displaying no

secular trends. In the most recent five year period, however, women represented 14.23% of new

venture capital hires. In a sharp comparison, the proportion of women in high-skilled occupations

such as medicine and law experienced dramatic increases during this period and are substantially

higher in 2019.




3.2    Industry Patterns

        In this section, we examine the industry patterns of gender representation within the venture

capital sector. These patterns may help identify critical mechanisms that affect diversity. In

particular, female venture capitalists may have different patterns of industry investments. These

differences may affect the propensity of venture capital firms to hire female investors depending

upon industry cycles of opportunity. Venture-financed portfolio companies are classified into

industries based upon VentureSource industry codes. We group companies into seven broad industry

segments: Business and Financial Services, Consumer Goods, Consumer Services, Energy and

Utilities, Healthcare, Industrial Goods and Materials, and Information Technology. These

classifications are highly correlated with venture capital investor specialization found in Gompers,



                                                  12
Lerner, Kovner, and Scharfstein (2010). We classify venture capitalists into industries based upon

the industry of their first investment.

        In Figure 3, we see pronounced variations of gender diversity across different industries for

venture capitalists. In the entire sample, women represent 9.0% of all venture capitalists. We

categorize venture capitalists based upon the industry of their first investment. Certain industries

have substantially more women investors. In particular, women represent 12.0% of venture

capitalists in the Healthcare industry and 13.1% of investors in Consumer Goods. On the other

hand, women venture capitalists are only 7.2% of Information Technology investors, the smallest

percentage in what is the largest venture capital-backed industry. These patterns are consistent with

anecdotal accounts of women pursuing more entrepreneurial opportunities in companies that focus

on the consumer.

        We next turn to the backgrounds of venture capitalists in our sample. In particular, we start

by looking at the educational background of male and female venture capitalists. In Table III we see

that many liberal arts colleges represented for undergraduate degrees for both male and female

venture capitalists. Harvard, Stanford, and the University of Pennsylvania are the top 3

undergraduate colleges for both male and female venture capitalists, while the top 20 colleges

represent 37.7% of all undergraduate institutions for men and 32.1% for women. The list of

undergraduate institutions for men and women are virtually identical. Undergraduate majors shows

some small differences between men and women. Economics and business are the top two majors

for both men and women, but engineering/electrical engineering/computer science represent the

next category of majors for men while biology/finance/chemistry are the next most common

majors for women. This is consistent with the higher percentage of female investors in the

Healthcare industry.




                                                  13
         For those who obtain post-graduate degrees, 56% have an MBA. Unlike undergraduate

institutions, MBAs are highly concentrated in a small number of programs. The concentration of the

top 20 MBA programs among all MBAs is 74.8% for both men and women: Harvard Business

School alone accounts for 21.8% of the MBAs for male venture capitalists and 20.7% of MBAs for

female venture capitalists. The top five business schools, Harvard, Stanford, University of

Pennsylvania, Columbia, and Chicago/Northwestern, account for more than half of all MBAs.

         Among the non-MBA graduate institutions that we see in Table IV, the list looks quite

similar to the MBA institutions with 45.6% of degrees represented by the top twenty universities for

men and 50.5% for women. Stanford, Harvard, MIT, University of Pennsylvania, and Columbia are

the top four institutions. Among non-MBA graduate degrees, Table VII shows that law and

medicine represent nearly half of the non-MBA graduate degrees for male venture capitalists, but

only 32.8% of graduate degrees for women.

         The work experience of venture capitalists also shows some difference from the experience

of entrepreneurs in Table VIII. Investment banks, private equity, and other venture capital firms

make up more than half of the top 20 past employers for both men and women. This includes

Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Merrill Lynch, Citigroup, and Lehman Brothers, suggesting that

the analytical skills developed in financial firms are potentially seen as useful for the evaluation of

investment opportunities. We also find a large number of consulting firms including McKinsey,

Bain, Ernst and Young, and Accenture among the top employers. The remaining top 20 employers

are large technology companies like Microsoft, IBM, Cisco, and Google. Overall, the number of

former employers is quite high and the top 20 past employers account for 10% of all venture

capitalists.

         As a quick test of whether labor supply has limited the number of women entering venture

capital, we tabulated data on women with training and backgrounds matching the venture capital


                                                    14
industry. As we saw, venture capitalists tend to have MBA degrees and experience in investment

banking or consulting. Overall, the fraction of MBA degrees granted to women has increased from

around 35% in 1990 to 39% in 2019. Meanwhile, for Harvard Business School (as a proxy for top

MBA programs) the fraction of MBAs granted to women grew from 27% in 1990 to 42% in 2019.

Similarly, the fraction of women in occupations relevant to venture capital is quite high. Figure 2

shows that the percentage of those entering the investment banking industry who are women

averaged 33.85% over the last decade. Meanwhile, the fraction of those taking a position in

consulting who were women over the same period of time was 46.8%.

         In short, for the venture capital industry, the number of women who have obtained the

relevant educational degrees as well as the relevant job experience has remained substantially higher

than the fraction of new venture capital investors who are women. 9 Overall, the evidence argues

against a purely labor supply explanation for the low female levels in venture capital.



4     Ellen Pao Trial
         The prior section documented that women are dramatically underrepresented in the venture

capital sector and that their entry did not change dramatically from 1990 to 2015, but started to

increase dramatically starting in 2015. In this section we explore whether the publicity around the

Pao Trial led to a treatment effect that brought gender issues to the surface and led to increased

hiring of female venture capitalists. We start by providing a brief history of the trial and then explore

in a difference-in-differences setting whether the trial had a causal effect on hiring.




9Again, one must take caution here in interpreting the occupation data. Since it represents the stock of employees, we
cannot differentiate entries from exits when it comes to their respective attribution to the overall changes.

                                                         15
4.1     Effects on Hiring of Venture Capitalists


4.1.1   Trial History

        Ellen Pao was hired by Kleiner Perkins Caufield Byers in 2005 to be Chief of Staff for John

Doerr, a Managing Director of the firm. Kleiner Perkins, established in 1972, is one of the oldest

and most successful venture capital firms in Silicon Valley having backed successful startups

including Genentech, Sun, AOL, Amazon, and Google. Believing she had been passed over for

promotion while similar male colleagues had been advanced, Pao filed a gender discrimination

lawsuit against Kleiner Perkins on May 10, 2012.

        While most gender discrimination lawsuits settle prior to a court hearing, the Pao Trial was

heard in San Francisco County Superior Court starting in February 2015. The trial gained significant

media attention in both broadcast and print media. The testimony of many of Silicon Valley's star

investors only increased the attention on the trial. The verdict was announced on March 27, 2015

and found for Kleiner Perkins, concluding that they had not discriminated against Pao. After the

verdict, many industry pundits provided views that the lawsuit would increase the focus of women's

issues in venture capital and technology. The effect of this focus, however, was in significant

disagreement. Some believed that the high-profile trial might reduce the hiring of women as venture

capital firms worried about the potential for similar legal actions. Others, however, forecast that the

trial would lead to greater awareness of women's issues and would lead to greater hiring of women

in the industry.




4.1.2   Diff-in-Diffs Ordinary Least Squares

        Our first set of tests looks at a simple difference-in-differences setting to establish whether

the Ellen Pao Trial was associated with an increase in the hiring of female venture capitalists.


                                                   16
Because the lawsuit was filed in early 2012 but not decided until early 2015, we define our pre-period

as the four years from 2008 through 2011. Similarly, our post period is defined as 2015 through

mid-2019. During the pre and post-periods, we identify the hiring of 3,635 venture capitalist.

        We are interested in the differential effect of the Pao Trial on hiring depending upon the

receptivity of the venture capitalist to coverage of the trial. To measure exposure to the Trial, we

look at Google search trends for Ellen Pao. Google search trends tracks the frequency of search for

different words or phrases relative to all searches over time and by region/state. A recent paper by

Levy and Mattsson (2020) used Google search trends as to identify the treatment effects of exposure

to the #MeToo movement across 30 OECD countries and its relation to reporting of sexual crimes.

Levy and Mattsson argue that Google search trends for #MeToo measures the receptivity to the

social movement, hence is a good measure of the treatment effect. They find that in OECD

countries, Google search trend ratings are positively related to the increase in reporting of sexual

crimes. We use a similar motivation to look at differential treatment effects of the Pao Trial.

        Google search trends for Ellen Pao peak in mid-2015 with little coverage before and after

the verdict in the trial, as shown in Figure 5. We use state level Google search trends to identify

treatment effects in our difference-in-differences results. The state with the highest relative search

intensity was California whose Google search trends rating is set to 100. The top five states are, in

order, California, the District of Columbia, Washington, Massachusetts, and Nevada. The lowest

state in terms of Google search trends is Mississippi, with a rating of 11. The next lowest states, in

order, are Alabama, Maine, Tennessee, and Wisconsin.

        Figure 6 illustrates a stylized difference-in-difference analysis where the percentages of

female hired diverged after the Ellen Pao trials depending on the intensity of the Google search

interest. More specifically, we divide states into above or below median levels of Google search

interests and plot the percentages of female hires over time. Prior to the trial, there is little


                                                     17
observable difference between these two groups of states. However, after the trial, there appears a

noticeable divergence in terms of the percentages of female hires in venture capital.

        In Table IX we run simple OLS regressions of whether the hire was a female on a variety of

controls. Our base specification in column 1 regresses the gender of the hire on an interaction term

between the state level Google search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. This

specification allows the treatment effect of exposure to the Pao Trial to vary by state. The intensity

of the treatment effect is measured by Google search trends ratings. We find that the interaction

term is positive, i.e., states with a higher Google search trend for the Pao Trial have a larger increase

in the hiring frequency for women in the post-Pao period. The standard deviation of the Google

search trend is 16.5, so a one standard deviation increase in the Google search trend is associated

with a 1.15% increase in hiring of female venture capitalists in the post period. Given that women

were 8.4% of venture capital hires in the pre-period, this represents a 14% increase in hiring of

female investors.

         We add a variety of state and firm-level controls to the regressions to test the robustness of

our result. First, controlling for the size of the venture capital market may be important in

understanding hiring dynamics. Venture capital firms in states with larger venture capital markets

may be under a greater spotlight and may therefore feel the pressure to respond to scrutiny from the

Pao Trial. To control for venture capital market size, in regressions (2) to (6) with include a variable

which is the number of venture capital investments made in that state during the ten years preceding

the pre-Pao period, i.e., from 2002-2012. Moreover we normalize vc size by state poplulation

        Our summary statistics above demonstrated that female venture capitalists were

disproportionately represented in certain industries. For example, in the past decade, Consumer

Goods and Consumer Services have become more important sectors of the venture capital industry.

As such, controlling for industry focus of the venture capital hire may be important. In regressions


                                                   18
(3) through (6) we include dummy variables for the industry of the first investment of the venture

capital hire. The results are unaffected by included these industry fixed effects.

        Similarly, hiring of female venture capitalists may be related to venture capital firm

characteristics. Larger and older venture capital firms may have different hiring practices and may be

more likely to actively seek diversity. We control for the same set of firm-level controls that Calder-

Wang and Gompers (2020) use in their hiring results. As such, we include venture capital firm age

(defined as the age (in years) at the time of the hiring event) and partner count (the number of

venture capitalists affiliated with the venture firm that has made at least one investment over the

prior three years).. In regressions (4) to (6) we control for various sets of these venture capital-firm

level controls. None of these firm level controls alter the main difference-in-differences result, that

treatment effects of the Pao Trial media coverage led to an increase propensity for venture capital

firms to hire women. We do find that older venture capital firms (defined as the age of the firm in

years at the time of the hiring event) is positively related to the propensity to hire a female venture

investor. This is true even once you control for the number of existing partners, hence age in the

regression is not a proxy for firm size.


4.1.3   Reduced Form and Instrumental Variables

        Given concerns about the measurement problems of Google search trends as it relates to the

Pao Trial, in this section we pursue an instrumental variables framework to estimate the effect of the

trial on hiring of female venture capitalists. A potential instrument in the context of our

experimental design is a variable that would be correlated with the treatment effect of the trial, i.e.,

sensitivity to gender bias issues brought into focus through coverage of the trial, but uncorrelated

with search intensity driven by factors that might drive interest in legal issues in venture capital




                                                    19
generally. The reasoning on identification of such an instrument is analogous to Kearney and

Levine's (2015) use of local area MTV ratings from the period before the airing of 16 and Pregnant.

         In our setting, we use the level of state-manded maternity benefits as an instrument for

Google search trends in response to the Pao Trial. A variety of research has examined the role of

maternity benefits on the choice of employment for women. Dustmann and Schonberg (2012)

provide evidence that an expansion in maternity benefits has a strong impact on mothers' return to

work after childbirth. Similarly, Gottlieb, Townsend, and Xu (2016) look at changes in Canadian

maternity benefits and the choice of women to start businesses. In our view, the state-level of

mandated maternity benefits proxies for how receptive individuals in that state are to issues of

women in the workplace. The Pao Trial is likely to have a higher impact on venture capitalists

attitudes in states with high levels of benefits. Therefore, we look at whether state-level variations in

the mandated maternity/family leave benefits as an instrument for the treatment effect of the Pao

Trial.

         We obtain the benefit scores from the National Partnership for Women and Families that

grades each state's laws concerning paid job protection, family and maternity leave, and flexible use

of sick leave. The five states with the highest grades are New York, Rhode Island, New Jersey,

Connecticut, and Washington D.C. that have an average score of 127. The sates with the lowest

grade (0): Arizona, Georgia, South Carolina, Alabama, Indiana, Michigan, Mississippi, Nebraska,

Oklahoma, South Dakota, and Wyoming. Our first set of regressions in Table X are reduced form

using the state-mandated maternity benefits instead of the Google search trends variable in Table IX.

We find that the interaction of state maternity benefits with the Post-Pao variable is positive and

significantly related to hiring of female venture capitalists. This indicates that in states with great

maternity benefits that are mandated, hiring of female venture capitalists went up more after the Pao

Trial verdict in 2015. Once again, we include a variety of controls (as in Table IX) and none of the


                                                    20
additional controls affects inferences our difference-in-differences effects. The standard deviation of

the maternity score is 41.2 implying that a one standard deviation increase in the maternity score for

a state increases the hiring of female venture capital investors by 2.2%, a 26% increase from the pre-

Pao period average rate of female hires of 8.4%.

        We now turn to our instrumental variables specification. In this setup, we instrument for

Google search trends interacted with our Post-Pao dummy variable. The first stage is estimated by

equation (1)

         ×  =   ×  +    +

           + 

We continue to use size of the venture capital market as well as a variety of firm level controls. As

can be seen in Panel A of Table XI, Maternity x Post-Pao is a strong predictor of Google x Post-Pao.

When we include the size of the venture capital market, we also see that it is positively related to

Google x Post-Pao indicating that it is a useful control in the first stage regressions. In regression

(1), a one standard deviation increase in state-mandated maternity benefits is associated with a 24.5

increase in the Google search trend rating.

        Larger venture capital markets (in terms of number of deals from 2002-2012 in that state)

are associated with a higher Google search trend rating. Given that the Pao Trial was a major issue

in the venture capital industry, it makes sense that a larger venture market would be associated with

a greater Google search trend rating. We saw in the reduced form regression in Table X, however,

that the size of the venture capital industry was not related to the probability of hiring a female

venture capital investor in the Post-Pao period. Even so, controlling for the size of the venture

capital market, the state-level mandated maternity benefits is still significantly related to the Google




                                                   21
search trend rating. A one standard deviation increase in mandated maternity benefits is associated

with an increase in the state's Google search trend rating by 18.3.

          The second stage regressions in Panel B show that the instrumented state Google search

trend rating is positive and significantly related to the propensity to hire a female venture capitalist in

the post-Pao period. The size of the coefficient on   ×  in the IV is of similar

magnitude to the OLS results in Table IX providing support for Google search trends measuring the

exposure treatment. When we add in the additional firm level controls, the results remain robust. We

do find that older venture capital firms do have a higher propensity to hire female venture capitalists,

but no other firm-level control is associated with hiring of woman.

         Our IV results gives us comfort that we are identifying a causal impact of the Pao Trial. The

Pao Trial exposed venture capital firms to the issues of woman in the venture capital industry.

Venture capitalists in states in which firms were more receptive to this exposure were more

significantly affected by the trial and were more likely to increase their propensity to hire a female

investor. Google search trends is a direct measure of the exposure, but the component of the

exposure that is related to the receptiveness is instrumented by the state-level of mandated maternity

benefits. This is exactly the same approach as taken by Kearney and Levine (2015) with the MTV

show 16 and Pregnant and by Levy and Mattsson (2020) with the #MeToo movement.




4.2     Effects on Investments in Female Entrepreneurs


4.2.1    Female Entrepreneur Trends

         One common reason given for hiring more female venture capitalists is that there are many

female entrepreneurs who lack access to capital, either because they are starting companies in

industries that are not the focus of male venture capital investors or because there is homophily in


                                                    22
investing (i.e., men generally tend to invest in men.) In this section, we look at the downstream

effects of the increase in female venture capitalists in the post-Pao period. We start by documenting

trends in gender representation among venture capital-backed entrepreneurs. We then examine

whether male venture capitalists tilt their portfolios more to male founders and whether female

venture capitalists tilt their portfolio towards female founders. Finally, we ask whether the fraction

of founders who are female increases after the Pao-Trial, whether that increase is exclusively due to

more female venture capitalists or whether men increased their propensity to invest in female

founders after the Pao trial.

        Figure 6 presents the time series of women as a percentage of all founders of venture capital-

financed companies. From 1990 through 2009, the fraction of female founders was always below

8% and showed little time trend. There was a meaningful increase in female founders from 2010-

2014 to 10.5% and another increase for 2015-2019 to 13.0% of all venture capital-backed founders.

        We are also able to tabulate the percentage of male and female founders in the portfolios of

male and female venture capitalists in the pre-Pao period and the Post-Pao period. In the pre-Pao

period, female venture capitalists had 11.9% of their founders who were women. Male venture

capitalists had 7.2% of their founders who were women. This difference clearly indicates potential

gender homophily in picking investments by venture capitalists. In the post-Pao period, the

percentage of female founders in the portfolio of female venture capitalists increased to 15.0% while

the percentage of female founders in male venture capitalists increased to 8.8%. Given that the

industry composition may have shifted between the two periods, it is hard to determine whether the

increase in portfolio weights is potentially associated with the Pao-trial treatment or is related to

other factors. In the next section, we explore a difference-in-differences framework to test the

hypothesis.




                                                    23
4.2.2   Diff-in-Diffs Effects

        We next look at the gender of the founders for investments by venture capitalists pre- and

post-Pao Trial. We use a similar framework to the one we used to examine the hiring of female

venture capitalists. In particular, we look at whether the exposure to the Pao Trial as measured

through Google search trends affected the propensity to invest in female founded companies. Given

that gender homophily likely influences the choice of male and female venture capitalists in terms of

founders, we control for whether the venture capitalists is male or female.

        In Table XIV we report the second stage of our IV regressions. Our first stage is estimated in

the same way as in Table XI. The main result can be seen in column (1). We see that female venture

capitalists have a 5.5% greater propensity to invest in female founders. This is 75% higher than the

propensity of male venture capitalists to invest in female founders. The constant term in (1) can be

viewed as the baseline probability that a male venture capitalist investing in a female founder, i.e.,

7.1%. We also see that the propensity to invest in female founders did not increase after the Pao

Trial. Google x Post-Pao is small and insignificant.

        In column (2) we include the treatment effect (Google x Post-Pao) interacted with Female.

The coefficient is small and insignificant (and negative). Google x Post-Pao remains small and

insignificant as well. Therefore, even when we separate out the treatment effect for male and female

venture capitalists, we do not find any effect on either gender in terms of propensity to invest in

female founders. Thus, the increase in female founders financed by venture capitalists after the Pao

Trial is entirely driven by the increase in the fraction of venture capitalists who are female.

        In columns (4)-(6) we include industry of the founder's company as well as a variety of

controls for venture capital firm characteristics. First, industry effects do not change the increased

propensity of female venture capitalists to invest in female founders. Even controlling for industry,




                                                    24
women are more likely to invest in female founders. We find that older and larger venture capital

firms are less likely to invest in female entrepreneurs. .



5   Conclusion


        In this paper, we document the historically low rate of hiring women in venture capital and

how a major gender-discrimination lawsuit in venture capital has impacted these firms' subsequent

hiring decisions. We used Google search trends as a potential measure of the exposure to the event.

We found strong evidence that exposure to the trial likely resulted in a material increase in the

percentages of women hired in venture capital. We used state-level maternity scores as an instrument

to address potential measure problems and find continued support for the causal impact. Lastly, we

find the increased hiring of women in VC likely resulted in an increased amount of capital allocated

to women founders.

        Our research contributes to a growing literature on the economic implications of diversity

and inclusion in firms. We provide measured, quantitative evidence towards how changes in firm

diversity could be brought about by increased awareness of the relevant issues in an important

segment of the capital market. Given that venture capital plays a crucial role in allocating equity

capital towards entrepreneurship and innovation, our findings are relevant for ensuring that financial

capital become accessible for all aspiring entrepreneurs despite their demographic backgrounds.




                                                    25
References

Abramowitz, A., and K. Saunders, "Ideological Realignment in the U.S. Electorate", The Journal of
Politics, 60, (1998), 634-652.

Barro, R., "Education and Economic Growth," Annals of Economics and Finance, 14-2(A), (2013) 277-
304.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullinathan, "Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal?
A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination," American Economic Review 94, (2004), pp. 991-
1013.

Bohnet, I., A. van Geen, and M. Bazerman, "When Performance Trumps Gender Bias: Joint Versus
Separate Evaluation," Management Science 62, no. 5 (May 2016): 1225­1234.

Calder-Wang, S., and P. Gompers, "And the Children Shall Lead: Gender Diversity and
Performance in Venture Capital," forthcoming in the Journal of Financial Economics (2020).

Calvo-Armengol, A., and M. Jackson, "The Effects of Social Networks on Employment and
Inequality," American Economic Review, 94 (3), (2004)

Cohen, L., A. Frazzini, and C. Malloy, "The Small World of Investing: Board Connections and
Mutual Fund Returns," Journal of Political Economy, 116 (2008), 951­979.

Dustmann, C., and U. Schonberg, "Expansions in Maternity Leave Coverage and Children's Long-
Term Outcomes," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4 (2012), 190-224.

French, K. R., and J. M. Poterba, "Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets,"
American Economic Review, 81 (1991), 222­226.

Granovettor, M. "The Strength of Weak Ties," American Journal of Sociology, 78, (1973), pp. 1360-
1380.

Gompers, P., A. Kovner, J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein, "Performance Persistence in
Entrepreneurship," Journal of Financial Economics 96, pp. 18-32.

Gompers, P., J. Lerner, and D. Scharfstein, "Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public Corporations and the
Genesis of New Ventures, 1986 to 1999," Journal of Finance, 2 (2005), 577 ­ 614.

Gompers, P., V. Mukharlyamov, and Y. Xuan, "The Cost of Friendship," Journal of Financial
Economics, 119 (2016), 626­644

Gompers, P., V. Mukharlyamov, E. Weisburst, and Y. Xuan, "Gender Effects in Venture Capital,"
forthcoming in Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (2020).

Gornall, W. and I. Strebulaev, "Financing as a Supply Chain: The Capital Structure of Banks and
Borrowers," Working Paper (2015).



                                                  26
Gottlieb, J., T. Richard, and T. Xu, "Experimenting with Entrepreneurship," University of British
Columbia working paper, (2016).

Goldin, C., and C. Rouse, "Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of `Blind' Auditions on Female
Musicians," American Economic Review, 90(4) (2000): 715-741.

Gruber, J., "The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits," American Economic Review, 84(3), 1994,
p. 622-641.

Hirsch, B., and D. Macpherson, "Union Membership and Coverage Database from the Current
Population Survey: Note," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56, (2003), 349-54.

Hunt, G., "Laboring for Rights: Unions and Sexual Diversity Across Nations," Philadelphia: Temple
University Press, (1999).

Hsieh, C. T. and E. Hurst, C. Jones, P. Klenow, "The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic
Growth," NBER Working Paper, No. 18693 (2013). Latest Update as of 2018.

Jasso, G., D.S. Massey, M.R. Rosenzweig and J.P. Smith. "The New Immigrant Survey 2003 Round
1 (NIS-2003-1) Public Release Data." March 2006. Retrieved September 10, 2018. Funded by NIH
HD33843, NSF, USCIS, ASPE & Pew. http://nis.princeton.edu.

Kaplan, S. N. and J. Lerner, "It ain't broke: The past, present, and future of venture capital," Journal
of Applied Corporate Finance 22(2) (2010), 36­47.

Kearney, M., and P. Levine, "Media Influence on Social Outcomes: The Impact of MTV's 16 and
Pregnant on Teen Childbearing," American Economic Review 105(12): 3597-3632.

Kerr, W. R., and W. F. Lincoln, "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms and U.S.
Ethnic Invention," Journal of Labor Economics, 28 (2010), 473­508.

Kerr, W. R., and M. Mandor, "Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship," Harvard Business
School Working Paper, (2015).

Klocke, U., "How to Improve Decision Making in Small Groups: Effects of Dissent and Training
Interventions," Small Group Research, June 2007 38: 437-468

Kossinets, G., and D. Watts, "Origins of Homophily in an Evolving Social Network," American
Journal of Sociology 115, no. 2 (September 2009): 405-450.

Layman G., and T. Carsey, "Party Polarization and Party Structuring of Policy Attitudes: A
Comparison of Three NES Panel Studies," Political Behavior, 24 (2002), 199-236.

Levey, R., and M. Mattsson, "The Effects of Social Movements: Evidence from #MeToo." Yale
University working paper. (2020).

McPherson, M., L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, "Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social
Networks," Annual Review of Sociology, 27 (2001), 415­444.


                                                   27
Redbird, B., "The New Closed Shop? The Economic and Structural Effects of Occupational
Licensure," American Sociological Review, 82(3) (2017), 600-624

Riegle-Crumb, C., C. Moore, and A. Ramos-Wada, "Who Wants a Career in Science or Math?
Exploring Adolescents' Future Aspirations by Gender and Race/Ethnicity," Science Education 95
(2010), 458-476.




                                                28
                        Figure 1: Female Ratio in Venture Capital, Law, and Medicine (1990-2019)

 This figure compares female participation entry rates in venture capital from 1990 to 2019 to female entry rates in law,
                                               medicine and labor force.

 70.00%


 60.00%                                                                               57.29%
            54.14%
                                                                                        49.64%
 50.00%     45.45%                                                                       49.72%
                                                                                   46.85%
                                                                                                         Female Bachelor
 40.00%     35.52%                                                                                       Female Labor
                                                                                                         Female Physicians
 30.00%                                                                                                  Female Lawyer

            26.58%                                                                                       Female VC
 20.00%
                                                                                         14.23%

 10.00%
          5.89%
  0.00%
           1990-1994     1995-1999      2000-2004     2005-2009     2010-2014    2015 and After


Female Bachelor Data is retrieved from https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/degreerecipients/, bachelor degree conferred to
female by year. Female Labor Force data is retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/cps/demographics.htm#women. Female
lawyer/physician data is retrieved from http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/data/pums.html, female
lawyers/physicians under 35 in 2000, 2005, 2010, and 2015. Female lawyer/physician in 1990 is estimated from female
lawyer/physician between age 35 and 50 in 2000.
Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA:
Version 10.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2020.




                                                           29
                           Figure 2: Female Ratio in Financial Service Industry after 2010

This figure compares female participation entry rates in venture capital from 2010 to 2019 to female entry rates in
                                       investment banking and consulting.
   50.00%
                                                                                              46.81%
                                              44.35%
   45.00%

   40.00%

   35.00%                                                             33.85%


   30.00%

   25.00%

   20.00%

   15.00%
                     11.42%
   10.00%

     5.00%

     0.00%
                   Female VC                Consulting          Investment Banking      Female Labor Force
         Data is retrieved from https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm




                                                         30
                            Figure 3: Industry Patterns of Female VCs


         This figure looks at female participation rate in venture capital by industry.



12.00%

                                                            10.67%

10.00%
                       9.16%


8.00%                               7.49%
                                                                         6.97%
                                                6.38%
           5.98%
6.00%                                                                                5.54%



4.00%



2.00%



0.00%
          Business    Consumer    Consumer Energy and Healthcare Industrial Information
             and       Goods       Services  Utilities            Goods and Technology
          Financial                                               Materials
           Service                 Female VC           VC Average

                                    Source: VentureSource




                                              31
                          Figure 4: Female Degree Recipients in Science and Engineering and MBA


 This figure plots the percentage of female science and engineering doctorate, master, and bachelor recipients as well as
                                                 female MBA recipients.

        70.0%


        60.0%


        50.0%


        40.0%                                                                                    Female SE Bachelor
                                                                                                 Female SE Master
        30.0%                                                                                    Female SE PhD
                                                                                                 Female MBA
        20.0%


        10.0%


         0.0%
                1989
                1990
                1991
                1992
                1993
                1994
                1995
                1996
                1997
                1998
                2000
                2001
                2002
                2003
                2004
                2005
                2006
                2007
                2008
                2009
                2010
                2011
                2012
                2013
                2014
                2015
                2016
                2017
                2018
Source: Female PhD, Master, Bachelor data is retrieved from http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/degreerecipients/#tabs-1.
Female MBA data is retrieved from National Center for Education Statistics, Master's degrees conferred by degree-
granting institutions, by sex, race/ethnicity, and field of study. http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2018menu_tables.asp




                                                            32
                                                  Figure 5: Aggregate Google Search Interest of "Ellen Pao" Over Time

                             This figure plots the aggregate search interest on the key word "Ellen Pao" using Google Trends API.




                                                       Source: Google Trends (https://www.google.com/trends)

                                       Figure 6: Percentage of Female Hires from Before and After Ellen Pao Trial by Google Trend

This figure plots time series of the percentage of female VC hires over time. The shaded area designates the time period
                                                 after the Ellen Pao Trial.


                                           Percentage of Female Hires in States by Google Search Interest
                                                 (Above vs. Below Median Google Search Trends)

                                   16.0%

                                   14.0%
      Percentage of Female Hires




                                   12.0%

                                   10.0%

                                    8.0%

                                    6.0%

                                    4.0%

                                    2.0%

                                    0.0%



                                                 Above Median - Average Female Hires        Below Median - Average Female Hires

         Source: Google Trends (https://www.google.com/trends). Hiring data from VentureSource


                                                                                       33
                             Figure 7: Female Founders Time Series


         This figure plots the percentage of female entrepreneurs from 1990 to 2019.

14.00%

                                                                                         13.03%
12.00%


10.00%


8.00%

          7.16%
6.00%


4.00%


2.00%
                                                                Feamle Entrepreneur

0.00%
         1990-1994      1995-1999     2000-2004     2005-2009      2010-2014     2015 and After

                                    Source: VentureSource




                                             34
                                                 Table I: Summary Statistics


This table reports summary statistics for the sample of US venture capitalists by gender from 1990 to 2019. There are a
few people whose gender cannot be identified (less than 1%), hence the sum of gender/ethnicity category is slightly less
                                          than the total number of observations.

                                                  Venture Capitalist
                                     Gender             Obs            % of total
                                      Male             12,325           90.69%
                                     Female            1,224             9.01%
                                      Total            13,571            100%


                                                Source: VentureSource



                                     Table II: Industry by Gender (Venture Capitalist)


This table summarizes VC industry by gender. The observation unit is VC deal-level. Non-US deals are excluded. Some
           deals cannot be matched to a specific industry, hence the sum of categories is slightly less than one.

                      Industry Group                       Obs           Male         Female
                      Business and Financial Service       9,993         93.89%       5.98%
                      Consumer Goods                       753           90.84%       9.16%
                      Consumer Services                    5,566         92.38%       7.49%
                      Energy and Utilities                 847           93.39%       6.38%
                      Healthcare                           13,555        89.23%       10.67%
                      Industrial Goods and Materials       1,062         92.47%       6.97%
                      Information Technology               21,463        94.32%       5.54%

                      Total                                53,248

                                                Source: VentureSource




                                                          35
                                         Table III: Undergraduate Education (Venture Capitalists)


  This table summarizes undergraduate education of venture capitalists in the sample by gender. The total number of
degrees is less than the total number of VCs because some VCs are missing education history in our sample either due to
                               they did not finish a certain degree or we cannot find it online.

                         Male Venture Capitalist                                                    Female Venture Capitalist
College                                            Count      Percent        College                                            Count   Percent
Harvard University                                    484      4.80%         Stanford University                                   55    4.49%
Stanford University                                   396      3.93%         Harvard University                                    54    4.41%
University Of Pennsylvania                            336      3.33%         University Of Pennsylvania                            47    3.84%
Princeton University                                  268      2.66%         Princeton University                                  28    2.29%
Yale University                                       263      2.61%         University Of California (Berkeley)                   21    1.72%
University Of California (Berkeley)                   234      2.32%         Yale University                                       20    1.63%
Dartmouth College                                     216      2.14%         Cornell University                                    17    1.39%
Cornell University                                    202      2.00%         University Of Virginia                                16    1.31%
Duke University                                       169      1.68%         Duke University                                       15    1.23%
Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                 163      1.62%         Georgetown University                                 15    1.23%
University Of Michigan                                159      1.58%         Brown University                                      14    1.14%
University Of Virginia                                150      1.49%         University Of Michigan                                13    1.06%
Brown University                                      143      1.42%         Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                 11    0.90%
University Of Ilinois (Urbana Champaign)               98      0.97%         University Of California (Los Angeles)                11    0.90%
University Of California (Los Angeles)                 97      0.96%         University Of Illinois (Urbana Champaign)             11    0.90%
Georgetown University                                  91      0.90%         Columbia University                                   10    0.82%
Brigham Young University                               84      0.83%         Dartmouth College                                     10    0.82%
Northwestern University                                84      0.83%         Northwestern University                               10    0.82%
Tufts University                                       83      0.82%         University Of North Carolina (Chapel Hill)             8    0.65%
Boston College                                         81      0.80%         Boston College                                         7    0.57%
Top 20 Total                                       3,801      37.71%         Top 20 Total                                        393    32.11%
                                                   10,079                                                                       1,224
                                                            Source: VentureSource




                                                                        36
                                         Table IV: Business School (Venture Capitalists) Continued


                           Male Venture Capitalist                                         Female Venture Capitalist
Business School                                      Count Percent    Business School                                  Count Percent
Harvard University                                     1,181 21.81%   Harvard University                                   111 20.71%
Stanford University                                      615 11.36%   Stanford University                                   76 14.18%
University Of Pennsylvania                               510  9.42%   University Of Pennsylvania                            60 11.19%
Columbia University                                      244  4.51%   Columbia University                                   24  4.48%
University Of Chicago                                    229  4.23%   Northwestern University                               20  3.73%
Northwestern University                                  210  3.88%   University Of Chicago                                 18  3.36%
Dartmouth College                                        127  2.35%   Yale University                                       13  2.43%
University Of California (Los Angeles)                   111  2.05%   New York University                                   10  1.87%
New York University                                      108  1.99%   University Of California (Berkeley)                   10  1.87%
Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                    103  1.90%   University Of California (Los Angeles)                 9  1.68%
University Of Virginia                                    94  1.74%   Cornell University                                     8  1.49%
University Of California (Berkeley)                       91  1.68%   Dartmouth College                                      7  1.31%
University Of Michigan                                    85  1.57%   Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                  7  1.31%
Duke University                                           73  1.35%   Boston University                                      5  0.93%
Insead                                                    66  1.22%   Insead                                                 5  0.93%
Yale University                                           50  0.92%   University Of North Carolina (Chapel Hill)             5  0.93%
Cornell University                                        42  0.78%   University Of Southern California                      4  0.75%
Indiana University (Bloomington)                          41  0.76%   Duke University                                        3  0.56%
University Of North Carolina (Chapel Hill)                38  0.70%   Indiana University (Bloomington)                       3  0.56%
University Of Southern California                         35  0.65%   University Of Virginia                                 3  0.56%
Top 20 Total                                           4,053 74.85%   Top 20 Total                                        401 74.81%
                                                       5,415                                                              536
                                                       Source: VentureSource

                                        Table V: Graduate School (Venture Capitalists) Continued


                           Male Venture Capitalist                                         Female Venture Capitalist
Graduate School                                      Count Percent    Graduate School                                  Count Percent
Stanford University                                      361  8.63%   Stanford University                                   33  7.53%
Harvard University                                       266  6.36%   Harvard University                                    28  6.39%
Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                    192  4.59%   Columbia University                                   18  4.11%
University Of Pennsylvania                               116  2.77%   Massachusetts Institute Of Technology                 13  2.97%
University Of California (Berkeley)                      105  2.51%   New York University                                   13  2.97%
Columbia University                                       88  2.10%   Northwestern University                               13  2.97%
New York University                                       79  1.89%   University Of Pennsylvania                            13  2.97%
Yale University                                           78  1.86%   University Of California (Berkeley)                   12  2.74%
Northwestern University                                   74  1.77%   Yale University                                       11  2.51%
Cornell University                                        70  1.67%   University Of Michigan                                10  2.28%
University Of Michigan                                    67  1.60%   Johns Hopkins University                               8  1.83%
Oxford University                                         59  1.41%   Cambridge University                                   7  1.60%
University Of Virginia                                    58  1.39%   Cornell University                                     6  1.37%
University Of Chicago                                     54  1.29%   Georgetown University                                  6  1.37%
University Of California (Los Angeles)                    46  1.10%   Oxford University                                      6  1.37%
Georgetown University                                     43  1.03%   University Of Southern California                      6  1.37%
Cambridge University                                      41  0.98%   University Of Virginia                                 6  1.37%
Duke University                                           37  0.88%   Boston University                                      4  0.91%
University Of Ilinois (Urbana Champaign)                  37  0.88%   University Of California (Los Angeles)                 4  0.91%
University Of London                                      37  0.88%   University Of Chicago                                  4  0.91%
Top 20 Total                                           1,908 45.61%   Top 20 Total                                        221 50.46%
                                                       4,183                                                              438
                                                       Source: VentureSource

                                                                37
                                    Table VI: Undergraduate Majors (Venture Capitalists) Continued


                          Male Venture Capitalist                                         Female Venture Capitalist
Undergraduate Major                                 Count Percent    Undergraduate Major                              Count Percent
Economics                                               829 11.83%   Economics                                             87 12.78%
Business                                                467  6.67%   Business                                              37  5.43%
Engineering                                             420  6.00%   Biology                                               29  4.26%
Electrical Engineering                                  321  4.58%   Finance                                               19  2.79%
Computer Science                                        222  3.17%   Chemistry                                             18  2.64%
Finance                                                 219  3.13%   Computer Science                                      18  2.64%
Accounting                                              166  2.37%   Political Science                                     18  2.64%
History                                                 155  2.21%   Political Science                                     18  2.64%
Mathematics                                             154  2.20%   Engineering                                           17  2.50%
Mechanical Engineering                                  139  1.98%   Electrical Engineering                                14  2.06%
Biology                                                 129  1.84%   English                                               14  2.06%
Chemistry                                               122  1.74%   Accounting                                            14  2.06%
Political Science                                       120  1.71%   Mathematics                                           12  1.76%
Science                                                 115  1.64%   Chemical Engineering                                  11  1.62%
Physics                                                  98  1.40%   Psychology                                            11  1.62%
Law                                                      62  0.89%   Science                                               10  1.47%
Chemical Engineering                                     61  0.87%   Physics                                                8  1.17%
English                                                  60  0.86%   Social Studies                                         8  1.17%
Government                                               57  0.81%   Law                                                    7  1.03%
Psychology                                               57  0.81%   History                                                6  0.88%
Top 20 Total                                          3,973 56.72%   Top 20 Total                                        376 55.21%
                                                      6,350                                                              681
                                                      Source: VentureSource


                                       Table VII:Graduate Majors (Venture Capitalists) Continued


                          Male Venture Capitalist                                         Female Venture Capitalist
Graduate Major                                      Count Percent    Graduate Major                                   Count Percent
Law                                                     493 33.22%   Law                                                   40 21.16%
Medicine                                                195 13.14%   Medicine                                              22 11.64%
Science                                                 156 10.51%   Chemistry                                             13  6.88%
Electrical Engineering                                  141  9.50%   Biology                                               11  5.82%
Computer Science                                         77  5.19%   Electrical Engineering                                 9  4.76%
Engineering                                              66  4.45%   Science                                                8  4.23%
Chemistry                                                62  4.18%   Economics                                              7  3.70%
Business                                                 58  3.91%   Computer Science                                       6  3.17%
Physics                                                  53  3.57%   Public Administration                                  5  2.65%
Mechanical Engineering                                   39  2.63%   Engineering                                            5  2.65%
Biology                                                  36  2.43%   Business                                               3  1.59%
Economics                                                35  2.36%   Finance                                                3  1.59%
Chemical Engineering                                     27  1.82%   International Relations                                3  1.59%
Accounting                                               26  1.75%   Pharmacology                                           2  1.06%
Finance                                                  23  1.55%   Physics                                                2  1.06%
Public Administration                                    15  1.01%   Mathematics                                            2  1.06%
Industrial Engineering                                   15  1.01%   Accounting                                             1  0.53%
Pharmacology                                             12  0.81%   Biochemistry                                           1  0.53%
Biochemistry                                             10  0.67%   Chemical Engineering                                   1  0.53%
International Relations                                  10  0.67%   Molecular Biology                                      1  0.53%
Top 20 Total                                          1,549 85.34%   Top 20 Total                                        145 76.72%
                                                      1,645                                                              189
                                                      Source: VentureSource
                                                               38
                                             Table VIII: Venture Capitalist Past Employment


  This table summarizes employment history of venture capitalists in the sample by gender. The total number of past
employers is less than the total number of VC because some people are missing employment history in our data and those
                                                     are dropped.

                        Male Venture Capitalist                                          Female Venture Capitalist
Past Employer                                      Count Percent    Past Employer                                    Count Percent
McKinsey & Company                                     142  0.74%   McKinsey & Company                                    18  0.91%
Morgan Stanley                                         118  0.61%   Morgan Stanley                                        15  0.76%
Goldman Sachs                                          114  0.59%   Goldman Sachs                                         13  0.66%
Merrill Lynch                                           83  0.43%   Citigroup                                              9  0.45%
Microsoft                                               79  0.41%   Ernst & Young                                          8  0.40%
Lehman Brothers                                         65  0.34%   Bain & Company                                         7  0.35%
Bain & Company                                          62  0.32%   Merrill Lynch                                          7  0.35%
IBM                                                     62  0.32%   Google                                                 6  0.30%
Deutsche Bank                                           59  0.31%   Microsoft                                              6  0.30%
Inc.                                                    55  0.29%   Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers                       5  0.25%
Credit Suisse                                           55  0.29%   Equity Capital Group                                   5  0.25%
JP Morgan                                               52  0.27%   JP Morgan                                              5  0.25%
Cisco Systems                                           49  0.25%   IBM                                                    5  0.25%
Google                                                  39  0.20%   Warburg Pincus                                         4  0.20%
Warburg Pincus                                          36  0.19%   Advent International                                   3  0.15%
New Enterprise Associates                               35  0.18%   Apax Partners                                          3  0.15%
Summit Partners                                         29  0.15%   Battelle Ventures                                      3  0.15%
Apax Partners                                           27  0.14%   Bay City Capital                                       3  0.15%
Battery Ventures                                        24  0.12%   Bessemer Venture Partners                              3  0.15%
Carlyle Group                                           23  0.12%   Deutsche Bank                                          3  0.15%
Top 20 Total                                         1,208  6.27%   Top 20 Total                                         131  6.62%
Sample Total                                        19,273          Sample Total                                      1,978
                                                      Source: VentureSource




                                                               39
                                                             Table IX: Hiring Level Regressions


The dependent variable is a binary indicator of whether a given hire is a woman. Google x Post is the interaction term between the state level Google
search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. Size of VC Industry x Post is the interaction between the number of venture capital
investments percapita made in that state during the ten years preceding the pre-Pao period from 2002-2012 and a dummy variable for the post-Pao
period. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.

                               (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)
                               Female Hire       Female Hire        Female Hire       Female Hire        Female Hire       Female Hire
          Google x Post        0.000694***       0.000283           0.000336*         0.000346*          0.000410**        0.000381**
                               (0.000108)        (0.000219)         (0.000175)        (0.000176)         (0.000199)        (0.000186)

          Size of VC                             60.96**            53.59**           52.95**            52.76**           51.66**
          Industry x Post
                                                 (23.06)            (20.71)           (20.52)            (21.78)           (21.61)

          VC Firm Size                                                                0.00000969         0.00000187        0.000161**
                                                                                      (0.00000913)       (0.00000902)      (0.0000626)

          VC Firm Age                                                                                    0.000970**        0.000117
                                                                                                         (0.000369)        (0.000332)

          Partner Count                                                                                                    -0.000109**
                                                                                                                           (0.0000430)

          Constant             0.0905***         0.0905***          0.932***          0.931***           0.923***          0.928***
                               (0.00516)         (0.00490)          (0.00830)         (0.00835)          (0.00906)         (0.00830)

          Industry FE          No                No                 Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
          Observations         3635              3635               3624              3624               3624              3624




                                                                           40
                                                      Table X: Hiring Level Regression Reduced Form


This table reports reduced form results of the hiring level sample. The dependent variable is a binary indicator of whether a given hire is a woman.
Independent variables are the interaction between state mandated maternity and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period and the interaction
between number of venture capital investments percapita made in that state during the ten years preceding the pre-Pao period from 2002-2012 and a
dummy variable for the post-Pao period. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**),
or 10% (*) levels.

                               (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
                               Female Hire        Female Hire        Female Hire        Female Hire        Female Hire        Female Hire
          Maternity x Post     0.000538***        0.000374***        0.000410***        0.000411***        0.000467***        0.000445***
                               (0.0000420)        (0.000127)         (0.000108)         (0.000110)         (0.000123)         (0.000114)

          Size of VC                              32.76              25.52              25.82              24.24              23.43
          Industry x Post
                                                  (19.72)            (18.15)            (18.32)            (19.21)            (18.50)

          VC Firm Size                                                                  0.00000929         0.000000839        0.000157**
                                                                                        (0.00000909)       (0.00000908)       (0.0000605)

          VC Firm Age                                                                                      0.00104***         0.000201
                                                                                                           (0.000387)         (0.000324)

          Partner Count                                                                                                       -0.000107**
                                                                                                                              (0.0000416)

          Constant             0.0889***          0.0891***          0.938***           0.938***           0.931***           0.935***
                               (0.00459)          (0.00469)          (0.00439)          (0.00437)          (0.00534)          (0.00414)

          Industry FE          No                 No                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
          Observations         3635               3635               3624               3624               3624               3624




                                                                             41
                                                             Table XI: Hiring Level IV Regressions


Panel A: This table reports regression result of female hires in the hiring level sample using a binary indicator of whether a given hire is a woman.
     
Google  x Post is the interaction term between the state level Google search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. In the instrumental
variable regression, the instrument is the interaction between state mandated maternity and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. Standard errors
are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.


                               (1)               (2)                 (3)               (4)              (5)                (6)
                               Female Hire       Female Hire         Female Hire       Female Hire      Female Hire        Female Hire
             
          Google x Post        0.000833***       0.000736***         0.000806***       0.000809***      0.000918***        0.000876***
                               (0.0000634)       (0.000250)          (0.000212)        (0.000216)       (0.000241)         (0.000224)

          Size of VC                             11.97               2.747             2.985            -1.672             -1.314
          Industry x Post
                                                 (26.50)             (23.84)           (24.10)          (25.67)            (24.57)

          VC Firm Size                                                                 0.00000929       0.000000839        0.000157**
                                                                                       (0.00000909)     (0.00000908)       (0.0000605)

          VC Firm Age                                                                                   0.00104***         0.000201
                                                                                                        (0.000387)         (0.000324)

          Partner Count                                                                                                    -0.000107**
                                                                                                                           (0.0000416)

          Constant             0.0866***         0.0870***           0.936***          0.936***         0.928***           0.933***
                               (0.00476)         (0.00501)           (0.00455)         (0.00454)        (0.00567)          (0.00437)

          Industry FE          No                No                  Yes               Yes              Yes                Yes
          Observations         3635              3635                3624              3624             3624               3624




                                                                             42
                                                   Table XI: Hiring Level IV Regression (Continued)

Panel B: This table reports the first stage results of the hiring level sample. The dependent variable Google x Post is the interaction term between the
state level Google search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. The independent variables are the interaction between state mandated
maternity and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period and the interaction between the number of venture capital investments percapita made in that
state during the ten years preceding the pre-Pao period from 2002-2012 and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. Standard errors are clustered
at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.

                                                                                 (1)
                                                                                 Google x Post
                                                         Maternity x Post        0.595***
                                                                                 (0.0779)

                                                         Size of VC              11106.3
                                                         Industry x Post
                                                                                 (37720.6)

                                                         Constant                6.210***
                                                                                 (1.862)
                                                         Observations            3635




                                                                            43
                                                           Table XII: Portfolio Level Regressions


The dependent variable is a binary indicator of whether a given founder of a portfolio company is female. Google x Post-Pao is the interaction term
between the state level Google search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. Size of VC Industry x Post-Pao is the interaction between
number of venture capital investments percapita made in that state during the ten years preceding the pre-Pao period from 2002-2012 and a dummy
variable for the post-Pao period. Female VC is binary indicator of whether a given venture capital investors is a female. Standard errors are clustered
at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.

                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)
                                   Female Founder     Female Founder     Female Founder     Female Founder     Female Founder      Female Founder
   Female VC                       0.0551***          0.0551***          0.0489***          0.0435***          0.0435***           0.0435***
                                   (0.0186)           (0.0189)           (0.0145)           (0.0134)           (0.0134)            (0.0136)

   Google x Post                   0.000255***        0.000282           0.000268           0.000292*          0.000300*           0.000304*
                                   (0.0000471)        (0.000218)         (0.000201)         (0.000165)         (0.000163)          (0.000157)

   Size of VC Industry x Post                         -3.900             -4.064             -6.812             -6.597              -6.653
                                                      (27.72)            (27.85)            (22.78)            (22.60)             (22.53)

   Google x Female VC x Post                                             0.000174           0.000126           0.000118            0.000119
                                                                         (0.000233)         (0.000220)         (0.000219)          (0.000218)

   VC Firm Size                                                                             -0.000127*         -0.0000483          -0.0000644
                                                                                            (0.0000680)        (0.0000997)         (0.000145)

   VC Firm Age                                                                                                 -0.000558*          -0.000558*
                                                                                                               (0.000285)          (0.000285)

   Partner Count                                                                                                                   0.000124
                                                                                                                                   (0.000517)

   Constant                        0.0713***          0.0713***          0.0718***          -0.0819***         -0.0812***          -0.0819***
                                   (0.00403)          (0.00405)          (0.00402)          (0.0153)           (0.0153)            (0.0139)

   Round FE                        No                 No                 No                 Yes                Yes                 Yes

   Industry FE                     No                 No                 No                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
   Observations                    20807              20807              20807              20792              20792               20792
   Adjusted R2                     0.005              0.004              0.004              0.020              0.021               0.021

                                                                          44
                                             Table XIII: Portfolio Level Regressions Reduced-Form: Maternity

This table reports reduced form results of the portfolio level sample. The dependent variable is a binary indicator of whether a given founder of a
portfolio company is female. Independent variables are the interaction between state mandated maternity and a dummy variable for the post-Pao
period. Size of VC Industry x Post is the interaction between number of venture capital investments percapita made in that state during the ten years
preceding the pre-Pao period from 2002-2012 and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. Female VC is binary indicator of whether a given
venture capital investors is a female. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or
10% (*) levels.
                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                  (4)                 (5)                   (6)
                                Female Founder Female Founder Female Founder Female Founder Female Founder Female Founder
 Female VC                      0.0545***           0.0544***          0.0544***            0.0415***           0.0415***             0.0415***
                                (0.0185)            (0.0183)           (0.0183)             (0.0120)            (0.0120)              (0.0122)

 Maternity x Post              0.000191***         0.000287            0.000287           0.000260             0.000266            0.000268
                               (0.0000499)         (0.000225)          (0.000225)         (0.000196)           (0.000192)          (0.000188)

 Size of VC Industry x Post                        -18.32              -18.32             -16.26               -16.06              -16.10
                                                   (37.61)             (37.61)            (33.67)              (33.15)             (33.05)

 Google x Female x Post                                                                   0.000153             0.000146            0.000147
                                                                                          (0.000221)           (0.000220)          (0.000218)

 VC Firm Size                                                                             -0.000121*           -0.0000422          -0.0000537
                                                                                          (0.0000707)          (0.000101)          (0.000144)

 VC Firm Age                                                                                                   -0.000554*          -0.000553*
                                                                                                               (0.000285)          (0.000286)

 Partner Count                                                                                                                     0.0000891
                                                                                                                                   (0.000480)

 Constant                      0.0710***           0.0709***           0.0709***          -0.0893***           -0.0888***          -0.0892***
                               (0.00407)           (0.00396)           (0.00396)          (0.0235)             (0.0232)            (0.0226)

 Round FE                      No                  No                  No                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes

 Industry FE                   No                  No                  No                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes
 Observations                  20807               20807               20807              20792                20792               20792
 Adjusted R2                   0.005               0.005               0.005              0.020                0.021               0.021


                                                                            45
                                                         Table XIV: Portfolio Level IV Regressions

Panel A: This table reports regression results of female founders in the portfolio level sample using a binary indicator of whether a given founder is a
woman. Google x Post is the interaction term between the state level Google search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. In the
instrumental variable regression, the instrument is the interaction between state mandated maternity and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period.
Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.

                                   (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
                                   Female Founder     Female Founder      Female Founder     Female Founder     Female Founder     Female Founder
   Female VC                       0.0546***          0.0544***           0.0549***          0.0506***          0.0507***          0.0507***
                                   (0.0187)           (0.0183)            (0.0174)           (0.0159)           (0.0159)           (0.0161)

      
   Google x Post                   0.000272***        0.000519            0.000520           0.000496           0.000507           0.000510
                                   (0.0000676)        (0.000409)          (0.000393)         (0.000354)         (0.000346)         (0.000340)

   Size of VC Industry x Post                         -31.06              -31.05             -28.21             -28.28             -28.40
                                                      (47.65)             (47.82)            (42.60)            (41.88)            (41.52)

   Google x Female VC x Post                                              -0.0000160         -0.0000903         -0.000100          -0.0000997
                                                                          (0.000298)         (0.000296)         (0.000298)         (0.000298)

   VC Firm Size                                                                              -0.000122*         -0.0000422         -0.0000517
                                                                                             (0.0000712)        (0.000102)         (0.000147)

   VC Firm Age                                                                                                  -0.000562*         -0.000561*
                                                                                                                (0.000289)         (0.000290)

   Partner Count                                                                                                                   0.0000738
                                                                                                                                   (0.000489)

   Constant                        0.0712***          0.0708***           0.0707***          -0.0920***         -0.0915***         -0.0919***
                                   (0.00419)          (0.00397)           (0.00360)          (0.0229)           (0.0226)           (0.0218)

   Round FE                        No                 No                  No                 Yes                Yes                Yes

   Industry FE                     No                 No                  No                 Yes                Yes                Yes
   Observations                    20807              20807               20807              20792              20792              20792
   Adjusted R2                     0.005              0.005               0.005              0.020              0.021              0.021

                                                                          46
                                              Table XIV: Portfolio Level IV Regressions (Continued)

Panel B: This table reports the first stage results of the portfolio level sample. The dependent variable Google x Post-Pao is the interaction term
between the state level Google search trend and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period. The independent variables are the interaction between
state mandated maternity and a dummy variable for the post-Pao period and the interaction between number of the number of venture capital
investments percapita made in that state during the ten years preceding the pre-Pao period from 2002-2012 and a dummy variable for the post-Pao
period. Standard errors are clustered at state level. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.

                                                                                (1)
                                                                                Google x Post
                                                 Maternity x Post               0.524***
                                                                                (0.0975)

                                                 Size of VC Industry x Post     26069.7
                                                                                (40222.4)

                                                 Constant                       2.624**
                                                                                (1.207)
                                                 Observations                   20807
                                                 Adjusted R2                    0.839




                                                                          47
Appendix Tables and Figures

Table A1: This table reports the regression results of the state-level Google search trend.The independent varibles are
Maternity Score which is the the level of state-mandated maternity benefits and Size of VC Industry which is number
of venture capital investments percapita made in that state during the ten years preceding the pre-Pao period from
2002-2012. Asterisks denote statistical significance at the 1% (***), 5% (**), or 10% (*) levels.

                                                (1)             (2)         (3)
                                                Google          Google      Google
                             Maternity Score    0.312***                    0.252***
                                                (0.0547)                    (0.0460)

                             Size of VC                         57725.5**   19355.9
                             Industry
                                                                (22385.5)   (22874.5)

                             Constant           25.98***        29.82***    25.84***
                                                (1.664)         (2.223)     (1.839)
                             Observations       48              48          48
                             R2                 0.597           0.420       0.621




                                                           48
