                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                IMMIGRATION AND REGIONAL SPECIALIZATION IN AI

                                     Gordon H. Hanson

                                     Working Paper 28671
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28671


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




I thank Savannah Noray for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Immigration and Regional Specialization in AI
Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 28671
April 2021
JEL No. J61,R12

                                           ABSTRACT

I examine the specialization of US commuting zones in AI-related occupations over the 2000 to
2018 period. I define AI-related jobs based on keywords in Census occupational titles. Using the
approach in Lin (2011) to identify new work, I measure job growth related to AI by weighting
employment growth in AI-related occupations by the share of job titles in these occupations that
were added after 1990. Overall, regional specialization in AI-related activities mirrors that of
regional specialization in IT. However, foreign-born and native-born workers within the sector
tend to cluster in different locations. Whereas specialization of the foreign-born in AI-related jobs
is strongest in high-tech hubs with a preponderance of private-sector employment, native-born
specialization in AI-related jobs is strongest in centers for military and space-related research.
Nationally, foreign-born workers account for 55% of job growth in AI-related occupations since
2000. In regression analysis, I find that US commuting zones exposed to a larger increases in the
supply of college-educated immigrants became more specialized in AI-related occupations and
that this increased specialization was due entirely to the employment of the foreign born. My
results suggest that access to highly skilled workers constrains AI-related job growth and that
immigration of the college-educated helps relax this constraint.


Gordon H. Hanson
Harvard Kennedy School
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gordon_hanson@hks.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
There is immense academic and policy interest in how artificial intelligence (AI) will affect
labor markets. Given the disruptive impacts of technological change on earnings and
employment in recent decades, such interest is understandable. The rapid pace of skill-
biased technical change after 1980 is credited with raising the earnings premia for workers
with college degrees (Katz & Autor, 1999), which contributed to greater income inequality
in many high-income countries. Amid these changes, the automation of routine tasks
shifted employment away from middle-skill jobs, leaving a more hollowed-out earnings
distribution in its wake (Autor & Dorn, 2013; Goos et al., 2014). The expanding use of
industrial robots (Acemoglu & Restrepo, 2020) and employment of contract workers via
Uber-like platforms (Abraham et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2019) are the most recent ways
in which new technology is upending the world of work. With the potential for AI to
convert many job tasks into algorithmic routines that can be performed by machines, yet
another wave of disruption may be on the horizon (Autor et al., 2020).
    In this paper, I turn my attention not to the labor-market consequences of AI but to the
forces governing where AI itself is being created. Three innovations have helped make AI
possible (Varian, 2018). One is new approaches to machine learning, another is advances
in high-speed and special-purpose computing, and a third is the proliferation of very
large data sets in digital format. Machine learning combines techniques from statistics
and computer science to predict outcomes or learn patterns from raw data. When embed-
ded in a system that feeds in data, applies domain expertise, and governs learning, AI is
created (Taddy, 2018). This process requires teams of computer scientists, data scientists,
engineers, network systems analysts, and programmers, as well as workers with knowl-
edge of the domains in which AI will operate. The need for high-speed computing arises
from the non-linearity and high dimensionality of prediction models, which require large
data sets for training, validation, and testing. Of the key inputs to AI, it is the final stage of
machine learning and systems engineering that appears to be the most location specific.
Creating AI involves computer hardware manufactured elsewhere, data collected from
disparate sources, and teams of specialists who tend to work in close proximity.
    If AI comes anywhere close to its forecasted potential, there will be an enormous mar-
ket for AI-related goods and services. Just as employment in new technology tends to be
highly geographically concentrated (Moretti, 2012, 2019; Bloom et al., 2020), it is natural
to expect AI-related activities to exhibit strong patterns of spatial agglomeration. Under-
standing emerging comparative advantage in jobs related to AI is therefore important for
evaluating how the technology will change national and global trade patterns. Trade in


                                                1
AI-related services is poorly measured, both because it is new and because revenue flows
from trade in technology services are hard to detect in conventional data. To study what
comparative advantage in the production of AI might look like, I take US commuting
zones as my unit of analysis (Tolbert & Sizer, 1996). A regional focus allows me to mea-
sure comparative advantage via abundantly available employment data rather than via
poorly documented trade flows. Because the US is at the frontier of innovations in AI
and IT, it is where regional comparative advantage in new technology is likely to mani-
fest itself first. Even with this focus, the newness of AI creates measurement challenges.
I study the occupations that appear to encompass AI-related activities, recognizing that
such categories will also include jobs in IT that do not necessarily involve AI. The analysis
is therefore subject to the maintained hypothesis that the spatial allocation of employment
in AI will resemble that in non-AI jobs that require AI-like skills.
     My aim is to understand regional changes in US AI-related employment over the last
two decades. Although machine learning dates to the 1950s (Cockburn et al., 2018), the
field did not begin to flourish until the 1990s. It was not until after 2000, and especially
after 2010, that it came into widespread use (Taddy, 2018). The first step in the analysis
is to identify occupations likely to be involved in the production of AI. Within occupa-
tions associated with STEM disciplines, I select the occupational codes that are likely to
contain AI-producing jobs based on their associated Census-defined job titles having at
least one term from each of the two following sets: computer, data, or software; and de-
sign/designer, engineer, research/researcher, or science/scientist. This procedure iden-
tifies 30 occupational titles, out of 707 total titles in the broader STEM category, as being
AI-related. The selected job titles include, for example, "artificial intelligence specialist"
and "information scientist." Using a wider filter identifies 146 AI-related titles. Because
employment can be measured at the occupational code but not at the title level, I focus
on the codes that contain these titles. Within these codes, I use results in Lin (2011) to
identify the occupational titles that were created after 1990, which is when advances in
AI began to accelerate. Following his work, I interpret new job titles as evidence of the
creation of new types of work.1 The creation of new work in AI-related occupations is a
signal of AI-related innovations in employment. To measure employment growth in AI
jobs over 2000 to 2018, I weight employment growth in AI-related occupations over the
period by the share of job titles within an occupation that were new as of 2000. By varying
the restrictiveness of the filters used to define AI-related jobs, I check the robustness of
the findings to the definition of AI-related activities.
   1 For literature that examines the creation of new work across all occupations and over longer time spans,

see Atalay et al. (2020) and Autor et al. (2020).


                                                     2
    An alternative way to measure employment in AI would be to use job postings that
explicitly mention the application of artificial intelligence. A rapidly emerging literature
takes this approach to examine changes in labor-market outcomes for the occupations
that appear likely to be disrupted by AI (see, e.g., Brynjolfsson et al., 2018; Felten et al.,
2018; Acemoglu et al., 2020; Bloom et al., 2020; Webb, 2020). Less work is devoted to
figuring out which jobs are involved the creation of AI and its applications. Acemoglu
et al. (2020) use job-posting data from Burning Glass to measure the expansion of jobs in
AI-producing activities. The advantage of these data is that job postings contain explicit
mention of skills related to AI (e.g., computer vision, deep learning, machine learning).2
Disadvantages include job postings being unavailable in complete form until 2010 and a
lack of information on the ultimate number of hires that result from postings. My focus on
employment growth in AI-related jobs since 2000 explains my choice to define AI-related
occupations using the the Census Bureau list of occupational titles.
    The second step in the analysis is to examine regional specialization in AI-related oc-
cupations. Two patterns stand out in the data. One is that regional specialization in AI-
related jobs is greatest in commuting zones that became hubs for technology jobs in the
1980s or 1990s. These CZs include Austin, Boston, Oakland, San Jose, Seattle, and Wash-
ington, DC. Their specialization in AI-related occupations was already substantial in 2000
and became more substantial still by 2018. These are the same cities in which high-tech
startups and patenting in high-tech domains are also concentrated (Chatterji et al., 2014;
Moretti, 2019). A second pattern is that increased specialization in AI-related jobs in tech-
oriented CZs is due primarily to the employment of foreign-born men. Whereas the CZs
in which native-born workers are most concentrated in AI-related jobs include cities spe-
cialized in government-funded military research (Colorado Springs, CO; Alexandria, VA)
and space research (Melbourne, FL; Huntsville, AL), those in which foreign-born men are
most concentrated in AI-related fields account for the largest AI employment clusters and
are the ones in which private firms dominate the high-tech landscape. Looking across the
origin countries of these foreign-born workers, there is wide variation in revealed com-
parative advantage in AI-related jobs. Comparative advantage in AI-related occupations
is strongest for workers born in East and South Asia and weakest for workers born in
Latin America and the Caribbean and the US. Although women account for a relatively
small share of employment in AI-related occupations, their revealed comparative advan-
tage in AI by country of birth is similar to that for men.
    It is well known that across occupations specialization varies among foreign-born
   2 Bloom et al. (2020) develop a conceptually related approach to identify new technology by tracking the
presence of key words or phrases in company earnings calls and Burning Glass job postings.


                                                    3
workers by their country of origin and that immigrants from specific countries tend to
concentrate in specific US cities (see, e.g., Patel & Vella 2013; Hanson & Liu 2017; Burstein
et al. 2020). These regularities are also manifest in the case of AI-related activities. Because
the skills required to create artificial intelligence and related innovations in information
technology are scarce and because some countries seem better than others at producing
workers capable of acquiring the required skills, the regions that are best positioned to
attract high-skilled foreign-born workers appear to be the ones most likely acquire com-
parative advantage in AI. Over the period 2000 to 2018, foreign-born workers accounted
for 54.6% of the increase in hours worked in AI-related activities.
    The third step in the analysis is to identify the factors behind regional employment
growth in AI-related jobs. Motivated by the importance of highly educated foreign-born
workers in AI-related employment, I model changes in regional specialization in AI as a
function of the change in college-educated immigrant labor supply confronting each re-
gion. I estimate the change in the CZ share of employment of prime-age college-educated
workers in AI-related occupations over the 2000 to 2018 period as a function of the pro-
jected local increase in college-educated immigrants. Inspired by the shift-share approach
of Altonji & Card (1991) and Card (2001), I predict the increase in the supply of college-
educated immigrants in a CZ using national growth in college-educated immigrants from
each origin country (outside of the CZ) and the initial-period share of the CZ in the em-
ployment of college-educated immigrants from each origin country (outside of AI-related
jobs). For men, the immigrant supply shock is strongly positively correlated with em-
ployment growth in AI-related occupations. This effect comes entirely from increased
employment of the foreign born. The impact of the immigrant labor-supply shock on the
employment of native-born men is small and imprecisely estimated, indicating that arriv-
ing foreign-born workers neither crowd-in nor crowd-out the native-born in AI-related
activities. Results are similar for the employment of women in AI-related occupations,
though coefficient magnitudes are smaller, consistent with relatively weaker specializa-
tion in AI-related jobs on the part of foreign-born females. I find similar results whether
using worker counts or hours worked to measure employment and whether using a nar-
row or a broad definition of AI-related occupations.
    Whereas in earlier decades computer power and data availability were binding con-
straints on the advance of AI, today those constraints seem closer to being slack. The
binding constraint is more likely to be on the supply of workers sufficiently skilled to
design the computing architecture, devise the learning algorithms, apply the domain sci-
ence, and construct the business systems necessary to create AI. Not surprisingly, build-
ing successful teams involves a global search for talent (Hanson & Slaughter, 2018). My


                                               4
results suggest that the US regions that are best positioned to attract foreign talent are
those that are acquiring a stronger comparative advantage in AI-related activities. Three
important actors in the global talent search are the US government, which regulates the
supply of visas to high-skilled immigrants (Lazear, 2021); US universities, which admit
many future US foreign-born tech workers as students (Bound et al., 2017, 2021); and US
technology companies, whose recruitment strategies also help bring skilled foreign work-
ers to the US (Kerr & Lincoln, 2010). The interdependent choices of these actors create a
business ecosystem in which innovation in AI has been able to flourish. However, it does
not appear to be the only ecosystem that is conducive to such innovation. To create AI,
China is taking a more state-directed approach, including trade protection for domestic
technology firms (Goldfarb & Trefler, 2018), and is relying mostly on domestic talent. In
terms of academic journal publications and awarded patents, its approach has had some
success (Xie & Freeman, 2020). When it comes to projecting my results to the world as a
whole, one needs to address how these different ecosystems will fare in global competi-
tion with each other, a subject on which my analysis is silent.
    The empirical results connect to several bodies of literature. A first is analysis of
the labor market consequences of regional labor-supply shocks related to immigration.
My finding that arriving immigrant workers neither crowd in nor crowd out native-born
workers in AI-related jobs is consistent with results in Burstein et al. (2020) across all oc-
cupations dedicated to tradable activities.3 Because arriving immigrant workers can be
absorbed into the production of exports (i.e., AI routines), they need not displace existing
native-born workers. A second body of related work addresses the occupational compar-
ative advantage of immigrants. Foreign-born workers from non-English-speaking coun-
tries tend to avoid jobs that are intensive in communication-based tasks (Dustmann &
Fabbri, 2003; Peri & Sparber, 2009; Oreopoulos, 2011), and to specialize STEM fields (Hunt
& Gauthier-Loiselle, 2010), especially those related to computing and engineering (Hunt,
2015). Specialization in STEM may account for the over-representation of the foreign-born
among US inventors (Kerr & Lincoln, 2010; Hunt, 2011; Bernstein et al., 2018) and for the
positive correlation between growth in college-educated immigrant labor supply and re-
gional productivity growth (Peri et al., 2015). The concentration of foreign-born workers
in AI-related activities is the latest manifestation of the propensity for immigrant labor to
specialize in technology-oriented fields in the US labor market.
    My analysis does not address why immigrants with skills applicable to AI are drawn
to the US. The concentration of leading IT firms in the US is one explanation for the at-
  3 SeeBorjas & Doran (2012) for evidence on how arriving Russian mathematicians displaced US scholars
working in subfields in mathematics in which Soviet-era research was relatively specialized.


                                                  5
traction. Another is that the highly educated are drawn to the US because it offers re-
wards to skill that are large relative to other high-income destination countries (Grogger
& Hanson, 2011). Nor does my work account for why workers from particular countries
appear to excel in AI fields. Hanson & Liu (2021) find that immigrants specializing in jobs
more intensive in abstract and quantitative reasoning tend to come from countries that
deliver higher-quality K-12 education, as evidenced by their students achieving higher
PISA exam scores. Similar forces may be at work regarding specialization in AI. It is
also unclear whether the specialization of foreign-born workers in AI will translate into a
comparative advantage in AI in their countries of origin. Whereas China is both a major
source of AI talent to the US labor market and the home to leading AI firms, India checks
the first box but not the second (at least as far as conventional data reveal). By implica-
tion, the presence of firms with core capabilities in computing (or protection from foreign
firms with such capabilities) may be necessary for AI to develop.
    In Section 2, I describe how I measure AI-related employment; in Section 3, I present
descriptive evidence on specialization in AI-related jobs across US commuting zones; in
Section 4, I present empirical analysis of how immigrant labor-supply shocks affect re-
gional employment in AI-related occupations; and in Section 5, I conclude.


2     Measuring Employment in AI-Related Occupations
Artificial intelligence distinguishes itself by requiring technical skills in computer science,
engineering, math, and related disciplines, and by being new (or at least new at a scale to
become detectable by employment surveys). My approach to measuring employment in
AI-related occupations keys on both of these features: the technical definitions of occupa-
tions and their newness. Of course, new work in AI-related fields may include new work
in IT that is not exclusive to AI. I therefore refer to my measures as capturing growth in
"AI-related" jobs rather than in jobs that are solely dedicated to AI.


2.1     Defining AI-Related Occupational Categories
The Census Bureau defines occupational codes by grouping together workers who per-
form similar tasks on the job. Over time, it modifies the codes, with most major revisions
occurring during census years. To measure employment growth for a uniform set of occu-
pations over a multi-decade period, I use Census occupational codes for 1990, as harmo-
nized by Dorn (2009), Autor & Dorn (2013), and Deming (2017).4 Each occupational code
    4 These   codes were modified slightly to accommodate work in military-related occupations.


                                                      6
has an attached set of jobs, which are defined in the Census Alphabetical List of Occupation
Titles. I use these titles to create filters to capture AI-related job growth.
    The creation of AI combines the efforts of workers with training across a wide range
of technical disciplines, including computer engineering, computer science, data science,
and software engineering. Supporting the workers who construct machine-learning algo-
rithms and design their implementation on dedicated computer hardware are specialists
who create and manage large databases, provide expertise in relevant domains (e.g., on-
cologists and radiologists for the use of AI to detect cancer), and develop and market AI
products, among other tasks. In order to focus on jobs that are core to innovations in AI,
I target the first group of occupations and not the second.
    I define the universe of potential AI-related occupations as those in STEM, using the
STEM definition in Hanson & Slaughter (2018). They take the Census Bureau categoriza-
tion of STEM jobs and remove those in which a relatively high fraction of workers lack
a college degree (e.g., lab technicians, computer support staff, drafters). The resulting
set of occupations includes all computer programmers, computer scientists, engineers,
mathematical scientists, network systems analysts, and life and physical scientists.5
    To define AI-related jobs, I apply a progressively finer set of filters to these broad
STEM categories, which creates four versions of occupations:

    · V.0 (version 0) occupations: I remove occupation codes from the Hanson & Slaugh-
      ter (2018) definition that appear to be related to administrative or supportive roles
      or that are tied to scientific disciplines that appear to be far removed from AI.6 The
      resulting set of modified STEM occupations had 707 titles in 2000, of which 137 were
      added between 1990 and 2000, as seen in Table 2.

    · V.1 occupations: I select from V.0 occupations those whose titles have at least one of
      the following terms: analyst (subject to restrictions), architect, designer/design, de-
      veloper, engineer, programmer, researcher/research, scientist, or statistician/statistical.
      The result set of potential AI occupations had 325 titles in 2000, of which 68 were
      added after 1990.

    · V.2 occupations: I select from V.1 occupations those whose titles have at least one of
    5 To this list, I add financial and management analysts, which may include workers engaged in quanti-

tative finance (an active area of AI). These categories are dropped in V.2, which contains broad AI titles.
    6 The excluded occupations, based on their 2000 Census codes, are: computer and information systems

managers, engineering managers, financial specialists (all other), computer support specialists, database
administrators, network and computer systems administrators, engineering technicians, computer opera-
tors, data entry keyers, and computer control programmers and operators. Among life and physical scien-
tists, I exclude agricultural and food scientists, chemists and materials scientists, conservation and forestry
scientists, and surveyors, cartographers, and mapping scientists.

                                                      7
          the following terms: designer/design, developer, programmer, researcher/research,
          scientist, and statistician/statistical; and engineer plus computer, data, or software.
          The resulting set had 146 titles across 18 occupation codes in 2000, of which 48 titles
          were added after 1990. This version is my broad definition of AI-related jobs.

    · V.3 occupations: I select from V.2 occupations those that have at least one term from
      the group {designer/design, researcher/research, scientist, or statistician/statistical}
      and one term from the group {computer, data, software}. The resulting set has 30
      titles across five occupation codes in 2000, of which 16 titles were added after 1990.
      This version is my narrow definition of AI jobs and is the baseline for the analysis.
      V.3 codes and titles appear in Appendix Table A.1.

Table 1 describes the application of the V.0 to V.3 filters to modified Census 1990 occu-
pation codes and shows the total number of job titles as of 2000 for each version. In the
empirical analysis, I use V.2 and V.3 occupations only.7
    Appendix Table A.1 lists job titles for V.3 occupations. This narrow definition includes
five Census 1990 occupations: computer hardware engineers, computer scientists and
systems analysts, computer software engineers, network systems and data communica-
tions analysts, and statisticians.8 The 30 AI-related job titles include artificial intelligence
specialist, information scientist, computer research, computer systems engineer, and soft-
ware applications engineer. Whereas the first two of these are AI-specific jobs, the latter
three are likely to span AI and non-AI-specific activities. Other job titles also appear likely
to include AI and non-AI specific jobs (e.g., software requirements engineer, systems an-
alyst engineer, computer engineer). By targeting job titles created after 1990, as I discuss
in the next section, my approach helps narrow the focus on AI-related activities, but may
do so imperfectly. The resulting measures of AI-related employment growth are therefore
likely to include some non-AI jobs in information technology that nonetheless require AI-
like skills. On the other hand, one may be concerned that designating just 30 job titles as
being AI-related is too narrow. For this reason, I also use the broader V.2 definition of AI
titles as a robustness check in the empirical analysis.




   7 Inunreported results, I perform analysis for V.0 and V.1 occupations and obtain similar results.
   8 Note that the 30 job titles designated to be AI-related exclude many other titles within the five occu-
pation codes that appear to be support roles, e.g., as indicated by the terms analyst, consultant, developer,
integrator, planner, specialist, tester, or writer.


                                                     8
             Version:                        V.0                         V.1                               V.2                                     V.3
         # identified titles:                707                         325                               146                                     30
                                           Analyst                     Analyst
                                           Scientist                   Scientist                         Scientist                  Scientist + Software/Data/Computer
                                Administration/administrator
                                    Researcher/research         Researcher/research               Researcher/research          Researcher/research + Software/Data/Computer
                                      Designer/design             Designer/design                   Designer/design             Designer/design + Software/Data/Computer
                                          Architect                   Architect
                                          Technician
                                        Programmer                  Programmer                        Programmer
                                          Developer                   Developer                         Developer
                                          Integrator
                                           Engineer                    Engineer            Engineer + Software/Data/Computer        Engineer + Software/Data/Computer
                                    Statistician/statistical    Statistician/statistical          Statistician/statistical
     Occupation title filters              Manager
                                     Planning/planner
9




                                            Health
                                         Consultant
                                          Specialist
                                         Supervisor
                                            Tester
                                           Installer
                                         Coordinator
                                            Officer
                                          Operator
                                         Investigator
                                              etc.


                                                      Table 1: Occupation Title Filters for AI-Related Jobs

    This table reports keywords used to define versions V.0 to V.3 of occupational titles. These keywords act as inclusion criteria, subject to discretion.
    In particular, "analyst" is used in a wide variety of occupation titles, mandating many exclusions (e.g., "forms analysts"). V.0 applies no keyword
    filters; its associated column reports representative keywords that appeared in many of its occupation titles. The V.1 to V.3 filters are based on the
    listed keywords. They exclude engineering occupations that appear unconnected to AI (agricultural, biomedical, chemical, civil, environmental,
    industrial, marine, materials, mechanical, mining and geological, petroleum, and other engineers).
                                                                                                         # AI Titles            # New, AI Titles
                                   Occupation                          Total # Occupation Titles     V.0 V.1 V.2 V.3          V.0 V.1 V.2 V.3
                          Computer programmers                                      22               22     18    18     0    11    10     10    0
              Computer systems analysts and computer scientists                    162               97     52    34    24    65    32     24    15
               Operations and systems researchers and analysts                      24               24      9    1      0     6     2      0    0
                  Engineers and other professionals, n.e.c.                         58               58     13    4      0    12     5      2    0
                      Atmospheric and space scientists                              19               19     17    17     0     3     3      3    0
                   Marine engineers and naval architects                            13               13     10    2      0     2     1      1    0
                             Electrical engineers                                   60               60     54    9      3     9     5      3    1
                Petroleum, mining, and geological engineers                         36               36      0    0      0     5     0      0    0
                      Mathematicians and statisticians                              27               27     13    10     3     3     0      0    0
                            Industrial engineers                                    46               46      0    0      0     5     0      0    0
                            Mechanical engineers                                    41               41     40    9      0     4     4      2    0
10




                             Chemical engineers                                     23               23     16    2      0     2     2      1    0
                         Physicists and astronomers                                 29               29     20    20     0     2     2      2    0
                             Biological scientists                                  53               53     11    11     0     2     0      0    0
                               Civil engineers                                      54               54      0    0      0     2     0      0    0
                            Management analysts                                     31               31      7    0      0     1     0      0    0
                            Aerospace engineers                                     42               42     37    9      0     1     0      0    0
                          Other financial specialists                               27               11      8    0      0     2     2      0    0
                   Metallurgical and materials engineers                            21               21      0    0      0     0     0      0    0

                                           Table 2: Occupation Codes and Numbers of Associated Titles

     This table reports the following values for each occupation that contains job titles in the V.0 to V.3 definitions: the total number of occupation titles
     as of 2000 (column 2), the number of column 2 titles that are potentially related to AI (columns 3-6), and the number of column 3-6 titles that were
     new as of 2000 (columns 7-10). The final two metrics are shown for V.0 (STEM occupations), V.1 (potential AI occupations), V.2 (broad AI-related
     occupations), and V.3 (narrow AI-related occupations) categories. The remaining, unlisted 310 occupations had zero potentially AI-related titles.
2.2    AI-Related Employment Growth
Although AI as a concept has been around for well over half a century, AI-specific occu-
pations did not become prominent enough to merit their own job titles in public surveys
until more recently. After slow progress in the 1970s and 1980s, advances in the field be-
gan to accelerate in the 1990s (Cockburn et al., 2018).9 I use the creation of new job titles
after 1990 as an indication of the intensity of innovation across occupations.
    The Census Bureau tracks how jobs change over time. To account for changes, it adds
and subtracts job titles from occupational codes, where a title defines a specific job per-
formed within an occupation. When the Census adds new titles to occupation codes, it
indicates that there are new lines of work within an occupation that appear at sufficient
frequency to merit official mention. Within my V.3 definition of AI-related jobs, after 1990
the Census added titles for artificial intelligence specialist and information scientist to the
computer scientists and systems analysts occupational category (see Table A.1), which
signified the expansion computer science jobs to include these fields. Lin (2011) uses the
addition of new titles to measure the creation of new work at the level of an occupation
code. Using his categorization, I define new AI-related work within an occupation using
the job titles that were created after 1990 (by his designation) and that are AI-related (by
my designation).10 I then measure employment growth in AI-related occupation codes,
using the percentage increase in job titles that are AI-related as weights.
    For occupation codes that register new titles in AI-related activities after 1990, Table 2
reports 1990 occupation categories in the first column, the total number of job titles for the
occupation in 2000 in the second column, the number of titles for V.0 to V.3 occupations in
2000 in the next four columns, and the number of potentially AI-related titles added after
1990 for V.0 to V.3 occupations in the final four locums. After 1990, there were 48 new AI-
related job titles added in V.2 occupations, representing a 50.0% (=48/(146-48)) increase in
job titles in the category, and 16 new AI-related job titles in V.3 occupations, representing a
114.3% (=16/(30-16)) increase in job titles in the category. For both definitions, the largest
increase in job titles was for computer scientists and systems analysts.


2.3    Alternative Approaches to Measuring AI
To provide context for my analysis, I discuss other approaches to measuring AI-related
production and work activities. Bloom et al. (2020) use earnings conference calls and
   9 Perhaps the signature AI achievement of the decade was IBM's Deep Blue machine-learning-based

system defeating world champion Gary Kasparov in chess in 1997.
  10 Ideally, one would like to track the creation of new occupational titles separately for each decade. Such

an exercise is unfortunately beyond the scope of this paper.

                                                     11
patent filings to document the rollout of 20 new technologies between 2002 and 2000. For
the 10 most-cited U.S. patents in each year between 1976 to 2016, they apply text analysis
to identify the most common technical bigrams (e.g., word pairs) that appear in the filings
for these patents. From the resulting bigrams, they identify those that appear most fre-
quently in corporate earnings calls over 2002 to 2020 and then collect these terms into 20
technology groups. Of these 20, one is artificial intelligence (whose associated keywords
are artificial intelligence, machine learning, neural networks, deep learning, predictive
analytics, and language processing). Three other new technologies include applications
of AI (driverless, machine vision, virtual reality), while two others are computing tech-
nologies that are used to create AI (cloud, disk drive).
    Using this categorization, they calculate the exposure of firms and occupations to new
technologies, where exposure to a specific technology is defined as the share of all techni-
cal bigrams that appear in earnings calls for a firm (from 2002 forward) or Burning Glass
job postings for an occupation (from 2010 forward) that are comprised of the bigrams as-
sociated with that technology. These data allow Bloom et al. (2020) to track exposure to
new technologies across U.S. industries, occupations, and regions. For AI, firm exposure
increased modestly from 2010 to 2015 and rapidly thereafter. As a technology diffuses
over time, the desired education level listed in job postings tends to decline.
    For my purposes, their measure of technology exposure, which is not yet publicly
available, represents a shock to labor demand that may be difficult to sign. For instance,
the two most exposed occupations to virtual reality are computer hardware engineers and
fine artists. One may imagine that the technology represents a strongly positive shock
for engineers but an ambiguous shock for fine artists (e.g., positive for those working in
digital media and negative for those working in non-digital media).
    Other work focuses on identifying occupations exposed to the job-displacing impacts
of AI. The measure in Felten et al. (2019) combines the Electronic Frontier Foundation AI
Progress Measurement dataset, which tracks technological progress across categories of
AI activities (e.g., image recognition), with crowdsourced assessments of how well these
categories apply to O*NET ability scales (e.g., depth perception), to measure the vulnera-
bility of occupations to AI, based on the importance of each ability scale to an occupation.
In two related approaches, Brynjolfsson et al. (2019) use crowdsourcing to evaluate the
suitability of machine learning for detailed work activities in O*NET, and then construct
an occupation-level measure of exposure to AI based on occupation intensities in these
activities, while Webb (2020) defines occupation-level exposure by identifying the overlap
between Google Patents Public Data and O*NET tasks. Acemoglu et al. (2020) calculate
exposure to AI at the establishment level by using the establishment intensity of employ-


                                            12
ment across occupations for each of these three AI occupation-exposure measures.
   These advances in measuring occupation or establishment-level exposure to the dis-
ruptive impacts of AI are welcome. None, however, appears to be directly useful for
detecting which occupations are most likely to be engaged in producing AI.


3      Preliminary Analysis
In this section, I examine which U.S. commuting zones are most specialized in AI-related
activities, in which commuting zones are AI-related activities most concentrated, and
how revealed comparative advantage in AI-related activities various across workers ac-
cording to their region of birth. I focus on prime-age workers (ages 25 to 54) who have
at least four years of college education. I measure employment as hours worked (weeks
worked last year × usual hours worked per week × sampling weight) for individuals not
in group quarters who had positive earnings in the previous year. Data are from the 2000
Census, the 2005-2009 ACS five-year sample (which I ascribe to 2009), and the 2014-2018
ACS five-year sample (which I ascribe to 2018).


3.1      CZ Specialization in AI-Related Occupations
Figure 1 shows the share of hours worked by the college-educated in AI-related occu-
pations for the V.3 definition across commuting zones. Unreported figures for the V.2
definition of occupations are very similar. The first panel shows the share of all CZ work-
ers employed in AI-related occupations, first for men and then for women; the second
panel shows foreign-born workers employed in AI-related occupations as a share of total
CZ employment; and the third panel shows native-born workers employed in AI-related
occupations as a share of total CZ employment.11 In each graph, the share of CZ em-
ployment in AI-related jobs for 2018 appears on the vertical axis and the corresponding
share for 2000 appears on the horizontal axis. To help identify the individual CZs in the
figures, Appendix Table A.2 lists the top 20 CZs in each of the six plots. Unreported plots
for employment shares using worker counts are very similar.
    Three patterns are apparent in the data. The first is that there is persistence in which
CZs are specialized in AI-related activities. In each figure, there is a strong positive cor-
relation between the share of CZ employment in AI-related jobs in 2000 and 2018, as
indicated by the clustering of points along the 45-degree line. Most points are modestly
    11 The   shares in the second and third panels add to the total shares shown in the first panel.




                                                         13
to substantially above the line, indicating a strengthening of regional specialization in AI-
related activities over time. The second is that across CZs and over time specialization of
men in AI-related activities tends to be much stronger than that for women. Male AI em-
ployment shares tend to be two to three times as large as those for women. This pattern
is consistent with the relatively greater specialization of men in STEM-related jobs across
occupations (e.g., Hanson & Slaughter, 2018).
    The third pattern relates to differences in native-born and foreign-born specialization
in AI-related activities across CZs. When considering all workers together in the first
panel, specialization in AI-related activities is strongest in three types of CZs: hubs for
high-tech industry (e.g., San Jose, CA), university towns (e.g., Bloomington, IL), and cities
specialized in government or military research (e.g., Colorado Springs, CO). When I sep-
arate foreign-born and native-born workers, we then see that when it comes to specializa-
tion in AI-related activities the two groups of workers tend to cluster in different places.
The share of foreign-born workers specialized in AI-related activities as a share of CZ
total employment is largest in conventional high-tech hubs (San Jose, CA; Oakland, CA;
Austin, TX; Boston, MA; Seattle, WA), and a few major cities (New York, NY; Washing-
ton, NY; Dallas, TX). For the native-born, by contrast, the share of their employment in
AI-related activities as a share of CZ total employment is highest in locations that have
government, military, or space-related research facilities (Colorado Springs, CO; Alexan-
dria, VA; Melbourne, FL; Huntsville, AL) or that are university towns (Bloomington, IL;
Provo, UT). For both men and women, the overlap of the top 10 CZs in terms of AI special-
ization by the foreign-born and native-born includes just two commuting zones, Wash-
ington, DC, and Raleigh, NC. Because government and military research tends to require
higher-level security clearances, it may be that native-born workers are better positioned
to take these types of jobs. Foreign-born workers appear to excel in taking up jobs in CZs
populated by private employers and non-governmental research entities.




                                             14
    Figure 1: Share of Hours Worked in AI-Related Occupations by Commuting Zone




                                                    Men, College+                                                                            Women, College+




                               2.5




                                                                                                                     2.5
                                                                               San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA




                               2




                                                                                                                     2
                               1.5                            Bloomington-Normal,
                                                        Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WAIL




                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                           Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
                        2018




                                                                                                                 2018
                                                               Washington Surrounding
                               1




                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                        San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA



                                                                                                                                          Bloomington-Normal, IL
                               .5




                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                                                Huntsville,
                                                                                                                                             Washington
                                                                                                                                          South             AL
                                                                                                                                                         Surrounding
                                                                                                                                                Arlington-Alexandria
                               0




                                                                                                                     0
                                     0        .5           1            1.5               2           2.5                      0         .5               1             1.5               2          2.5
                                                                2000                                                                                            2000


                                                                                   (a) All Workers



                                                    Men, College+                                                                            Women, College+
                               2




                                                                                                                     2




                                                                  San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                               1.5




                                                                                                                     1.5
                        2018




                                                                                                                 2018
                         1




                                                                                                                  1




                                                   Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
                                         Bloomington-Normal,   IL WA
                                           Seattle-Bellevue-Everett,
                                                 West New York                                                                                     San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                               .5




                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                     Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
                                                                                                                                   Seattle-Bellevue-Everett,
                                                                                                                                    West New York            WA
                                                                                                                                    Washington Surrounding
                               0




                                                                                                                     0




                                     0             .5             1               1.5                  2                       0              .5                 1                1.5                2
                                                                2000                                                                                            2000


                                                                  (b) Foreign-born Workers



                                                    Men, College+                                                                            Women, College+
                                                                                          Huntsville, AL
                                                                                         Provo-Orem, UT
                               1




                                                                                                                     1




                                                                                           South Arlington-Alexandria
                                                                                                      Colorado Springs, CO
                                                                                           Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL
                               .8




                                                                                                                     .8
                           .6




                                                                                                                    .6
                        2018




                                                                                                                 2018




                                                                                                                                                                              Huntsville, AL
                                                                                                                                                             South Arlington-Alexandria
                               .4




                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                             Bloomington-Normal, IL
                                                                                                                                                                 Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL
                                                                                                                                                                    Colorado Springs, CO
                               .2




                                                                                                                     .2
                               0




                                                                                                                     0




                                     0       .2          .4        .6              .8             1                            0        .2              .4         .6              .8           1
                                                                2000                                                                                            2000


                                                                   (c) Native-born Workers

The figures show the share of hours worked (in percentage terms) in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition)
for prime-age, college-educated men or women in a given CZ for 2000 and 2018. AI hours worked is
measured as hours worked in a given AI-related occupation times the share of all 2000 jobs titles in that
occupation that were created after 1990 and that were AI-related. Shares are for all workers in panel (a),
foreign-born workers in panel (b), and native-born workers in panel (c).
                                                                                                           15
3.2   Concentration of AI-Related Employment in Tech-Oriented CZs
Figure 2 shows the share of commuting zones in national hours worked by the college-
educated in AI-related occupations by the V.3 definition, where figures for the V.2 def-
inition are very similar. The first panel includes all workers, first for men and then for
women; the second panel includes foreign-born workers only; and the third panel in-
cludes native-born workers only. In each graph, the CZ share of national employment
in AI-related jobs for 2018 appears on the vertical axis and the corresponding share for
2000 appears on the horizontal axis. To help identify the individual CZs in the figures,
Appendix Table A.3 shows the top 20 CZs in each of the six figures. Unreported plots for
employment shares using worker counts are very similar.
    The largest hubs account for a substantial share of US AI-related employment. These
patterns are persistent over time, as indicated by the concentration of data points along
the 45-degree line. The top five hubs (Washington, Los Angeles, Oakland, Chicago, San
Jose) accounted for 23.1% of male AI-related employment in 2018 and the top 10 (top five
plus Boston, New York, West New York, Atlanta, Dallas) accounted 40.9% of male AI-
related employment in that year. Figures for women are similar, as are the CZs in which
their employment is concentrated. Consistent with overall patterns of spatial agglomera-
tion in high-tech activities (Moretti, 2012, 2019; Bloom et al., 2020), US employment in jobs
that require AI-like skills are highly geographically concentrated.
    As with regional specialization in AI-related jobs, it is again the case that the commut-
ing zones that account for the the largest clusters of AI-related employment differ depend-
ing on whether one is examining foreign-born or native-born workers. For foreign-born
men, San Jose (8.6% in 2018) and Oakland (8.1% in 2018) are the largest clusters of AI-
related employment, whereas for native-born men San Jose (1.8% in 2018) and Oakland
(3.4% in 2018) are numbers 12 and five, respectively. For native-born men, Washington,
DC (4.9% in 2018) and Boston (3.3% in 2018) are the largest clusters of AI-related employ-
ment, whereas for foreign-born men Washington, DC (5.6% in 2018) and Boston (3.7% in
2018) are numbers five and eight, respectively. This provides further evidences of differ-
ences in specialization patterns of the foreign and native-born when it comes to AI-related
jobs. We turn next to examine these specialization patterns in more detail.




                                             16
       Figure 2: Share of CZ in National Hours Worked in AI-Related Occupations



                                             Men, College+                                                                    Women, College+




                           8




                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                       Washington Surrounding




                           6




                                                                                                      6
                                                                        Washington Surrounding
                                                             Oakland-Fremont-Hayward,  CA                                                         Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
                                                              Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA                                            Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                         2018




                                                                                                    2018
                                                            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                          4




                                                                                                     4
                                                            Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL                                                     New York Surrounding/New     York
                                                                                                                                               Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL
                           2




                                                                                                      2
                           0




                                                                                                      0
                                 0       2             4               6                8                    0                2         4                   6                 8
                                                     2000                                                                              2000



                                                                      (a) All Workers



                                             Men, College+                                                                    Women, College+
                           10




                                                                                                      10




                                                                                                                                                                    Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
                                                                                     San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA                                                        San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                                                                            Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA
                           8




                                                                                                      8




                                                                           West New York                                                                        Washington Surrounding
                                                                                                                                                           West
                                                                                                                                                         Los    New York Beach-Glendale, CA
                                                                                                                                                             Angeles-Long
                             6




                                                                                                        6




                                                                    Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                         2018




                                                                                                    2018




                                                                 Washington Surrounding
                           4




                                                                                                      4
                           2




                                                                                                      2
                           0




                                                                                                      0




                                 0   2         4         6             8           10                        0            2       4        6                8           10
                                                     2000                                                                              2000



                                                       (b) Foreign-born Workers



                                             Men, College+                                                                    Women, College+
                           8




                                                                                                      8




                                                                                                                                                                     Washington Surrounding
                           6




                                                                                                      6




                                                                       Washington Surrounding
                         2018




                                                                                                    2018
                          4




                                                                                                     4




                                                      Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                                                   New York Surrounding/New York IL                                                   Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA
                                                          Chicago-Naperville-Joliet,                                                          Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL
                                                           Boston-Quincy, MA                                                            New York Surrounding/New York
                                                                                                                                               Boston-Quincy, MA
                           2




                                                                                                      2
                           0




                                                                                                      0




                                 0       2             4               6                8                    0                2         4                   6                 8
                                                     2000                                                                              2000



                                                        (c) Native-born Workers

The figures show the share of a commuting zone in national hours worked (in percentage terms) in AI-
related occupations (V.3 definition) for prime-age, college-educated men or women in a given CZ for 2000
and 2018. AI hours worked is measured as hours worked in a given AI-related occupation times the share
of all 2000 jobs titles in that occupation that were created after 1990 and that were AI-related. Shares are for
all workers in panel (a), foreign-born workers in panel (b), and native-born workers in panel (c).
                                                                                            17
3.3    Revealed Comparative Advantage in AI-Related Occupations
In this section, we consider the extent to which foreign and native-born workers differ in
their specialization in AI-related jobs. Existing literature indicates that across all STEM-
related occupations, the foreign-born show stronger patterns of specialization than do the
native-born (Hanson & Liu, 2017; Hanson & Slaughter, 2018). Here, we narrow the focus
to the revealed comparative advantage of the two groups in jobs that are related to AI.
    To begin, Figure 3 shows the share of hours worked by the prime-age and college-
educated in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) by worker place of birth. I group birth
countries into eight regions based on similarities in education levels and specialization in
STEM occupations: the US; Africa and the Middle East; China and Hong Kong; Europe,
Australia and New Zealand; India; Korea, Japan, and Taiwan; Latin America and the
Caribbean; and Other Asia.12 For men, the share of AI-related jobs (V.3 definition) held
by those born in the US declined from 75.2% in 2000 to 65.2% in 2018. This drop was due
almost entirely to the increased employment of men born in India, whose share of AI-
related employment rose from 7.8% in 2000 to 16.9% in 2018. Over 2000 to 2018, foreign-
born workers accounted for 54.6% of the increase in employment in AI-related jobs, with
workers born India alone accounting for 63.7% (or 35.3% of the nationwide increase) of
this increase. Patterns for women are similar. The share of native-born women in AI-
related employment fell between 2000 and 2018 (from 78.1% to 65.1%), with rising shares
for women born in India (from 4.8% to 16.4%) accounting for most of this decline.
    To characterize specialization in AI-related jobs, one needs to adjust for the overall
presence of workers from different national origin groups in the economy. I do so by
calculating revealed comparative advantage in AI-related employment, defined as,

                                                          ai / L ai
                                                         Ln
                                       RCAn = ln                      ,
                                                          Ln / L
where Ln ai / L ai is the share of national-origin group n in US employment (of the college

educated) in AI-related occupations (which is shown in Figure 3) and Ln / L is the share of
national-origin group n in national employment (of the college educated) across all occu-
pations. RCA values for men and women in 2000 and 2018 appear in Figure 4. Workers
born in India display the strongest revealed comparative advantage in AI-related employ-
ment. The log RCA value for Indian men of 1.37 in 2018 indicates that their employment
share in AI was 3.9 (= exp (1.37)) times their employment share across all occupations in
the US. Women born in India display an even stronger revealed comparative advantage
  12 See Appendix Tables A.6 and A.8 for the values reported in these figures as well as values for the V.2
definition of AI-related jobs.


                                                    18
in AI-related activities. For both men and women, China and Hong Kong is the region
with the next strongest RCA in AI-related jobs. Robustly negative log RCA values for
individuals born in the US and Latin America and the Caribbean indicate that among
the college educated their employment shares in AI-related activities were substantially
below their employment shares across all occupations.
    It its natural to wonder whether the revealed comparative advantage we observe on
the part of Indian and Chinese workers in AI-related occupations simply reflects a generic
comparative advantage across all jobs that are related to STEM disciplines. To investigate
this possibility, Appendix Tables A.4 to A.8 show employment shares and log RCA val-
ues for national origin groups using the V.0 definition of STEM-related jobs (707 titles),
the V.1 definition of potentially AI-related jobs (325 titles), and the V.2 broad definition
of AI-related jobs (146 job titles). These categories represent substantially larger employ-
ment levels than the 30 AI-related job titles in the V.3 definition. In 2018, workers born in
India accounted for 4.3% of total employment of college-educated men in the US, 10.9%
of employment in V.0 occupations, 12.1% of employment in V.1 occupations, and 14.6% of
employment in V.2 occupations, as compared to their 16.9% of employment in V.3 occupa-
tions. A similar patterns holds for women born in India, whose employment shares rise
from 2.2% among all college-educated workers to 9.3% in V.0 occupations and to 16.4% in
V.3 occupations. As we narrow the definition of jobs related to AI, the revealed compar-
ative advantage of workers from India in these occupations intensifies. For men born in
China or Hong Kong, their 2018 employment shares rise from 1.4% across all occupations
to 2.7% in V.0 occupations and to 3.4% in V.3 occupations, while for women born in the
region their employment shares rise from from 1.4% across all occupations to 4.3% for
V.0 occupations and to 5.3% for V.3 occupations. For workers born in India and China,
specialization in narrowly defined AI-related jobs is much stronger than specialization in
STEM-related occupations overall.
    Which factors account for the revealed comparative advantage of workers from China
and India in AI-related activities? One may be the quality of technical training in en-
gineering and math in the two countries. China has invested heavily in its university
training in STEM (Xie & Freeman, 2020), while India's technical institutes excel in engi-
neering and math. Strong engineering and math skills may have left workers from the
countries well-positioned to move into AI as the field has expanded.
    A related factor, which may be both a result of and a contributor to the countries' re-
vealed occupational comparative advantage in computer science and engineering, is the
exceptional capabilities of Indian and Chinese firms in technology fields. Indian firms,
such as Infosys, Tata Consultancy Services, and Wipro, are among the leading providers


                                             19
of technology-related services globally. These companies do not compete head to head
with Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Microsoft, or other major US tech companies.
Instead, they provide programming and other technical services to them. Indian tech
firms may offer a training ground for workers who wish to obtain visas to work in the
US. For its part, China has developed a set of national technology companies in Alibaba,
Baidu, and Tencent that occupy similar market niches as the big five US tech firms. Be-
cause of barriers to entry in China, the two groups of companies tend not to compete
head to head in their national markets. Like Indian companies, these firms may provide
a training ground for workers seeking to break into the US job market.
    A third factor may be US immigration policy. Prior to 1990, there were few individuals
of Indian or Chinese origin (either in absolute terms or relative to their national popula-
tions) in the US. As a result, few US residents would have been able to sponsor individ-
uals from these countries for family-based immigration visas, which by law account for
the strong majority of permanent visas that the US government gives out each year. Their
primary means of obtaining a US permanent legal residence visa, or green card, has been
through employer-sponsored visas, the supply of which equal a legally mandated 15%
of all restricted visas (i.e., visas other than those awarded to immediate family members
of US residents) awarded in a given year. The need to obtain employer-sponsored green
cards may have meant that the Indian and Chinese immigrants selected for admission
have been disproportionately likely to reflect the types of high-skilled workers in most
demand by US companies, including those in high tech.
    H-1B visas, which were introduced in 1990 and allow workers to hold a job in the
US for three years and to renew the visa for a second three-year stay, are claimed over-
whelmingly by workers in technology-related fields (Bound et al., 2017, 2021). These visas
operate effectively as queues for employer-sponsored green cards. One pathway to an
employer sponsored green card is first to obtain an H-1B temporary work visa, which
allows a worker to demonstrate her talents to a US employer before that employer un-
dertakes the time-consuming task of employment sponsorship. A second and related
pathway is first to obtain a student visa, then to complete an undergraduate or graduate
degree in the US, and finally to secure an H-1B visa. The need for many Chinese and
Indian immigrants to obtain an H-1B visa to gain entry to the US may create a selection
mechanism that favors workers who excel in jobs that require skills applicable to AI.




                                            20
                                                 2000                                                           2018

                          Native born                                                    Native born


                                India                                                          India


     Europe + Australia + New Zealand                               Europe + Australia + New Zealand


                           Other Asia                                            China + Hong Kong


                  China + Hong Kong                                                       Other Asia


            Latin America + Caribbean                                      Latin America + Caribbean


               Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                         Africa and Middle East


               Africa and Middle East                                         Korea + Japan + Taiwan


                                        0   .2   .4     .6   .8                                        0   .2   .4     .6   .8


                                                              (a) Men
21




                                                 2000                                                           2018

                          Native born                                                    Native born


                                India                                                          India


                  China + Hong Kong                                              China + Hong Kong


     Europe + Australia + New Zealand                                                     Other Asia


                           Other Asia                               Europe + Australia + New Zealand


               Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                      Latin America + Caribbean


            Latin America + Caribbean                                         Korea + Japan + Taiwan


               Africa and Middle East                                         Africa and Middle East


                                        0   .2   .4     .6   .8                                        0   .2   .4     .6   .8


                                                             (b) Women

     Figure 3: Share of Hours Worked by the College Educated in AI-Related Occupations by Worker Region of Birth
                                                            2000                                                                         2018

                                    India                                                                        India


                      China + Hong Kong                                                            China + Hong Kong


                               Other Asia                                                                   Other Asia


                   Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                             Europe + Australia + New Zealand


         Europe + Australia + New Zealand                                                       Korea + Japan + Taiwan


                   Africa and Middle East                                                       Africa and Middle East


                              Native born                                                                  Native born


                Latin America + Caribbean                                                    Latin America + Caribbean


                                            -.4   .1   .6          1.1   1.6    2.1                                      -.4   .1   .6          1.1   1.6   2.1


                                                                                (a) Men
22




                                                            2000                                                                         2018

                      China + Hong Kong                                                                          India


                                    India                                                          China + Hong Kong


                   Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                                       Korea + Japan + Taiwan


                               Other Asia                                                                   Other Asia


         Europe + Australia + New Zealand                                             Europe + Australia + New Zealand


                   Africa and Middle East                                                       Africa and Middle East


                              Native born                                                                  Native born


                Latin America + Caribbean                                                    Latin America + Caribbean


                                            -.4   .1   .6          1.1   1.6    2.1                                      -.4   .1   .6          1.1   1.6   2.1


                                                                               (b) Women

     Figure 4: Revealed Comparative Advantage in AI-Related Occupations for College-Educated Workers by Region of Birth
4      Regression analysis
In this section, I present the core empirical results of the paper. I estimate the change
in CZ specialization in AI-related activities as a function of the immigrant labor-supply
shock confronting the CZ, defined as local exposure to national growth in the number
of college-educated immigrants. The estimation covers the long-period change 2000 to
2018; results for stacked first differences over 2000 to 2009 and 2009 to 2018 are shown
in the appendix. This time period spans the slower growth in AI-related activities of
the early 2000s and the acceleration in growth after 2010. All specifications control for
regional business cycles and initial-period CZ demographic composition and exposure
technological change, manufacturing decline, and globalization.


4.1      Empirical Specification
The core empirical specification takes the form,

                                         v
                                        Ycg  =  g0 +  g1           zv
                                                                    cg +  Xcg +            cg ,                           (1)

where Ycg  v is the change in the share of employment for prime-age, college-educated
             
workers of gender g (female, male) in commuting zone c (722 CZs in the continental US)
in AI-related occupations of type v (V.3, V.2) over time period  (2000-2018).13 I use hours
worked to measure employment in the baseline analysis; results using worker counts
appear in the appendix. I estimate equation (1) separately for men and women. I measure
the employment change in the numerator of the dependent variable to be, alternatively,
for all workers, foreign-born workers, and native-born workers (such that the estimated
 g1 values for the latter two groups sum to that of the first group).
    The immigrant labor-supply shock, zv     c , is defined as follows (where all values are
gender-group specific and from here forward I suppress the gender-group index):

                           c Lnv     - Lnv        Ln          nv
                                                    c,2000 - Lc2000           c Ln        n            n        n
                                                                                 c2018 - Lc2018 - ( c Lc2000 - Lc2000 )
              zv c =          c 2000
                           c Ln
                                        c2000
                                     - Ln
                                              
                                               c Ln        - c Lnv
                                                                           
                                                                                               Lc2000
                                                                                                                           (2)
                       n      c 2000    c2000     c 2000            c 2000

                                   A                        B                                     C



This shock, which follows the logic of shift-share instruments for immigrant labor supply
developed by Altonji & Card (1991) and Card (2001), is the function of three terms. Term
C is the change in the employment of prime-age, college-educated individuals of a given
    13 Both
         the dependent variable, Ycgv , and the immigration labor-supply shock,  zv
                                                                                  cg , are expressed in
decadalized terms by multiplying them by 10/ t, where t is the length of time period  .



                                                                23
gender for national-origin group n outside of CZ c over period  (e.g., the change in the
number of college-educated Indians in the US living outside of Austin between 2000 and
2018), normalized by the employment of prime-age, college-educated individuals in CZ
c in the initial period. By leaving out quantities of CZ c in the numerator of this term,
I utilize information on immigration of group n, excluding those migrants who chose
CZ c as their destination (and may have been motivated by economic conditions in c in
making their emigration decision). This value therefore summarizes the generic attraction
of college-educated immigrants of national origin group n to the US over time period  .
    Term B is the share of workers from national-origin group n employed outside of
AI-occupation-group v that resided in CZ c in the year 2000. Excluding AI-related oc-
cupations in this share captures the initial-period attraction of CZ c to college-educated
immigrants from origin n that is generic to the CZ and not specific to AI-related activities.
Term A is the share of college-educated workers of national origin group n outside of CZ
c that worked in AI occupation group v in the initial time period. Excluding CZ c from
this value captures the generic specialization of national origin group n in AI-related ac-
tivities. Multiplying terms A, B, and C, and then summing across national origin groups
produces the imputed inflow of immigrant workers in AI-related occupations to a CZ,
which is based on the specialization of immigrants in AI-related occupations (outside of
the CZ), the concentration of different immigrant groups in the CZ (outside of AI-related
activities), and national growth in immigrant populations (outside of the CZ). The specifi-
cation in (1) is therefore equivalent to a first-stage regression in which the CZ employment
of workers in AI-related occupations is the endogenous variable and the projected change
in CZ immigrant labor supply is the instrument.
    The vector of control variables Xcg includes state fixed effects (to control for regional
business cycles); the sum of the shares in (2) (i.e., n Acn Bcn which follows the recom-
mendation of Borusyak et al. (2018) when using shift-share shocks as regressors); and CZ
shares for the year 2000 of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the
population, women in total employment, employment in manufacturing (to control for
secular trends in the sector), employment in routine-intensive jobs (to control for exposure
to automation and related forms of skill-biased technological change), and employment
in offshorable jobs (to control for exposure to globalization). The third group of controls
follows those used by Autor et al. (2013) in their analysis of local-labor-market adjustment
to trade-related, labor-demand shocks. I cluster standard errors by state and weight re-
gressions by CZ total employment (of prime-age, college educated workers of the given
gender group) in the initial period. Summary statistics for the dependent variables and
immigration-shock measures used in the analysis appear in Appendix Table A.9.


                                             24
4.2   Baseline Estimation Results
The baseline estimation results appear in Table 3, where AI-related occupations are de-
fined for the narrow V.3 job titles. All coefficients except those for the immigration shock
are suppressed. Consider first the results for all men, shown in column 3 of the first
panel. The coefficient estimate of 1.68 (t-value = 2.56) implies that when comparing CZs
at the 75th and 25th percentiles of exposure to the immigrant labor-supply shock, the more
exposed CZ would have a 0.08 (= 1.68 × (0.08 - 0.03)) larger annual percentage-point
increase in the share of college-educated men employed in AI-related activities. This in-
crease represents a full standard-deviation change in the dependent variable.
    Columns 1 and 2 decompose the dependent variable in column 3 into two terms: the
portion due to the increase in the employment of the foreign-born and the portion due
to the increase in the employment of the native-born. By construction, coefficients in
columns 1 and 2 sum to that in column 3. The highly precise coefficient estimate of 1.93
(t-value = 4.69) in column 1 implies that when comparing CZs at the 75th and 25th per-
centiles of exposure to the immigrant labor-supply shock, the more exposed CZ would
have a 0.09 (= 1.93 × (0.08 - 0.03)) larger annual percentage-point increase in the share
of college-educated men who are employed in AI-related activities and who are foreign
born, which represents a 1.2 standard-deviation increase in the dependent variable. By
contrast, in column 2 when the dependent variable is the change in native-born men em-
ployed in AI the coefficient on the immigration shock is small, negative, and imprecisely
estimated (  = -0.24, t-value = 0.75). This means that the immigrant labor-suppy shock
works to expand employment in AI-related activities entirely through increased employ-
ment of the foreign born. The shock neither crowds in nor crowds out the employment of
native-born men in AI-related occupations.
    The concentrated impact of immigrant labor-supply growth on foreign-born AI em-
ployment is notable because nationally foreign and native-born workers have contributed
roughly equally to the increase in AI employment. Of the mean change in the share of
men employed in AI over 2000 to 2018 in Table A.9, 54.6% is due to greater employment
of the foreign-born and 45.4% is due to greater employment of the native-born. Despite
this similar contribution, the two groups have responded quite differently to localized
high-skilled immigrant labor-supply shocks. Consistent with the descriptive evidence in
Figures 1, the factors driving expanded AI-related regional employment for the foreign-
born appear to be distinct from those for the native-born.




                                            25
     Table 3:
     Long difference (2000-2018): Immigration Impact on CZ Specialization in AI-Related Occupations (V.3)
                                                            AI (v3) hours worked by nativity group
                                      DV: 100 ×    10
                                                   t    ×             total hours worked

                                                    Men                                              Women
                                 Foreign-born      Native-born           All        Foreign-born     Native-born     All
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)
      Immigrant shock (v3)              1.927           -0.242         1.684                0.776         0.107     0.883
                                       (0.411)          (0.324)       (0.658)              (0.393)       (0.262)   (0.626)
      State FE                           Yes              Yes           Yes                  Yes           Yes       Yes
      Obs.                               722              722           722                  717           717       717
      Adj. R-squared                    0.797            0.380         0.541                0.695         0.528     0.304
      DV Mean                           0.076            0.063         0.139                0.019         -0.018    0.001
      DV 25th percentile                0.032            0.026         0.107                0.005         -0.040    -0.020
26




      DV 75th percentile                0.088            0.090         0.167                0.027         -0.002    0.017
      The dependent variable is the change in the share of hours worked in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) for the
     long difference 2000-2018 for men (columns 1-3) and women (4-6), shown separately for all workers (columns 5 and
     6), foreign-born workers (columns 1 and 2), and native-born workers (columns 3 and 4). The immigrant shock for
     AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) is defined in equation (2). The sample is individuals 25 to 54 years old with at
     least a bachelor's degree residing in one of the 722 commuting zones in the continental US. All regressions include
     a constant, the summed product of the weights used in the immigration shock, state fixed effects, and initial-period
     shares of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the population, females in total employment,
     employment in manufacturing, employment in routine-intensive jobs, and employment in offshorable jobs. Stan-
     dard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. Regressions are weighted by CZ employment (of prime-age,
     college educated workers of the designated gender) in the initial period.
    It is important to note that the results in Table 3 are not mechanical. CZs exposed to
a larger overall increase in college-educated immigration experience larger employment
growth specific to AI-related activities. Because AI-related occupations account for a very
small share of total employment, there is no automatic connection between the expanded
supply of college graduates in a CZ and greater specialization in AI-related activities. The
results for women, to which I now turn, confirm this reasoning.
    Estimation results for women appear in the second panel of Table 3. Impacts of the
immigration supply shock on AI-related employment of all college-educated women,
shown in column 6, are positive but imprecisely estimated (  = 0.88, t-value = 1.41). This
overall effect combines a positive but small and imprecise impact on the AI employment
of native-born women in column 5 (  = 0.11, t-value = 0.42) and a larger, positive, and
more precisely estimated impact on the AI employment of foreign-born women in col-
umn 4 (  = 0.78, t-value = 1.98). Given the differential specialization of men and women
in AI-related jobs--over 2000 to 2018, employment shares in AI-related occupations rose
by 0.14 percentage points annually for men but just 0.001 percentage points annually for
women--the immigration labor-supply shock has substantially larger impacts on male
versus female employment. By the same token, the specialization of foreign-born men
in AI-related activities means that increased access to college-educated male immigrants
drives a region to specialize more strongly in AI-related activities.
    Burstein et al. (2020) provide a theoretical framework that explains how exogenous in-
creases in the supply of foreign-born workers to specific occupations need neither crowd
in nor crowd out the employment of native-born workers, at least in jobs whose output is
tradable. Tradability implies that firms can absorb immigrant workers in an occupation
(e.g., using machine learning to create AI) by expanding exports to other regions. As long
as a region is small in the sense of its output changes having minimal impacts on prices
in national or global markets, then the expansion in the employment of the foreign born
need not displace any native-born workers, even where foreign and native-born workers
are perfectly substitutable on the job. Because AI-related occupations are highly tradable,
the results in Table 3 appear to be consistent with Burstein et al. (2020) logic.
    Beyond the tradable-sector adjustment mechanism, there may be other factors at work
that affect how foreign and native-born workers sort themselves across jobs related to AI.
AI has many applications in national defense, national intelligence, and space-related
research (Allen & Chan, 2017). Jobs in these applications, whether they be for private
employers, universities, non-profit research organizations, or the government, often re-
quire a security clearance. Native-born workers may be better positioned to acquire such
clearances. Although Census and ACS data do identify whether or not workers are em-


                                            27
ployed by government entities, the data are not sufficiently granular to identify which
private employers are engaged in activities related to national security. One task for fu-
ture research is to evaluate whether greater access to high-skilled immigrant labor leads
a region to adjust the types of AI activities in which it engages.


4.3   Robustness Checks
Next, I explore the robustness of the empirical results in three dimensions. First, I use
alternative measures of employment. Appendix Table A.10 displays results using worker
counts, rather than hours worked, to measure employment. For men and women and
all nativity groups, the results in Table A.10 are very similar to those in Table 3. The im-
plication is that the immigration shock has comparable impacts on the intensive margin
(hours worked) and extensive margin (worker counts) of AI employment.
    Second, I adjust the definition of time periods used in the analysis. Instead of the 2000
to 2018 long difference, I organize the data in stacked first differences over two time peri-
ods, 2000 to 2009, during which growth in AI was relatively slow, and 2009 to 2018, during
which growth in AI was relatively rapid (Bloom et al., 2020). The results, which appear
in Appendix Table A.12, are very similar in terms of coefficient signs and magnitudes to
those in Table 3. Shortening the time periods and expanding the sample size allows for
more precision in the coefficient estimation. For women, the impact of the immigration
shock on employment in AI-related occupations is now positively and strongly precisely
estimated for all women and for foreign-born women. The impact on native-born women
remains small and imprecisely estimated.
    Finally, I broaden the definition of AI-related occupations. The V.3 measure I have
used so far in the estimation defines AI jobs to comprise 30 job titles, of which 16 were
created after 1990. The broader V.2 definition includes 146 job titles, of which 48 were cre-
ated after 1990. Table 4 reports results for V.2 AI-related occupations using employment
measured as hours worked, and the 2000 to 2018 long difference. Appendix Tables A.11
and A.13 show corresponding V.2 results for employment measured using worker counts
and stacked first differences over 2000 to 2009 and 2009 to 2018, respectively. For men,
the results in Tables 3 and 4 are qualitatively similar. For either measure, the high-skilled
immigration shock has a strongly positive impact on employment in AI-related occupa-
tions, which is due entirely to the expanded employment of the foreign born. The results
differ in terms of magnitudes. The coefficient on the immigration shock for V.3 occupa-
tions is twice as large (1.95 = 1.93/0.99) as for V.2 occupations. For women, the change
in coefficient magnitudes is even more substantial. The immigration shock coefficient for


                                             28
foreign-born women in Table 4 is only one-third (0.36 = 0.78/0.28) as large as in Table 3
and is quite imprecisely estimated (t-value = 0.99).
    One interpretation of the finding that the high-skilled immigration shock has a larger
impact on employment shares in narrow versus broad AI-related occupations is that the
supply of skilled labor is a more binding constraint for former than for the latter. Relaxing
this constraint would then generates larger adjustment in V.3 than in V.2 occupations.
Because narrow V.3 job titles are associated with the more skilled jobs than the broad V.2
titles, this interpretation appears plausible.




                                             29
     Table 4:
     Long difference (2000-2018): Immigration Impact on CZ Specialization in AI-Related Occupations (V.2)
                                                            AI (v2) hours worked by nativity group
                                      DV: 100 ×    10
                                                   t    ×             total hours worked

                                                    Men                                              Women
                                 Foreign-born      Native-born           All        Foreign-born     Native-born     All
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)
      Immigrant shock (v2)              0.989            0.217         1.206                0.280         0.119     0.400
                                       (0.260)          (0.278)       (0.476)              (0.283)       (0.153)   (0.352)
      State FE                           Yes              Yes           Yes                  Yes           Yes       Yes
      Obs.                               722              722           722                  717           717       717
      Adj. R-squared                    0.675            0.478         0.398                0.637         0.534     0.466
      DV Mean                           0.102           -0.037         0.065                0.003         -0.130    -0.128
      DV 25th percentile                0.027           -0.145        -0.045                -0.029        -0.190    -0.196
30




      DV 75th percentile                0.141            0.046         0.157                0.028         -0.067    -0.065
      The dependent variable is the change in the share of hours worked in AI-related occupations (V.2 definition) for the
     long difference 2000-2018 for men (columns 1-3) and women (4-6), shown separately for all workers (columns 5 and
     6), foreign-born workers (columns 1 and 2), and native-born workers (columns 3 and 4). The immigrant shock for
     AI-related occupations (V.2 definition) is defined in equation (2). The sample is individuals 25 to 54 years old with at
     least a bachelor's degree residing in one of the 722 commuting zones in the continental US. All regressions include
     a constant, the summed product of the weights used in the immigration shock, state fixed effects, and initial-period
     shares of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the population, females in total employment,
     employment in manufacturing, employment in routine-intensive jobs, and employment in offshorable jobs. Stan-
     dard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. Regressions are weighted by CZ employment (of prime-age,
     college educated workers of the designated gender) in the initial period.
5    Discussion
The frenzy over artificial intelligence rivals that surrounding the space race of the 1950s
and 1960s. With applications of AI still in its early stages, observers are free to make
bold claims about how the technology will cause widespread job loss, usher in a future of
driverless transportation, render language barriers obsolete, or bring forth other massive
disruptions. Whatever the future of AI, it is likely to inspire heavy investments in new
ventures for some time to come. Where these investments occur will help determine the
future spatial distribution of activities in IT. Because AI is the current frontier of IT, which
locations host its creation is of enormous interest to government and industry alike.
    In the US, the regions that are best able to attract the computer scientists, data sci-
entists, and computer systems engineers who are most adept at machine learning and
related activities are likely to be the ones that acquire a comparative advantage in AI.
Globalization has made it possible to obtain advanced computer hardware just about
anywhere. Advances in digital communications now allow data to flow freely across
space. Because these two key AI ingredients are footloose, the location of their produc-
tion has little bearing on the location of AI production. The technical talent that creates AI
is also footloose. In the US, much of this talent is foreign born--and from India and China
in particular. The location choices of newly arrived immigrants, whether low-skilled
or high-skilled, tend to follow the location choices of previous generations of workers
from their origin countries. So too has it been in the case for AI-related workers. US
commuting zones that were most exposed to increases in the supply of college-educated
immigrants--based on the previous specialization patterns of these regions and their his-
torical attraction to foreign-born arrivals--have seen the largest increase in the share of
employment devoted to AI-related jobs. The lesson from this regularity is that access to
high-skilled immigration relaxes the talent constraint that limits the expansion of AI. The
US government, by regulating the volume and composition of high-skilled labor inflows
from abroad, in effect regulates the pace of growth in AI.
    The US model of innovation in AI--in which private-sector firms competing in open
markets make their own investment decisions and hire talent from around the world--
stands in contrast with that of China. China's tech firms enjoy protection from foreign
competition, receive subsidies for R&D, and benefit from the government's appetite for
facial recognition and other AI applications. One presumes that the talent constraint in
AI production applies in China, just as in the US. What remains to be seen is whether the
relative openness of the US to immigration gives it an advantage in the sector.




                                              31
References
Abraham, Katharine G, Haltiwanger, John, Sandusky, Kristin, & Spletzer, James. 2019.
 The rise of the gig economy: fact or fiction? Pages 357­61 of: AEA Papers and Proceedings,
 vol. 109.

Acemoglu, Daron, & Restrepo, Pascual. 2020. Robots and jobs: Evidence from US labor
 markets. Journal of Political Economy, 128(6), 2188­2244.

Acemoglu, Daron, Autor, David, Hazell, Joe, Restrepo, Pascual, et al. 2020. AI and Jobs:
 Evidence from Online Vacancies. Tech. rept. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Allen, Greg, & Chan, Taniel. 2017. Artificial intelligence and national security. Belfer Center
  for Science and International Affairs Cambridge, MA.

Altonji, Joseph G., & Card, David. 1991. The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
  Outcomes of Less-skilled Natives. University of Chicago Press. Pages 201­234.

Atalay, Enghin, Phongthiengtham, Phai, Sotelo, Sebastian, & Tannenbaum, Daniel. 2020.
  The Evolution of Work in the United States. American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 12(2), 1­34.

Autor, David, Mindell, David, & Reynolds, Elisabeth. 2020. The Work of the Future:
 Building Better Jobs in an Age of Intelligent Machines. MIT Work of the Future.

Autor, David H, & Dorn, David. 2013. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polar-
 ization of the US labor market. American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553­97.

Autor, David H, Dorn, David, & Hanson, Gordon H. 2013. The China syndrome: Local
 labor market effects of import competition in the United States. American Economic
 Review, 103(6), 2121­68.

Bernstein, Shai, Diamond, Rebecca, McQuade, Timothy, Pousada, Beatriz, et al. 2018. The
  contribution of high-skilled immigrants to innovation in the United States. Standford
  Graduate School of Business Working Paper 3748, en, 202019­20.

Bloom, Nicholas, Hassan, Tarek Alexander, Kalyani, Aakash, Lerner, Josh, & Tahoun,
  Ahmed. 2020. The Geography of New Technologies. Stanford mimeo.

Borjas, George J, & Doran, Kirk B. 2012. The collapse of the Soviet Union and the pro-
  ductivity of American mathematicians. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1143­
  1203.

                                              32
Borusyak, Kirill, Hull, Peter, & Jaravel, Xavier. 2018. Quasi-experimental shift-share research
  designs. Tech. rept. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bound, John, Khanna, Gaurav, & Morales, Nicolas. 2017. Understanding the Economic
  Impact of the H-1B Program on the US. In: High-Skilled Migration to the United States
  and its Economic Consequences. University of Chicago Press.

Bound, John, Braga, Breno, Khanna, Gaurav, & Turner, Sarah. 2021. The Globalization of
  Postsecondary Education: The Role of International Students in the US Higher Educa-
  tion System. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 35(1), 163­84.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Mitchell, Tom, & Rock, Daniel. 2018. What can machines learn, and
  what does it mean for occupations and the economy? Pages 43­47 of: AEA Papers and
  Proceedings, vol. 108.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Mitchell, Tom, & Rock, Daniel. 2019. Machine Learning and Occupa-
  tional Change. Unpublished manuscript, MIT.

Burstein, Ariel, Hanson, Gordon, Tian, Lin, & Vogel, Jonathan. 2020. Tradability and the
  Labor-Market Impact of Immigration: Theory and Evidence From the United States.
  Econometrica, 88(3), 1071­1112.

Card, David. 2001. Immigrant inflows, native outflows, and the local labor market im-
  pacts of higher immigration. Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), 22­64.

Chatterji, Aaron, Glaeser, Edward, & Kerr, William. 2014. Clusters of entrepreneurship
 and innovation. Innovation policy and the economy, 14(1), 129­166.

Chen, M Keith, Rossi, Peter E, Chevalier, Judith A, & Oehlsen, Emily. 2019. The value of
 flexible work: Evidence from uber drivers. Journal of political economy, 127(6), 2735­2794.

Cockburn, Iain M, Henderson, Rebecca, & Stern, Scott. 2018 (March). The Impact of Ar-
 tificial Intelligence on Innovation. Working Paper 24449. National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Deming, David J. 2017. The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1593­1640.

Dorn, David. 2009. Essays on inequality, spatial interaction, and the demand for skills.
 Dissertation University of St. Gallen no. 3613.



                                              33
Dustmann, Christian, & Fabbri, Francesca. 2003. Language proficiency and labour market
 performance of immigrants in the UK. The Economic Journal, 113(489), 695­717.

Felten, Edward, Raj, Manav, & Seamans, Robert Channing. 2019. The effect of artificial
  intelligence on human labor: An ability-based approach. Page 15784 of: Academy of Man-
  agement Proceedings, vol. 2019. Academy of Management Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510.

Felten, Edward W, Raj, Manav, & Seamans, Robert. 2018. A method to link advances in ar-
  tificial intelligence to occupational abilities. Pages 54­57 of: AEA Papers and Proceedings,
  vol. 108.

Goldfarb, Avi, & Trefler, Daniel. 2018. Artificial intelligence and international trade. Pages
 463­492 of: The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda. University of Chicago
 Press.

Goos, Maarten, Manning, Alan, & Salomons, Anna. 2014. Explaining job polarization:
 Routine-biased technological change and offshoring. American economic review, 104(8),
 2509­26.

Grogger, Jeffrey, & Hanson, Gordon H. 2011. Income maximization and the selection and
  sorting of international migrants. Journal of Development Economics, 95(1), 42­57.

Hanson, Gordon, & Liu, Chen. 2021. Immigration and Occupational Comparative Advantage.
 Tech. rept. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hanson, Gordon H, & Liu, Chen. 2017. High-skilled immigration and the comparative
 advantage of foreign-born workers across us occupations. Pages 7­40 of: High-skilled
 migration to the United States and its economic consequences. University of Chicago Press.

Hanson, Gordon H, & Slaughter, Matthew J. 2018. High-Skilled Immigration and the
 Rise of STEM Occupations in US Employment. Education, Skills, and Technical Change:
 Implications for Future US GDP Growth, 77, 465.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2011. Which immigrants are most innovative and entrepreneurial? Dis-
 tinctions by entry visa. Journal of Labor Economics, 29(3), 417­457.

Hunt, Jennifer. 2015. Are Immigrants the Most Skilled US Computer and Engineering
 Workers? Journal of Labor Economics, 33(S1), S39­S77.

Hunt, Jennifer, & Gauthier-Loiselle, Marjolaine. 2010. How much does immigration boost
 innovation? American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(2), 31­56.


                                             34
Katz, Lawrence F, & Autor, David. 1999. Changes in the wage structure and earnings
  inequality. Pages 1463­1555 of: Handbook of labor economics, vol. 3. Elsevier.

Kerr, William R, & Lincoln, William F. 2010. The supply side of innovation: H-1B visa
  reforms and US ethnic invention. Journal of Labor Economics, 28(3), 473­508.

Lazear, Edward P. 2021. Why are some immigrant groups more successful than others?
  Journal of Labor Economics, 39(1), 115­133.

Lin, Jeffrey. 2011. Technological adaptation, cities, and new work. Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 93(2), 554­574.

Moretti, Enrico. 2012. The new geography of jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Moretti, Enrico. 2019. The effect of high-tech clusters on the productivity of top inventors. Tech.
 rept. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Oreopoulos, Philip. 2011. Why Do Skilled Immigrants Struggle in the Labor Market? A
  Field Experiment with Thirteen Thousand Resumes. American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 3(4), 148­71.

Patel, Krishna, & Vella, Francis. 2013. Immigrant networks and their implications for
  occupational choice and wages. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(4), 1249­1277.

Peri, Giovanni, & Sparber, Chad. 2009. Task specialization, immigration, and wages.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3), 135­169.

Peri, Giovanni, Shih, Kevin, & Sparber, Chad. 2015. STEM workers, H-1B visas, and
  productivity in US cities. Journal of Labor Economics, 33(S1), S225­S255.

Taddy, Matt. 2018. The technological elements of artificial intelligence. Tech. rept. National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Tolbert, Charles M, & Sizer, Molly. 1996. US commuting zones and labor market areas: A 1990
  update. ERS Staff Paper Number 9614. Washington, DC: Economic Research Service. Tech.
  rept. Rural Economy Division, US Department of Agriculture.

Varian, Hal. 2018. Artificial intelligence, economics, and industrial organization. Tech. rept.
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Webb, Michael. 2020. The Impact of Articial Intelligence on the Labor Market. Unpublished
 manuscript, Stanford.

                                                35
Xie, Qingnan, & Freeman, Richard B. 2020 (May). The Contribution of Chinese Diaspora
  Researchers to Global Science and China's Catching Up in Scientific Research. Working Paper
  27169. National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                             36
 Occupation                              Occupation Title                        V.3 AI   New   Occupation                     Occupation Title                 V.3 AI   New
                                          Analyst \ n.s.                                                                   Chat room host/monitor
                                 Artificial intelligence specialist                                                      Communications consultant
                                   Business systems analyst                                                            Computer consultant, networks
                                        Computer analyst                                                                     Computer integration
                             Computer consultant \ n.e.c. or n.s.                                                       Data communications analyst
                                       Computer research                                                                      Engineer, network
                                       Computer scientist                                                            Info. technology specialist, internet
                                   Computer systems analyst                                                     Info. technology specialist, network services
                              Computer systems design analyst                                                                 Internet developer
                                  Computer systems designer                                                                   Intranet developer
                                 Computer systems, planning                                                                    Manager, website
                                  Computing systems analyst                                                       Multimedia telecom. systems integrator
                      Consultant, systems, computer or data processing                          Network                        Network analyst
                                  Data processing consultant                                    systems and                    Network architect
 Computer                      Data processing systems analyst                                  data com-                     Network consultant
 scientists                Data processing systems project planner                              munications                   Network designer
 and systems                  Digital computer systems analyst                                  analysts                      Network specialist
 analysts                        Engineering systems analyst                                                                   Network support
                              Health systems analyst, computer                                                            Network systems analyst
                                     Information scientist                                                               Network systems integrator
                                Information systems consultant                                                   Software consultant, data communications
                                Information systems specialist                                                          Software consultant, networks
                       Information technology specialist, general or n.s.                                                     Systems integrator
                     Information technology specialist, systems analysis                                                       Systems planner
                                  Methods analyst, computer                                                             Telecommunications specialist
                                   Scientific systems analyst                                                                    Web designer
                                  Software consultant \ n.e.c.                                                                  Web developer
                                 Supervisor, computer analyst                                                                   Web specialist
                             Systems analyst, computer systems                                                                    Webmaster
                              Systems analyst, data processing                                                               Analytical statistician
                                        Systems architect                                                                     Applied statistician
                         Technician, computer or computer laboratory                                                             Biometrician
                                    Applications developer                                                                      Biostatistician
                              C.N.E. (certified Novell engineer)                                                              Engineer, statistical
                                                                                                Statisticians
                              Computer applications developer                                                              Mathematical statistician
                               Computer programmer analyst                                                                     Sampling expert
                                 Computer specialist, software                                                                    Statistician
                         Engineer, Microsoft certified systems (MCSE)                                                         Survey statistician
                               Engineer, computer applications                                                              Time study statistician
                             Engineer, computer software \ n.e.c.                                                             Computer designer
                          Engineer, computer software applications                                                             Computer layout
                            Engineer, computer software systems                                                                Computer tester
                                                                                                Computer
                                  Engineer, computer systems                                                          Engineer, computer \n.e.c. or n.s.
                                                                                                hardware
                                   Engineer, software \ n.e.c.                                                          Engineer, computer hardware
                                                                                                engineers
                               Engineer, software applications                                                              Engineer, design \ n.s.
                               Engineer, software requirements                                                   Engineer, installation, computers exc. PCs
                                  Engineer, software systems                                                                  Microchip specialist
                                        Engineer, system
 Computer                            Engineer, system EDP
 software                          Engineer, systems analyst
 engineers     Info. technology specialist, software engineering, applications
                  Inf. technology specialist, software engineering, systems
                        M.C.S.E (Microsoft certified systems engineer)
                                         Program analyst
                                       Programmer analyst
                           Quality assurance specialist, applications
                        Quality assurance specialist, systems software
                                       Software QA tester
                               Software applications specialist
                                        Software designer
                                       Software developer
                               Software development specialist
                                        Software installer
                                  Software specialist, systems
                                          Software writer
                              Supervisor, software engineering
                                          Tester, software


         Table A.1: Job Titles Associated with AI-Related Occupations (V.3 definition)
This table lists all occupation titles that correspond to Census occupation codes that have at least one AI-
related title by the V.3 definition. Column 3 indicates whether a title is AI-related; column 4 indicates
whether the title was added after 1990.               37
                                              All workers                                                               Foreign-born workers                                                         Native-born workers

       Rank                 Men                                      Women                                Men                                       Women                               Men                                    Women

        1     San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA     San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA    San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA        San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA         Colorado Springs, CO                        Huntsville, AL

        2           Colorado Springs, CO                          Huntsville, AL            Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA               Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA            South Arlington-Alexandria                Colorado Springs, CO

        3          Washington Surrounding                     Colorado Springs, CO                  West New York                                West New York            Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL                Martinsville, VA

        4          Bloomington-Normal, IL                    Washington Surrounding             Washington Surrounding                    Washington Surrounding               Bloomington-Normal, IL            Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL

        5             Raleigh-Cary, NC                           Martinsville, VA                 Dallas Surrounding                    Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                Huntsville, AL                   Washington Surrounding

        6     Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL       Palm Bay-Melbourne-Titusville, FL         Austin-Round Rock, TX                              Edison, NJ                     Raleigh-Cary, NC                   Bloomington-Normal, IL

        7        South Arlington-Alexandria                     Raleigh-Cary, NC                  Boston-Quincy, MA                            Dallas Surrounding                  Provo-Orem, UT                   South Arlington-Alexandria

        8          Austin-Round Rock, TX                    South Arlington-Alexandria                 Edison, NJ                               Pike County, KY                    Binghamton, NY                          Raleigh-Cary, NC

        9              Binghamton, NY                  Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA            Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                      Raleigh-Cary, NC                 Denver-Aurora, CO                      Denver-Aurora, CO

        10           Denver-Aurora, CO                       Bloomington-Normal, IL                Raleigh-Cary, NC                            Boston-Quincy, MA               Washington Surrounding                      Binghamton, NY

        11              Huntsville, AL                           Binghamton, NY               Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL               Wilmington, DE-MD-NJ            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA          Austin-Round Rock, TX

        12     Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA                     Denver-Aurora, CO          Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA              Houston Surrounding            Rockingham. Strafford County, NH            Baltimore Surrounding
38




        13           Dallas Surrounding                        Dallas Surrounding                 Atlanta Surrounding               Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA        Austin-Round Rock, TX            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA

        14             Provo-Orem, UT                   Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA        Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL                        Columbus, OH                       Rochester, MN                       Dallas Surrounding

        15           Boston-Quincy, MA                         Boston-Quincy, MA           San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA                     Goldsboro, NC                   Dallas Surrounding             Hagerstown-Martinsburg, MD-WV

        16    Rockingham. Strafford County, NH               Austin-Round Rock, TX               Houston Surrounding                    Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL       Omaha-Council Bluffs, NE-IA            Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA

        17       Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                 Baltimore Surrounding        New York Surrounding/New York             New York Surrounding/New York              Baltimore Surrounding                   Boston-Quincy, MA

        18             West New York                         Wilmington, DE-MD-NJ                   Columbus, OH                               Atlanta Surrounding           Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                    Madison, WI

        19           Atlanta Surrounding                         Columbus, OH                   Bloomington-Normal, IL                      Sullivan County, MO                  Boston-Quincy, MA                      Chaffee County, CO

        20              Rochester, MN                            West New York                  Wilmington, DE-MD-NJ                             Kirksville, MO                  Winchester, VA-WV                          East Charlotte




                           Table A.2: Top 20 CZ's in Terms of Share of CZ Hours Worked in AI-Related Occupations, 2000

     This table reports the top 20 commuting zones in terms of the share of CZ hours worked in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) for prime-age,
     college-educated men and women in 2000. AI hours worked is measured as hours worked in a given AI-related occupation times the share of all
     2000 jobs titles in that occupation that were created after 1990 and that were AI-related.
                                                   All workers                                                                 Foreign-born workers                                                            Native-born workers

       Rank                    Men                                         Women                                 Men                                       Women                                 Men                                      Women

        1            Washington Surrounding                       Washington Surrounding          San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA        San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA         Washington Surrounding                   Washington Surrounding

        2      Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA           Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA           Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA               Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA                 Boston-Quincy, MA                           Boston-Quincy, MA

        3        Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA                     Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL             West New York                         Washington Surrounding              Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL             Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL

        4          Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL                     Boston-Quincy, MA           Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA                    West New York            Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA        New York Surrounding/New York

        5       San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA          New York Surrounding/New York              Washington Surrounding              Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA     Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA               Oakland-Fremont-Hayward, CA

        6              Boston-Quincy, MA                  Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA     New York Surrounding/New York             New York Surrounding/New York         New York Surrounding/New York           Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale, CA

        7                West New York                                 West New York                 Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL             Chicago-Naperville-Joliet, IL             Atlanta Surrounding                           West New York

        8       New York Surrounding/New York              San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA            Boston-Quincy, MA                            Boston-Quincy, MA                  Denver-Aurora, CO                           Atlanta Surrounding

        9              Atlanta Surrounding                          Atlanta Surrounding                  Dallas Surrounding                    Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                West New York                              Philadelphia, PA

        10             Dallas Surrounding                        Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA        Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                     Dallas Surrounding             Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                    Denver-Aurora, CO

        11         Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA                        Philadelphia, PA                  Atlanta Surrounding                          Atlanta Surrounding                Dallas Surrounding                    Seattle-Bellevue-Everett, WA

        12             Denver-Aurora, CO                             Dallas Surrounding                 Houston Surrounding                       Houston Surrounding             San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA        Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI
39




        13               Philadelphia, PA                   Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI       Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI                    Philadelphia, PA                    Philadelphia, PA                          Dallas Surrounding

        14      Minneapolis-Bloomington, MN-WI                       Denver-Aurora, CO                     Philadelphia, PA                  Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI     Minneapolis-Bloomington, MN-WI            Minneapolis-Bloomington, MN-WI

        15       Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI           Minneapolis-Bloomington, MN-WI         Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL             Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall, FL         Warren-Farmington Hills-Troy, MI              Baltimore Surrounding

        16            Houston Surrounding                           Houston Surrounding           San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA         Minneapolis-Bloomington, MN-WI             Baltimore Surrounding,                     Houston Surrounding

        17              Raleigh-Cary, NC                           Baltimore Surrounding          Minneapolis-Bloomington, MN-WI                       Raleigh-Cary, NC                 Houston Surrounding                San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA

        18            Baltimore Surrounding                           Raleigh-Cary, NC                   Denver-Aurora, CO                  San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA             Raleigh-Cary, NC                            Raleigh-Cary, NC

        19                Hartford, CT                                  Hartford, CT                   Austin-Round Rock, TX                             Hartford, CT                        Hartford CT                                Hartford, CT

        20      San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA                Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ                Hartford, CT                          Baltimore Surrounding              Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ              Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ




              Table A.3: Top 20 Commuting Zones in Terms of CZ Share of National Hours Worked in AI-Related Occupations

     This table reports the top 20 commuting zones in terms of the CZ share of national hours worked in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) for
     prime-age, college-educated men and women in 2000. AI hours worked is measured as hours worked in a given AI-related occupation times the
     share of all 2000 jobs titles in that occupation that were created after 1990 and that were AI-related.
Table A.4: Share of Hours Worked in All Occupations among Prime-Age,
College-educated Workers by Region of Birth


                                                    2000   2004-09   2014-18
 Men
 Native born                                        86.5     83.1      81.5
 Latin America + Caribbean                           2.5      3.7       3.9
 Africa and Middle East                              1.4      1.8       2.1
 China + Hong Kong                                   0.9      1.2       1.4
 India                                               2.1      3.1       4.3
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                              1.3      1.4       1.3
 Other Asia                                          1.9      2.2       2.1
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada           3.4      3.6       3.5
 Women
 Native born                                        88.4     85.6      84.5
 Latin America + Caribbean                           2.5      3.6       4.0
 Africa and Middle East                              0.7      0.9       1.2
 China + Hong Kong                                   0.9      1.2       1.4
 India                                               1.1      1.6       2.2
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                              1.1      1.3       1.1
 Other Asia                                          2.5      2.7       2.5
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada           2.7      3.1       3.0
 Each cell reports the fraction of hours worked by a particular national origin
group for men and women with at least a college education and who are 25 to
54 years old. The data are from the 2000 Census and the 2005-2009 and 2014-2018
five-year ACS samples.




                                              40
Table A.5: Share of Hours Worked in V.0 and V.1 Occupations among Prime-Age, College-educated
Workers by Region of Birth

                                                            V.0 Hours                 V.1 Hours
                                                    2000    2004-09 2014-18      2000 2004-09 2014-18
 Men
 Native born                                         80.2     75.7      72.9     78.8     74.2       71.4
 Latin America + Caribbean                           1.9      2.5        3.0      1.9      2.4        2.9
 Africa and Middle East                              1.5      1.8        2.1      1.5      1.7        2.1
 China + Hong Kong                                   2.1      2.5        2.7      2.4      2.8        2.9
 India                                               5.0      7.8       10.9      5.7      8.9       12.1
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                              1.7      1.9        1.5      1.8      2.0        1.6
 Other Asia                                          2.9      3.2        2.6      3.0      3.3        2.7
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada           4.6      4.7       4.3       4.8      4.7        4.3
 Women
 Native born                                         80.6     75.9      73.1     79.0     73.9       71.8
 Latin America + Caribbean                           2.0      2.7       3.0       2.0      2.8        3.1
 Africa and Middle East                              0.8      1.1       1.3       0.8      1.2        1.3
 China + Hong Kong                                   3.5      4.2       4.3       4.0      4.7        4.5
 India                                               3.3      6.0       9.3       3.8      7.0       10.2
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                              2.3      2.1       1.6       2.6      2.3        1.7
 Other Asia                                          3.3      3.6       3.3       3.4      3.9        3.5
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada           4.2      4.4       4.0       4.2      4.4        3.8
 Each cell reports the fraction of hours worked by a particular national origin group for men and women with
at least a college education and who are 25 to 54 years old in V.0 or V.1 occupations. Data are from the 2000
Census and the 2005-2009 and 2014-2018 five-year ACS samples.




                                                     41
Table A.6: Share of Hours Worked in V.2 and V.3 Occupations among Prime-Age, College-educated
Workers by Region of Birth

                                                            V.2 Hours                 V.3 Hours
                                                    2000    2004-09 2014-18      2000 2004-09 2014-18
 Men
 Native born                                         76.6     71.3      67.5     75.2     68.8       65.2
 Latin America + Caribbean                           2.0       2.4      2.9       2.1      2.4        3.0
 Africa and Middle East                              1.6       1.8      2.2       1.6      1.9        2.3
 China + Hong Kong                                   2.7       3.2      3.4       3.0      3.3        3.4
 India                                               6.6      10.4      14.6      7.8     12.6       16.9
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                              2.0       2.2      1.7       2.0      2.1        1.6
 Other Asia                                          3.4       3.6      3.1       3.4      3.7        3.0
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada           5.2      5.2       4.6       5.0      5.2        4.7
 Women
 Native born                                         76.4     70.3      65.1     78.1     70.8       65.1
 Latin America + Caribbean                           1.9      2.2        2.8      1.9      2.2        2.7
 Africa and Middle East                              0.9      1.2        1.4      0.8      1.2        1.4
 China + Hong Kong                                   4.9      5.7        5.6      4.5      5.5        5.3
 India                                               4.7      9.2       15.4      4.8     10.2       16.4
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                              2.9      2.4        1.8      2.8      2.2        1.8
 Other Asia                                          3.6      4.3        4.1      3.4      3.9        3.8
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada           4.7      4.7       3.9       3.7      4.0        3.6
 Each cell reports the fraction of hours worked by a particular national origin group for men and women with
at least a college education and who are 25 to 54 years old in V.2 or V.3 occupations. Data are from the 2000
Census and the 2005-2009 and 2014-2018 five-year ACS samples.




                                                     42
Table A.7: Revealed Comparative Advantage in V.0 and V.1 Occupations by Worker Region of Birth

                                                                       V.0 Hours                             V.1 Hours
                                                         2000          2004-09 2014-18               2000    2004-09 2014-18
 Men
 Native born                                             -0.08           -0.09               -0.11   -0.09    -0.11   -0.13
 Latin America + Caribbean                               -0.27           -0.39               -0.26   -0.25    -0.42   -0.28
 Africa and Middle East                                  0.05            -0.00               -0.01   0.03     -0.04   -0.01
 China + Hong Kong                                       0.82            0.76                0.67    0.94     0.85     0.75
 India                                                   0.89            0.94                0.93    1.02     1.07     1.04
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                  0.29            0.28                0.19    0.36     0.33     0.23
 Other Asia                                              0.44            0.36                0.23    0.48     0.39     0.25
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada               0.30            0.26                0.20    0.34     0.28     0.20
 Women
 Native born                                             -0.09           -0.12               -0.15   -0.11    -0.15   -0.16
 Latin America + Caribbean                               -0.23           -0.28               -0.26   -0.22    -0.26   -0.25
 Africa and Middle East                                  0.17            0.17                0.12    0.19     0.20    0.12
 China + Hong Kong                                       1.35            1.29                1.10    1.49     1.39    1.13
 India                                                   1.08            1.35                1.43    1.23     1.50    1.53
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                  0.70            0.51                0.36    0.83     0.60    0.43
 Other Asia                                              0.28            0.27                0.27    0.34     0.35    0.32
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada               0.43            0.34                0.30    0.44     0.34    0.26
Calculation is:
                                                         (L    kgost   )/    (L   gost   )
                                                       o O v             o O v
                                       RCAkgst = ln(                                         )
                                                         (L    kgost   )/  ( Lgost )
                                                       o O               o O

where L is hours worked and     Ov  is the set of occupations with a positive share of new STEM or potential AI
work according to V.0 or V.1. This is calculated for each year (t), gender ( g), and national origin group (k) among
either men or women 25 to 54 years old with at least a college education. Data are from the 2000 Census and
the 2005-2009 and 2014-2018 five-year ACS samples.




                                                         43
Table A.8: Revealed Comparative Advantage in V.2 and V.3 Occupations by Worker Region of Birth

                                                                       V.2 Hours                             V.3 Hours
                                                         2000          2004-09 2014-18               2000    2004-09 2014-18
 Men
 Native born                                             -0.12           -0.15               -0.19   -0.14    -0.19   -0.22
 Latin America + Caribbean                               -0.21           -0.43               -0.27   -0.18    -0.42   -0.27
 Africa and Middle East                                  0.09            0.02                0.04    0.11     0.07    0.08
 China + Hong Kong                                       1.06            0.99                0.90    1.14     1.03    0.90
 India                                                   1.15            1.22                1.22    1.33     1.42    1.37
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                  0.46            0.42                0.31    0.48     0.38    0.25
 Other Asia                                              0.58            0.48                0.37    0.58     0.52    0.36
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada               0.43            0.37                0.26    0.38     0.37    0.27
 Women
 Native born                                             -0.15           -0.20               -0.26   -0.12    -0.19   -0.26
 Latin America + Caribbean                               -0.27           -0.48               -0.35   -0.29    -0.50   -0.40
 Africa and Middle East                                  0.21            0.26                0.18    0.20     0.25    0.17
 China + Hong Kong                                       1.67            1.59                1.35    1.60     1.56    1.29
 India                                                   1.45            1.77                1.94    1.47     1.87    2.00
 Korea + Japan + Taiwan                                  0.95            0.65                0.46    0.89     0.56    0.46
 Other Asia                                              0.38            0.44                0.47    0.32     0.35    0.40
 Europe + Australia + New Zealand + Canada               0.54            0.42                0.26    0.29     0.26    0.19
Calculation is:
                                                         (L    kgost   )/    (L   gost   )
                                                       o O v             o O v
                                       RCAkgst = ln(                                         )
                                                         (L    kgost   )/  ( Lgost )
                                                       o O               o O

where L is hours worked and     Ov  is the set of occupations with a positive share of new STEM or potential AI
work according to V.2 or V.3. This is calculated for each year (t), gender ( g), and national origin group (k) among
either men or women 25 to 54 years old with at least a college education. Data are from the 2000 Census and
the 2005-2009 and 2014-2018 five-year ACS samples.




                                                         44
            Table A.9: Summary Statistics for Dependent Variables and Immigration Shocks

       Variable                 Obs              Mean           Std. Dev.           P25               P75
 Male hours worked
 V.3
  All                            722              .139             .078             .107              .167
  Foreign born                   722              .076             .073             .032              .088
  Native born                    722              .063             .052             .026               .09
  Immigrant shock                722              .052             .035             .027              .076
 V.2
  All                            722              .065             .178             -.045             .157
  Foreign born                   722              .102             .131              .027             .141
  Native born                    722             -.037             .158             -.145             .046
  Immigrant shock                722              .153             .101              .078             .219
 Male employment
 V.3
  All                            722              .144              .08             .113              .173
  Foreign born                   722               .08             .076             .033              .096
  Native born                    722              .064             .054             .024              .094
  Immigrant shock                722              .068             .045             .035              .101
 V.2
  All                            722              .058             .187             -.055             .155
  Foreign born                   722              .106             .139              .028             .157
  Native born                    722             -.048             .166             -.156             .035
  Immigrant shock                722                .2             .131              .104             .296
 Female hours
 worked
 V.3
  All                            722              .001             .033             -.02              .017
  Foreign born                   722              .019             .022             .005              .027
  Native born                    722             -.018             .032             -.04             -.002
  Immigrant shock                717              .032             .024             .014              .048
 V.2
  All                            722             -.128             .104             -.196            -.065
  Foreign born                   722              .003             .053             -.029             .028
  Native born                    722              -.13             .098              -.19            -.067
  Immigrant shock                717              .114             .084              .049             .168
 Female employment
 V.3
  All                            722              .005             .031             -.015              .02
  Foreign born                   722              .019             .022              .006             .026
  Native born                    722             -.015             .031             -.034               0
  Immigrant shock                717              .034             .025              .015             .051
 V.2
  All                            722             -.115             .101              -.18            -.053
  Foreign born                   722              .005             .054             -.023             .029
  Native born                    722              -.12             .094             -.173            -.063
  Immigrant shock                717              .118             .088              .052             .176
 This table reports means of the outcome variables and immigration shocks used in the regression analysis. The
outcomes are changes employment shares (hours worked, worker counts) by gender group (male, female) in
AI-related occupations (V.3, V.2) by nativity group (all workers, foreign-born, native-born) over 2000 to 2018.
The immigration shock (defined in equation (2)) is the projected change in the supply of workers (by gender,
employment definition) in AI-related occupations (by AI definition) relative to total initial-period labor supply
in the CZ over 2000 to 2018. All variables are multiplied by 100 and decadalized (multiplied by 10 divided by
the number of years between time periods). The sample includes individuals 25 to 54 years old with at least a
bachelor's degree. Results are weighted using CZ total employment of prime-age, college-educated workers of
the gender group in the initial period.




                                                                45
     Table A.10:
     Long difference (2000-2018): Immigration Impact on CZ Specialization in AI-Related Occupations (V.3)
                                                             AI (v3) employment of nativity group
                                       DV: 100 ×    10
                                                    t    ×             total employment


                                                     Men                                             Women
                                 Foreign-born      Native-born           All        Foreign-born     Native-born     All
                                       (1)               (2)            (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)
      Immigrant shock (v3)              1.529            -0.269        1.259                0.872         0.027     0.899
                                       (0.341)           (0.267)      (0.553)              (0.373)       (0.220)   (0.561)
      State FE                           Yes               Yes          Yes                  Yes           Yes       Yes
      Obs.                               722               722          722                  717           717       717
      Adj. R-squared                    0.787             0.397        0.520                0.705         0.544     0.319
      DV Mean                           0.080             0.064        0.144                0.019         -0.015    0.005
      DV 25th percentile                0.033             0.024        0.113                0.006         -0.034    -0.015
46




      DV 75th percentile                0.096             0.094        0.173                0.026         -0.000    0.020
      The dependent variable is the change in the share of workers employed in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition)
     for the long difference 2000-2018 for men (columns 1-3) and women (4-6), shown separately for all workers (columns
     5 and 6), foreign-born workers (columns 1 and 2), and native-born workers (columns 3 and 4). The immigrant shock
     for AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) is defined in equation (2). The sample is individuals 25 to 54 years old with
     at least a bachelor's degree residing in one of the 722 commuting zones in the continental US. All regressions include
     a constant, the summed product of the weights used in the immigration shock, state fixed effects, and initial-period
     shares of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the population, females in total employment,
     employment in manufacturing, employment in routine-intensive jobs, and employment in offshorable jobs. Stan-
     dard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. Regressions are weighted by CZ employment (of prime-age,
     college educated workers of the designated gender) in the initial period.
     Table A.11:
     Long difference (2000-2018): Immigration Impact on CZ Specialization in AI-Related Occupations (V.2)
                                                             AI (v2) employment of nativity group
                                       DV: 100 ×    10
                                                    t    ×             total employment


                                                     Men                                             Women
                                 Foreign-born      Native-born           All        Foreign-born     Native-born     All
                                       (1)               (2)            (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)
      Immigrant shock (v2)              0.763             0.088        0.851                0.382         0.091     0.473
                                       (0.224)           (0.247)      (0.422)              (0.270)       (0.145)   (0.334)
      State FE                           Yes               Yes          Yes                  Yes           Yes       Yes
      Obs.                               722               722          722                  717           717       717
      Adj. R-squared                    0.667             0.494        0.390                0.648         0.530     0.476
      DV Mean                           0.106            -0.048        0.058                0.005         -0.120    -0.115
      DV 25th percentile                0.028            -0.156       -0.055                -0.023        -0.173    -0.180
47




      DV 75th percentile                0.157             0.035        0.155                0.029         -0.063    -0.053
      The dependent variable is the change in the share of workers employed in AI-related occupations (V.2 definition)
     for the long difference 2000-2018 for men (columns 1-3) and women (4-6), shown separately for all workers (columns
     5 and 6), foreign-born workers (columns 1 and 2), and native-born workers (columns 3 and 4). The immigrant shock
     for AI-related occupations (V.2 definition) is defined in equation (2). The sample is individuals 25 to 54 years old with
     at least a bachelor's degree residing in one of the 722 commuting zones in the continental US. All regressions include
     a constant, the summed product of the weights used in the immigration shock, state fixed effects, and initial-period
     shares of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the population, females in total employment,
     employment in manufacturing, employment in routine-intensive jobs, and employment in offshorable jobs. Stan-
     dard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. Regressions are weighted by CZ employment (of prime-age,
     college educated workers of the designated gender) in the initial period.
     Table A.12:
     Stacked first differences (2000-2009 and 2009-2018): Immigration Impact on CZ Specialization in AI-
     Related Occupations (V.3)
                                                            AI (v3) hours worked by nativity group
                                      DV: 100 ×    10
                                                   t    ×             total hours worked

                                                    Men                                              Women
                                 Foreign-born      Native-born           All        Foreign-born     Native-born     All
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)
      Immigrant shock (v3)              1.835           -0.203         1.631                0.729         0.285     1.014
                                       (0.260)          (0.232)       (0.444)              (0.242)       (0.181)   (0.369)
      State × Year FE                     Yes             Yes           Yes                   Yes           Yes       Yes
      Obs.                               1444            1444          1444                  1438          1438      1438
      Adj. R-squared                    0.719            0.453         0.564                0.550         0.420     0.388
      DV Mean                           0.092            0.112         0.203                0.023         0.002     0.025
48




      DV 25th percentile                0.031            0.065         0.142                0.004         -0.019    -0.005
      DV 75th percentile                0.109            0.139         0.244                0.034         0.022     0.044
      The dependent variable is the change in the share of hours worked in AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) for
     stacked first differences over 2000-2009 and 2009-2018 for men (columns 1-3) and women (4-6), shown separately
     for all workers (columns 5 and 6), foreign-born workers (columns 1 and 2), and native-born workers (columns 3
     and 4). The immigrant shock for AI-related occupations (V.3 definition) is defined in equation (2). The sample is
     individuals 25 to 54 years old with at least a bachelor's degree residing in one of the 722 commuting zones in the
     continental US. All regressions include a constant, the summed product of the weights used in the immigration
     shock, state fixed effects, and initial-period shares of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the
     population, females in total employment, employment in manufacturing, employment in routine-intensive jobs, and
     employment in offshorable jobs. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. Regressions are weighted
     by CZ employment (of prime-age, college educated workers of the designated gender) in the initial period.
     Table A.13:
     Stacked first differences (2000-2009 and 2009-2018): Immigration Impact on CZ Specialization in AI-
     Related Occupations (V.2)
                                                            AI (v2) hours worked by nativity group
                                      DV: 100 ×    10
                                                   t    ×             total hours worked

                                                    Men                                              Women
                                 Foreign-born      Native-born           All        Foreign-born     Native-born     All
                                       (1)              (2)             (3)                (4)           (5)          (6)
      Immigrant shock (v2)              1.099            0.202         1.300                0.279         0.333     0.612
                                       (0.199)          (0.209)       (0.350)              (0.239)       (0.150)   (0.284)
      State × Year FE                     Yes             Yes           Yes                   Yes           Yes       Yes
      Obs.                               1444            1444          1444                  1438          1438      1438
      Adj. R-squared                    0.566            0.398         0.375                0.429         0.371     0.362
      DV Mean                           0.116            0.045         0.161                0.007         -0.083    -0.076
49




      DV 25th percentile                0.013           -0.078         0.052                -0.035        -0.142    -0.143
      DV 75th percentile                0.169            0.154         0.251                0.038         -0.029    -0.009
      The dependent variable is the change in the share of hours worked in AI-related occupations (V.2 definition) for
     stacked first differences over 2000-2009 and 2009-2018 for men (columns 1-3) and women (4-6), shown separately
     for all workers (columns 5 and 6), foreign-born workers (columns 1 and 2), and native-born workers (columns 3
     and 4). The immigrant shock for AI-related occupations (V.2 definition) is defined in equation (2). The sample is
     individuals 25 to 54 years old with at least a bachelor's degree residing in one of the 722 commuting zones in the
     continental US. All regressions include a constant, the summed product of the weights used in the immigration
     shock, state fixed effects, and initial-period shares of the college educated in the population, the foreign-born in the
     population, females in total employment, employment in manufacturing, employment in routine-intensive jobs, and
     employment in offshorable jobs. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by state. Regressions are weighted
     by CZ employment (of prime-age, college educated workers of the designated gender) in the initial period.
