                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             IDEOLOGY AND PERFORMANCE IN PUBLIC ORGANIZATIONS

                                        Jorg L. Spenkuch
                                          Edoardo Teso
                                             Guo Xu

                                       Working Paper 28673
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28673


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jorg L. Spenkuch, Edoardo Teso, and Guo Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Ideology and Performance in Public Organizations
Jorg L. Spenkuch, Edoardo Teso, and Guo Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 28673
April 2021
JEL No. D73,H57,M5

                                           ABSTRACT

We combine personnel records of the United States federal bureaucracy from 1997-2019 with
administrative voter registration data to study how ideological alignment between politicians and
bureaucrats affects the personnel policies and performance of public organizations. We present
four results. (i) Consistent with the use of the spoils system to align ideology at the highest levels
of government, we document significant partisan cycles and substantial turnover among political
appointees. (ii) By contrast, we find virtually no political cycles in the civil service. The lower
levels of the federal government resemble a "Weberian" bureaucracy that appears to be largely
protected from political interference. (iii) Democrats make up the plurality of civil servants.
Overrepresentation of Democrats increases with seniority, with the difference in career
progression being largely explained by positive selection on observables. (iv) Political
misalignment carries a sizeable performance penalty. Exploiting presidential transitions as a
source of "within-bureaucrat" variation in the political alignment of procurement officers over
time, we find that contracts overseen by a misaligned officer exhibit cost overruns that are, on
average, 8% higher than the mean overrun. We provide evidence that is consistent with a general
"morale effect," whereby misaligned bureaucrats are less motivated.

Jorg L. Spenkuch                                  Guo Xu
MEDS Department                                   Haas School of Business
Kellogg School of Management                      University of California at Berkeley
2001 Sheridan Road                                2220 Piedmont Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                                Berkeley, CA 94720
j-spenkuch@kellogg.northwestern.edu               and NBER
                                                  guoxu@haas.berkeley.edu
Edoardo Teso
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
Managerial Economics and
Decision Sciences Departm
Evanston, IL
edoardo.teso@kellogg.northwestern.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28673
1       Introduction
Mission-oriented organizations pursue objectives beyond profit maximization. Instead of pro-
viding employees with high-powered financial incentives, these organizations tend to attract
workers whose own values and preferences are closely aligned with the greater mission (Besley
and Ghatak, 2005). In fact, explicit pecuniary incentives may backfire when agents derive
intrinsic benefits from furthering an organization's goal (Dewatripont et al., 1999; B´
                                                                                      enabou
and Tirole, 2003). While mission can act as a powerful intrinsic motivator, it may also create
frictions when the preferences of leaders and their subordinates become misaligned.
     Frictions of this kind may be particularly relevant in bureaucracies, whose mission can
change from one day to the next due to political turnover. When politicians face a large
share of subordinates who no longer agree with the new priorities of the organization and
whose compensation is not directly tied to performance, their real authority as the prin-
cipal can be severely limited (Aghion and Tirole, 1997). Anecdotal evidence of ideological
mismatch between bureaucrats and politicians abound. For instance, the Trump adminis-
tration's decision to roll back environmental regulations was met with fierce resistance from
within the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), with bureaucrats refusing to comply,
undermining directives by leaking confidential information to the press, or deciding to leave
the agency (Plumer and Davenport, 2019). Similarly, throughout much of 2020, scientists
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) disagreed sharply with mem-
bers of the Trump administration over public messaging related to the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic. At the height of these disagreements, Michael Caputo, a political appointee and
top spokesperson for the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), publicly accused
the CDC of harboring a "resistance unit" and engaging in "sedition."1 Examples like these
can be found across the world and in both non-profit and for-profit organizations.2
     In this paper, we turn to the U.S. federal government to investigate the role of align-
ment within organizations. We examine how the personnel policies and performance of the
organization are affected by ideological (mis)alignment between bureaucrats and their po-
litical leaders (i.e., agents and their principals). The U.S. federal bureaucracy provides for
an almost ideal setting to study these questions. As the executive arm of the federal gov-
    1
     See CNBC article "CDC director says he's `deeply saddened' by allegations of `sedition' from Trump
HHS appointee", retrieved on March 19, 2021.
   2
     For instance, when Google, known for it's mission to "do no evil," was readying a new contract with
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), thousands of employees resisted, pointing to allegations
of human rights violations (link). In another instance, Google leadership reportedly faced strong internal
backlash over Project Dragonfly, a search engine prototype that was designed to be compatible with China's
state censorship provisions. Within a matter of months, the company announced that Project Dragonfly
had been terminated (link).



                                                    1
ernment, its goal--or mission--is tightly linked to the policy agenda of the White House.
At the same time, the vast majority of bureaucrats serve in civil service positions that are,
in principle, protected from political interference. Many of them have their own preferences
and ideological leanings, which may conflict with those of the president. Moreover, the party
in power changes repeatedly, generating sharp shifts in the priorities of the organization. As
a consequence, to implement an administration's agenda, politicians and department heads
often need to work with bureaucrats whose personal values are not always aligned with the
present mission of their department.
     Our study draws on a large, novel data set that contains information on the partisan
leanings of U.S. bureaucrats. We link personnel records for the near-universe of federal em-
ployees between 1997­2019 with contemporary administrative data on all registered voters
in the United States.3 By combining both sources of information, we are the first to mea-
sure ideology--and thus political alignment--for more than a million individuals throughout
nearly the entire federal bureaucracy.
     In the first part of the paper, we provide a descriptive analysis of the ideological prefer-
ences of federal bureaucrats, and how their careers depend on ideological alignment with the
party in power. We establish three stylized facts. First, politicians can and do leverage their
limited power over personnel in order to achieve greater ideological alignment between them-
selves and high-ranking bureaucrats. Specifically, we document a great amount of turnover
and significant partisan cycles among political appointees. Under a Democratic president,
political appointees are 49.7 p.p. more likely to be fellow Democrats than under a Republican
one--a 152% increase. For Republican appointees we observe similarly dramatic changes--a
45.9 p.p., or 504%, increase relative to years in which the president is a Democrat. The
presence of political cycles in our data is consistent with the use of the spoils system (i.e.,
the practice of placing supporters in public sector positions after winning an election) to
better align the highest layers of the bureaucracy with the goals of the president.
     Second, we document a remarkable degree of political insulation among career civil ser-
vants. In sharp contrast to our results for political appointees, we observe virtually no po-
litical cycles in the career civil service. In our data, the share of Democrats remains nearly
constant over the entire time period. The share of Republicans exhibits a slight monotonic
downward trend, which is offset by a corresponding rise in the fraction of independents.
Focusing only on the hiring margin, we do detect statistically significant cycles for career
senior executives; but they are an order of magnitude smaller than for political appointees.
Moreover, career senior executives account for less than one percent of civil servants. Our
   3
     The former data were released by the federal government in response to a series of FOIA requests. The
latter were purchased from L2, Inc., a private, non-partisan data vendor.



                                                    2
descriptive findings, therefore, suggest that the core of the U.S. federal government resembles
a "Weberian" bureaucracy, which is largely protected from political interference (Evans and
Rauch, 1999).
    Third, Democrats make up the plurality of career civil servants. The share of Democrats
hovers around 50% across the 1997­2019 period, while the share of Republicans ranges from
32% in 1997 to 26% in 2019. This overrepresentation is present in nearly every department.4
The share of Democrats is highest in the Department of Education, the State Department,
and the EPA. The most conservative departments are Agriculture and Transportation, where
the shares of Democrats and Republicans are nearly equal. Democrats are especially over-
represented in more-senior positions. Interestingly, positive selection on observables explains
practically all of the observed difference in the career progression of Democrats and Re-
publicans within the federal bureaucracy. Democratic-leaning bureaucrats have, on average,
higher levels of educational attainment, and they are less likely to exit the civil service,
which results in a greater accumulation of experience. The observation that Democrats
appear to be positively selected, even conditional on pay, suggests that they might have a
higher proclivity for public service (Ashraf et al., 2020).
    Broadly summarizing, although politicians exert significant control over the ideological
makeup of the highest layers of the federal bureaucracy, there are virtually no political
cycles among rank-and-file civil servants. This leads to large and temporarily persistent
ideological misalignments within the executive branch, irrespective of which party controls
the White House. Given that Democrats are overrepresented among career bureaucrats,
however, ideological misalignments are especially prevalent under Republican presidents.
    In the second part of the paper, we study the performance implications of mission align-
ment. In light of the insulated nature of the career civil service, it stands to reason that
a significant number of rank-and-file bureaucrats experience shocks to mission alignment
whenever a new president and new political appointees take over from a previous regime.
However, constructing performance measures for everyone in the federal bureaucracy with
its wide range of occupations is exceedingly difficult. To make progress, we focus on a subset
of important bureaucrats who complete comparable tasks with measurable outcomes: pro-
curement officers. Procurement officers play a crucial role both in the ex-ante selection of
buyers and in the ex-post monitoring of contracts. Moreover, procurement contracts account
for a significant share of the federal budget. In 2017, the combined value of procurement
contracts amounted to 9.3% of U.S. gross domestic product5
  4
    For expositional ease, we refer to both federal departments and independent agencies as departments.
We refer to sub-units of departments or independent agencies as bureaus.
  5
    Congressional Research Service (2021). IF11580, v. 4 UPDATED.



                                                   3
    We link data on procurement contracts from the Federal Procurement Data System
(FPDS) to our matched personnel and voter registration data. To examine mission-alignment,
we exploit the fact that the raw procurement data contain information on the identity of
the officers processing particular contracts. This hitherto underutilized feature allows us
to assign contracts to about 7,200 individual procurement officers across nearly all depart-
ments of the federal government. We can thus investigate the performance implications of
misalignment at the level of the officer that oversees the respective contract. Following the
procurement literature, we use cost overruns and delays as contract-level measures of per-
formance (Bajari and Tadelis, 2001; Decarolis et al., 2020b; Kang and Miller, 2020). Our
analysis focuses on services and works contracts, which require significant monitoring and
exhibit substantial variation in cost overruns and delays. Relying on "within-officer" varia-
tion to compare contract outcomes in years in which the officer is and is not aligned with
the political superiors, we find that misalignment increases cost overruns by approximately
1% of initial contract value--about 8% relative to the mean overrun. This result holds even
when comparing procurement officers working in the same department and year.
    Higher cost overruns under politically misaligned officers do not appear to be the result
of differential assignment of officers to tasks. Since contract characteristics, such as size or
projected duration, do not significantly covary with officers' alignment, our estimates remain
nearly unchanged when we include a rich set of contract-level controls, including industry
and product fixed effects. We also find no evidence to suggest a change in pecuniary or career
incentives. Instead, using data from a large, repeated survey of civil servants, we provide
evidence that hints at a general "morale effect" of mission-alignment, whereby bureaucrats
are more motivated and exert more effort when they are more closely aligned with the
organizational mission.
Related Literature.         Our findings contribute to three broad literatures. First, our
results are related to a growing literature on bureaucratic turnover and selection. Prior
work has documented different real-world costs due to turnover of bureaucrats (Iyer and
Mani, 2011; Akhtari et al., 2020). There is also evidence on how political turnover affects
employment outcomes within and selection into the bureaucracy (Colonnelli et al., 2020;
Barbosa and Ferreira, 2019; Brassiolo et al., 2020; Fiva et al., 2021). It is important to note,
however, that extant work focuses on developing countries, where the bureaucracy may be
more suspectible to political interference, even if it is nominally insulated. In the context
of the U.S., we document the existence and absence of political cycles. While politicians
can and do use their discretion in hiring to increase ideological alignment at the highest
levels of the federal bureaucracy, it is the absence of political interference in the career civil
service--a feature intended to create an impartial administrative state--that creates the cost

                                                4
of misalignment that we document.
    To be clear, our findings should not be interpreted as evidence that protecting bureaucrats
from political interference leads to overall worse performance. We present evidence on an
underappreciated cost of politically insulating the civil service, which should be evaluated
against known benefits (see, e.g., Colonnelli et al., 2020; Akhtari et al., 2020; Xu, 2018).
    More closely related to our work is a small, recent literature in political science and public
administration that studies bureaucratic turnover in the U.S.6 Bertelli and Lewis (2020) use
data from a survey of federal executives to show that human capital and perceptions of
policy influence correlate with bureaucrats' turnover intentions. Bolton et al. (2020) study
turnover in the aftermath of presidential transitions. They present evidence of an increase
in turnover among the most senior civil servants in the first year of a new administration,
especially in departments whose employees are estimated to have, on average, divergent views
from the president.7 By linking personnel records to administrative voter registration data,
we are able to measure ideological alignment and trace its consequences at the individual-
level throughout nearly the entire U.S. bureaucracy. Like Bolton et al. (2020), we investigate
whether misaligned bureaucrats are more likely to leave. Unlike Bolton et al. (2020), however,
we can also ask whether, within the same department, politically aligned individuals are more
likely to be hired, promoted, or to exit relative to their misaligned counterparts. By linking
individual procurement officers to contract outcomes, we can further investigate whether
individuals' ideological alignment is associated with tangible differences in performance.
    Second, our results speak to the literature on incentives and mission in public organiza-
tions (Dewatripont et al., 1999; B´ enabou and Tirole, 2003; Besley and Ghatak, 2005; Ashraf
and Bandiera, 2018). A growing body of work provides evidence on the role of pecuniary
incentives in motivating bureaucrats (Khan et al., 2016; Bertrand et al., 2019; Khan et al.,
2018; Leaver et al., 2020). We add to this strand of the literature by documenting how
mission-alignment can shape effort and preformance. In the polarized American two-party
system, differences in partisanship are indicative of diverging attitudes towards policies and
the overarching mission of the state. Our findings provide suggestive empirical evidence that
"mission matters," even in the context of a textbook bureaucracy in a high-income country.
Our work, therefore, complements evidence from frontline providers in developing-country
settings (Ashraf et al., 2014; Deserranno, 2019; Ashraf et al., 2020; Khan, 2021).
   6
     Another strand of the political science literature is focused on estimating the degree of ideological
proximity between different departments, political appointees, and the president (see, e.g., Nixon, 2004;
Bonica et al., 2015; Bertelli and Grose, 2011).
   7
     In a similar vein, Doherty et al. (2019) use survey data on the political leanings of 821 senior executives
to show that turnover in the aftermath of the 2016 election was higher among those who opposed President
Trump.



                                                       5
    Third, our results contribute to an important literature on public procurement. Prior
work has examined the role of individual procurement officers in explaining contract perfor-
mance (Bandiera et al., 2009; Best et al., 2016; Decarolis et al., 2020b), the role of discretion
in contracting (Szucs, 2020; Decarolis et al., 2020a; Baltrunaite et al., 2020; Bandiera et al.,
2020; Baltrunaite, 2019), as well as the role of competition (Kang and Miller, 2020; Carril
et al., 2021). Some of the work in the procurement literature focuses on (political) con-
nections between procurement officers, the ruling party, and sellers. It typically exploits
variation across organizations to identify potential distortions. By contrast, our focus lies
on ideological alignment within the same organization. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to exploit the individual identifiers in the U.S. raw procurement data to relate
performance to the identity and characteristics of procurement officers.


2       Data and context
Our analysis combines data on employees of the U.S. federal civil sevice, information on the
partisan affiliation of registered voters, and data on U.S. federal procurement contracts. In
this section we describe the sources of these data and how we link them. Additional details
are provided in the Appendix.


2.1     Federal employment records
Information on employees of the U.S. federal government for the 1973­2019 period come
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), an independent government agency that
manages the civilian workforce. For the period up to 2017, we use data that were made
publicly available by BuzzFeed News, which, in turn, obtained the respective files via a series
of Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests.8 We made an additional FOIA request to
the OPM in October 2019, extending the coverage of our data to February 2019. Since we
are constrained in our ability to measure partisanship over time (cf. Section 2.2), we restrict
our analysis to 1997­2019. This period is sufficient to study outcomes under four different
presidents--two Democrats and two Republicans--and across three presidential transitions.
    The OPM data constitute a panel at the employee-by-quarter level, which contains rich
information on federal employees and their positions in the government. For instance, we
observe the department and bureau associated with a particular position, the location of
employment, the employee's occupation and pay, as well as the full name, education level,
    8
   The data are available at https://archive.org/details/opm-federal-employment-data/docs/
2015-02-11-opm-foia-response (last accessed March 2021).



                                               6
and age (expressed in five years intervals).
    The data come with two caveats. First, they do not include information on the identity
of law enforcement officers and employees in certain sensitive departments, such as Defense.9
Second, starting in the third quarter of 2014, the data cease to contain unique employee
identifiers. To nonetheless be able to track employees over time, we rely on their full name
and educational attainment to create identifiers for the last five years of the panel.
    The OPM data also include information on the type of appointment to each position.
We use this information to divide positions into six categories.10 Specifically, we broadly
differentiate between positions that are filled by a political appointee, and those in which
appointments and removals are formally insulated from political influence. Political ap-
pointments are made by the President, or by a department head. Political positions belong
to one of three categories: Presidential appointments in top executive positions (with or
without Senate confirmation), politically appointed members of the Senior Executive Ser-
vice (SES), and Schedule C appointees. The first category includes the highest level officers
in the U.S. federal bureaucracy, such as cabinet secretaries and their immediate subordi-
nates, as well as heads of government departments and employees in the Executive Office of
the President (Davis and Greene, 2017). The second category--politically appointed mem-
ber of the SES--includes executive positions just below the top Presidential appointees.
While most SES employees are selected by departments through meritocratic procedures, up
to 10% of them can be politically appointed government-wide (Shimabukuro and Staman,
2019).11 The third category--Schedule C appointees--comprises positions with a confiden-
tial or policy-determining nature. Schedule C appointees must have a Presidential appointee,
a SES appointee, or a Schedule C appointee as direct supervisor (The Plum Book, 2020).
Regardless of the specific category, political appointees do not enjoy job protection, and can
be removed at any time. They represent a small minority of all employees of the federal
government--about 0.23% of all positions throughout the 1997­2019 period.
    All remaining positions are "non-political" in nature. To differentiate them from political
appointments, we refer to these positions as "civil service positions," and to employees in
these positions as "civil servants." Civil service positions can be divided into three cate-
gories: employees in the competitive service, Career SES, and the excepted service. Employ-
ees in the competitive service represent the clear majority of the civilian workforce. They
   9
     In some cases the departments are not included in the data, while in other cases the names of the
employees are redacted. See Appendix F for the list of departments for which no information is reported.
  10
     For the full list of OPM type-of-appointment codes, see Appendix F.
  11
     In addition, a small number of politically appointed SES fall in the limited term appointment category,
which can be used to fill positions that are either temporary (e.g., to lead a special project), or meet an
unanticipated, urgent need.



                                                     7
are hired based on a competitive selection process with objective standards. Career SES
positions include senior executives that are selected through a merit-based hiring process.12
Finally, employees in the excepted service are hired without being subjected to a competitive
examination. These "unclassified" positions are used by departments when competitive ex-
amination is not practicable and recruitment is better achieved through alternative selection
procedures. Examples include attorneys, policy analysts, or STEM occupations.13 Employ-
ees in any one of our three civil service categories generally enjoy significant protection from
removal, sometimes after a probationary period.
    Figure 1 provides a high-level summary of our categorization scheme. It also reports,
for each category, the number of observations during our sample period. Our final dataset
includes 2,809,907 employees with non-missing information on name, for a total of 72,993,738
employee-quarter observations.14


2.2     Voter registration data
In order to be able to measure the political leanings of federal employees, we have acquired
information on the universe of registered voters in the U.S. These data are current as of
the spring of 2020, and come from L2, Inc., a non-partisan for-profit data vendor that
maintains high-quality databases of registered voters, political donors, and consumers. L2
collects, integrates, and standardizes information from different administrative and com-
mercial sources, such as local election boards and Secretaries of State, the Federal Election
Commission (FEC), mortgage and real estate records, Experian, and marketing mailing lists.
It sells these data to political candidates and action committees (PACs), advocacy groups,
and interested academics, among others.
    In all but fifteen states does the partisanship of individuals in the L2 data coincide with
the party affiliation in the respective states' voter registration lists. The remaining fifteen
states do not collect information on voters' partisan leanings. For voters in the these states,
L2 uses predictive modeling to impute a "likely" party affiliation.15 Per the company, their
  12
      SES positions are designated as "career reserved" or as "general." To ensure impartiality and insulation
from political influence, the former positions can only be filled by career appointees. The latter can be
filled by either career or political appointees. Noncareer appointments, however, cannot exceed 10% of
SES positions government-wide, nor can they surpass 25% of a particular department's SES positions. See
https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/senior-executive-service/overview-history/.
   13
      For an exhaustive list of possible positions, see https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/
07/18/2019-15247/excepted-service-consolidated-listing-of-schedules-a-b-and-c-exceptions.
Although Schedule C appointments are also part of the excepted service, we assign them a separate category
due to the political nature of the appointment process.
   14
      Appendix Figure D1 shows how the number of employees in our data varies over the 1997­2019 period.
   15
      Specifically, L2 models party affiliation in the following states: HI, IL, WA, MT, ND, MN, WI, MI, VT,
SC, MO, AL, TX, VA, and GA. In our data, the share of civil servants from these states is 28%.


                                                      8
proprietary machine-learning algorithms use an array of public and private data sources,
including participation in primaries, demographics available through states' voter files, exit
polling from presidential elections, commercial lifestyle indicators, census data, self-reported
party preferences from private polling, and more. L2 does not guarantee that any single
voter will self-identify as being associated with the assigned "likely" party, but it claims an
accuracy level of 85% or better. We say that an individual is a Democrat or Republican if
and only if L2 lists the person as such. All others are classified as "independent."
    The L2 data come with two key limitations. First, we only observe individuals who are
registered to vote. According to Census Bureau estimates, registered voters make up about
70% of voting-aged citizens (File, 2018). Second, we only observe individuals' partisan
leanings at a single point in time. Given that changes in party registration tend to be rare,
we interpret our measure as capturing a latent, time-invariant trait that proxies for the set
of ideas and principles--in short, the political ideology--of each person.


2.3     Matching of OPM and voter registration records
To recover information on the partisanship of government employees, we link individuals in
the OPM and L2 voter registration data using a combination of name, state of residence, and
age. Overall, we are able to succcessfully match 1,263,181 out of the 2,809,907 bureaucrats
in our sample, i.e., about 45%.16 The fact that about 55% of federal bureaucrats remain
unmatched could be due to one of three issues. First, our matching procedure is conser-
vative. In particular, we do not allow for even minor discrepancies in the spelling of first
and last names across both data sources. Second, we consider as unmatched all instances in
which a bureaucrat is matched to multiple voter registration records, as well as all cases in
which a registered voter is matched to multiple bureaucrats. Third, a significant fraction of
bureaucrats is not registered to vote. Based on our analysis of data from the 2010­18 Voting
and Registration Supplements to the Current Population Survey, only about 86% of civilian
federal government employees are registered voters.17
    Table 1 shows how matched and unmatched bureaucrats differ in terms of age, education,
  16
      Among the successfully matched individuals, 77% are matched by name, year of birth, and state. Since
we lack information on age for about 9.5% of federal employees, and since employees may reside in a state
that is different than the state of employment, we also allow for less stringent matching requirements. 13.5%
of the matched individuals are linked by name and year of birth, while 9.5% are matched by name and state.
The matching rate is higher for people who are present in the data for a longer period, and it increases
slightly over the 1997-2019 period. We match 46% of employees in 1997, and 54% of employees in 2019.
Appendix Figure D2 reports success rates for each year over the sample period. For additional details on
how we combine the OPM data with voter registration records, see Appendix F
   17
      Given the likely direction of survey bias in this setting, it stands to reason that 86% is likely an upper
bound on the true share of registered voters among federal bureaucrats.



                                                       9
experience, annual pay, and location of employment. Given the large sample size, the dif-
ferences are precisely estimated. While we observe statistically significant differences, most
of the magnitudes are relatively small.18 For instance, matched bureaucrats are on average
older and more educated. Relative to unmatched employees, matched bureaucrats are 3.5
p.p. less likely to be younger than 30. They are 1.9 p.p. more likely to have a four-year college
degree, and 3 p.p. more likely to have some form of post-graduate education. These differ-
ences mirror those between registered and unregistered Americans in the general population.
In the 2018 Voting and Registration Supplement to the Current Population Survey, about
24% of registered voters have a four-year college degree, and about 15% of registered voters
have some form of post-graduate education. The corresponding shares among unregistered
individuals are 11% and 4%. We see similar differences in terms of age, with an average age
of 50.7 among registered voters and of 43.3 among unregistered individuals.
    We also see differences between matched and unmatched bureaucrats in terms of expe-
rience and pay. On average, matched bureaucrats are present in the data for 8.9 additional
quarters. At entry, matched bureaucrats earn an extra $2,404 per year on average (about
6% more than unmatched ones). Finally, matched bureaucrats are slightly less likely to be
employed in D.C. at some point during the 1997­2019 period.


2.4     Procurement data
To relate political misalignment to tangible outcomes, we rely on U.S. federal procurement
data covering 2004­2019. These data are collected through the Federal Procurement Data
System (FPDS), and are made available through the FPDS-Next Generation database. For
each procurement contract, the data list the initial procurement award and subsequent mod-
ifications (if any). We use this information to construct cost overrun and delay measures
by comparing the initially projected costs and completion dates to realized costs and actual
completion dates. Throughout our analysis, we focus on service and works contracts, since
these are the types of contracts for which cost overruns and delivery delays are empirically
most important. Given that our OPM data do not contain de-identified information for
the Department of Defense, we drop all defense contracts.19 We further impose a range of
standard sample restrictions from the related procurement literature (Bajari and Tadelis,
2001; Kang and Miller, 2020). In particular, we disregard indefinite delivery vehicle (IDV)
contracts as well as lease and rental contracts, and we limit the sample to contracts that
  18
     We measure age, education, and pay at entry, namely as of the first quarter in which we observe the
employee in the data in the 1973-2019 period. We measure experience as the total number of quarters in
which we observe an employee in the data in the 1973-2019 period.
  19
     Defense constracts account for about 58% of all procurement contracts in our sample period.



                                                  10
were performed within the U.S.20 Finally, we probe the robustness of our results by restrict-
ing attention to contracts of at least USD 25,000, which results in the exact same sample
restrictions as in Decarolis et al. (2020b). We winsorize at the 5th and 95th percentiles to
remove outliers.21
    Critical for our purposes, the raw procurement data also list the email address of the
officer in charge of the contract. We exploit this feature of the data to identify individual
officers and subsequently match them to our OPM data. Specifically, we first construct the
universe of unique email addresses in the FPDS database, from which we drop those that
do not contain a name (e.g., admin@dept.gov). We then extract individuals' names, the
department and bureau for which they work. Before matching procurement officers to the
OPM data based on name and bureau, we further enrich the data by linking email addresses
to name directories in govtribe.com.22 This last step is useful because email addresses of
federal employees do not always contain their owner's middle or full first name. Our final
dataset covers 718,362 procurement contracts created by 7,202 procurement officers across
132 departments and bureaus.23


3      Political alignment in the U.S. bureaucracy
In this section, we use our matched data to document three stylized facts about the political
affiliation of bureaucrats in the U.S. federal government.



3.1     Fact 1: Partisan cycles among political appointees
We begin by documenting how the partisan leanings of political appointees covary with the
party of the president. Since political appointments are the prerogative of the President,
Vice President, or department heads, and in light of the fact that these staffing decisions
constitute one of the few direct tools to align the bureaucracy with the goals of the White
House (Pfiffner, 2001; Clinton et al., 2012), we expect significant cycles in the ideology of
  20
     Indefinite delivery vehicle contracts reflect long-running contractual arrangements that do not exactly
specify quantities ex ante. Contracts that are performed and delivered outside the U.S. have very different
cost structures and are thus typically omitted (Kang and Miller, 2020).
  21
     We show in Appendix Table B9 that our results are robust to alternative cutoffs for winsorizing.
  22
     Govtribe is a private data provider that specializes in providing information on federal contracting and
grant-making.
  23
     Appendix Table B4 provides a step-by-step documentation of the sample selection process. For additional
details on our selection and matching criteria, see Appendix G




                                                     11
political appointees.24
    Figure 2 shows the raw share of political appointees that are affiliated with the Demo-
cratic party, with the Republican Party, and who are independent.25 Consistent with the
use of the spoils system to increase ideological alignment between politicians and top bu-
reaucrats, we observe large partisan swings right around presidential transitions. The share
of Democratic appointees falls from over 80% under Presidents Clinton and Obama to about
30% under Presidents Bush and Trump. The share of Republican political appointees in-
creases from around 10% under Democratic presidents to more than 50% during Republican
administrations. We do not observe similarly sharp cycles among independent appointees.
    Table 2, Panel A reports regression estimates that more precisely quantify the magnitude
of the observed shifts. In columns 1 and 3, we regress an indicator for whether a political
appointee is a Democrat or Republican on an indicator for the party of the president and a
linear time trend. In columns 2 and 4, we add bureau fixed effects in order to assess the extent
to which political cycles are driven by parties' tendencies to increase their representation in
specific bureaus. Under a Democratic president, political appointees are 49.7 p.p. more
likely to be a fellow Democrat--a 152% change relative to years in which the president is a
Republican. Political cycles are even larger for Republican appointees. Relative to years with
a Democratic president, we observe an increase of 45.9 p.p., or 504%, when a Republican
rises to power. We further note that the coefficients in Table 2 are essentially unaffected by
the inclusion of bureau fixed effects.
    Appendix Figure D3 and Appendix Table A1 report estimates of partisan cycles for each
category of political appointment. Interestingly, we see larger effects for Noncareer SES
and Schedule C appointees than for presidential appointments to top executive positions
(cf. Panels A, B, and C of Appendix Table A1). This observation is consistent with the
fact that the latter commonly require confirmation from the Senate, which may induce the
president to either nominate more independents or a more-balanced mix of partisans. In a
similar vein, Appendix Figure D3 shows that the partisan composition of Noncareer SES
and Schedule C appointees changes discontinuously in the year of a presidential transition,
whereas changes in the partisan composition for presidential appointees occur much more
gradually--presumably due to delays in the process of their confirmation.
    In columns 5­8 of Table 2, Panel A, we focus on new hires as a source of political cycles.
  24
     Previous work documents the ideological proximity between the president and his political appointees,
drawing on a variety of data sources, including the voting records of appointees who have previously served in
Congress (Nixon, 2004), campaign donations (Bonica et al., 2015), or policy positions that cabinet members
express during congressional testimony (Bertelli and Grose, 2011).
  25
     In this figure, we pool all political appointments, i.e., presidential appointments, non-career SES, and
schedule C appointees.



                                                     12
For each political appointee in our data, we keep the first observation in an employment
spell and re-estimate the same econometric models as in columns 1­4. As one might suspect,
selective hiring turns out to be an important factor in the emergence of political cycles. Under
a Democratic administration, new appointees are 55 p.p. more likely to be copartisans of
the president (col. 5), with a comparable point estimate for Republicans (col. 7). Again,
controlling for bureau fixed effects does not affect our estimates. This suggests that partisan
cycles in hiring are not due to a tendency to prioritize political appointments in departments
and bureaus that already attract more employees of the president's party.
    Finally, in Figure 3 we explore the exit margin. The figure shows how the share of
political appointees that depart from their positions varies by party affiliation within two-
year time windows around each presidential transistion in our data.26 Whenever a new
president takes office the share of political appointees who leave the bureaucracy spikes
sharply. Although exit rates are lower among appointees that are politically aligned with
the incoming adminstration, we observe significant churn irrespective of partisanship.27 This
pattern is consistent with anecdotal evidence according to which presidents use the tool of
political appointments to staff the highest levels of the bureaucracy with individuals who,
besides being ideologically aligned, can be personally trusted.


3.2     Fact 2: Political insulation of civil servants
Next, we ask how civil servants' appointments, career progression, and removals depend on
ideological alignment with the current administration. Although formally insulated from
political interference, there exist at least two potential mechanism that could lead to the
emergence of political cycles among civil servants.
    First, presidents and political appointees may attempt to exert control over civil service
positions by manipulating extant personnel policies. Such strategies are known to have been
used by the Nixon administration, which summarized them in the White House Personnel
Manual. This "manual" was distributed to political appointees as a guide on how to fill
positions with ideologically close individuals. In one prominent example, political appointees
were instructed that, in order to induce a career executive to leave, "You simply call an
individual in and tell him he is no longer wanted. [...] There should be no witnesses in the
room at the time" (Subcommittee on Manpower and Civil Service, 1976, p. 163). Political
appointees could also use transfers to remove unwanted employees from key positions, with
the expectation that they would hire or promote individuals who were recommended by the
  26
     We say that an employee leaves the position if we no longer observe the person in the following quarter.
To avoid censoring we exclude the first quarter of 2019.
  27
     In the Appendix, we present similar results for each type of political appointment (cf. Figures D6­D8).


                                                     13
White House (Cole and Caputo, 1979). More recently, the Trump administration has been
accused of using reassignments in order to push out unwanted employees (Halper, 2017).
    Second, civil servants may leave on their own accord if their ideological preferences are no
longer aligned with the administration. For example, Trump's targeting of the Environmental
Protection Agency's mission was reportedly responsible for the departures of several career
employees (Plumer and Davenport, 2019). Additionally, prospective civil servants may not
even apply for a position if they disagree with the overall direction of the organization.
    We quantify the aggregate relevance of these channels in Figure 4 and Table 2, Panel
B. The former depicts trends in the party affiliation of civil servants over time, while the
latter presents regression estimates. In marked contrast to political appointees, there are
no visually apparent partisan cycles among career civil servants. The share of Democrats
remains nearly constant over the entire sample period, while that of Republicans exhibits a
slight monotonic downward trend, which is offset by a corresponding increase in the fraction
of civil servants that are independents. None of these trends appear to be affected by which
party controls the government.
    This impression is confirmed by the coefficients in columns 1­4 of Table 2, Panel B.
Although our estimates are very precise--due to the size of our panel--they are economically
small. Columns 5­6 focus on the entry margin. Again, there is very limited evidence of
political interference, especially after controlling for bureau fixed effects. Contrary to what
we documented in Panel A of the same table for political appointees, we do not observe clear
political cycles among civil servants.
    In line with this conclusion, Figure 5 shows no meaningful increase in exit rates around the
Obama­Trump (Panel A), Bush­Obama (Panel B), and Clinton­Bush (Panel C) transitions.
The quarterly exit rates in these panels range from 2% to 6%, and do not spike towards the
end of an administration's term. We also do not observe differentially higher exit rates by
party affiliation.28
    In Appendix Figure D4 and Table A2, we report results separately by type of civil service
position. While we find at most very small partisan effects in the competitive civil service,
we do see some evidence of political cycles on the hiring margin in the excepted service
and, especially, in the senior executive service. In quarters with a Democratic (Republican)
president, new senior executive hires are 6.4% (11.6%) more likely to be fellow Democrats
(Republicans). As shown in Appendix Figure D5, these partisan differentials in the hiring of
senior executives are large enough to be visually apparent, especially when we compare the
  28
     In Appendix Figure D12 we show trends in civil servants' exit rates at the EPA, whose mission directly
conflicted with the goals of the Trump administration. For the EPA we do observe a significant increase
in exits during the last quarter of the Obama and the first quarter of the Trump administration, with no
corresponding change in departures around other presidential transitions.


                                                    14
Clinton to the Bush administration.29 Given that employees in the senior executive service
comprise less than 1% of federal bureaucrats, however, partisan cycles among this group of
workers have almost no bearing on the aggregate make up of the civil service.
    We also explore whether political alignment is associated with changes in earnings. To
this end, we regress civil servants' log annual earnings on an indicator equal to one if
they are aligned with the party of the president, individual fixed effects, and quarter (or
quarter×bureau) fixed effects. In light of the rigid pay structure in the U.S. civil service, in-
creases in a bureaucrat's compensation are best interpreted as progressions along the career
ladder. The results from our regressions are shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 3. They
are very precise but provide no evidence of economically significant aligment effects on the
compensation of civil servants.
    We additionally investigate whether employees who are misaligned with the president's
party are more likely to be transferred--a strategy that department heads may use to create
vacancies in key positions. In particular, we focus on transfers away from D.C., which may
be interpreted as assignments to less prestigious jobs. The results are shown in columns 3­6
of Table 3. Since the former may be more likely to be targeted by the administration, we
separately consider members of the SES and non-SES civil servants. Once again, we do not
observe economically significant alignment effects.
    In sum, we find very limited evidence that political cycles affect civil servants' careers.
The insulation of most civil service positions from political interference makes it difficult for
the administration to facilitate the hiring or promotion of ideologically aligned bureaucrats.
We also find limited evidence of differentially higher departure rates among misaligned bu-
reaucrats. Two potential reasons could explain this null result. First, for most bureaucrats,
the benefits of a long-term career in the federal government may outweight the intrinsic
costs of temporarily serving an objectionable administration. Second, misaligned bureau-
crats may decide to remain in the federal government as a way to influence the direction of
the organization from within the system.30
  29
    Appendix Figures D9, D10 and D11 present trends in exit rates for each group of civil servants.
  30
    This rationale is explicitly mentioned in a 2017 Washington Post opinion column by a senior U.S.
diplomat. Despite leaving his post following the Trump administration's decision to withdraw from the
Paris Agreement, he invited his colleagues to remain in their positions "so that they can continue to work
within the system to make things a little bit better, a little bit at a time." (link)




                                                   15
3.3     Fact 3: Democratic plurality among career civil servants
3.3.1    Democrats are overrepresented among civil servants

We now turn to our third (and last) stylized fact: Democrats make up the plurality of civil
servants. Figure 4 shows that the share of Democratic-leaning civil servants hovers around
50% across the entire 1997­2019 period. By contrast, the share of Republicans ranges from
approximately 32% in 1997 to about 26% in 2019, with a corresponding increase in the
share of independents. To put these numbers into perspective, the share of Democrats in the
universe of individuals in our voter registration data is 40.8%, while the share of Republicans
is 30.7%. This implies an overrepresentation of Democrats among federal civil servants of
about 10 p.p., or about 20% relative to their share in the population.31

3.3.2    Heterogeneity across departments

Appendix Figures D14 and D15 report partisan shares of civil servants for all departments
(except the DoD) as well as the two largest independent agencies, i.e., the EPA and the Social
Security Administration. The evidence therein shows that Democrats are overrepresented
in most departments. With around 70% each, the EPA, the Department of Education,
and the State Department employ the highest share of Democrats. The most conservative
departments by this measure are Agriculture and Transportation, where we observe near
parity of Democrats and Republicans--which, of course, means that, relative to the general
population, Democrats are underrepresented in these departments.
   We next evaluate how our department-level measure of partisanship correlates with exist-
ing expert assessments of ideological leanings across departments. Figure 6 plots the share
of Democrats in a particular department against the department-level ideology scores of
Clinton and Lewis (2008). The latter are based on a 2006 survey of 39 experts in bureau-
cratic politics (i.e., leading academics, journalists, and members of Washington think tanks).
For each department, the respondents were asked to indicate whether the department had
"policy views due to law, practice, culture, or tradition that can be characterized as liberal
or conservative." Clinton and Lewis (2008) then calculate ideology scores by estimating
an item-response model, which explicitly allows for systematic differences among survey re-
spondents. Reassuringly, we find that experts' assessments of a department's ideology are,
indeed, significantly correlated with the share of Democrats in the same department. The
departments that are identified as strongly liberal--most notably, Education, Labor, EPA,
  31
     In Appendix Figure D13, we show that the same conclusion holds if we adjust these numbers for partisan
differences across states. In other words, Democrats are overrepresented among civil servants even after
accounting for the state of employment.



                                                    16
Health and Human Services, and Housing and Urban Development--are among those with
a higher-than-average presence of Democrats. At the same time, we note that some of the
departments that the experts identified as very conservative, such as the Department of
Commerce, have, in fact, a strong democratic presence.

3.3.3    Democrats' representation increases along the hierarchy

Our data further reveal that Democrat civil servants are especially overrepresented in the
higher layers of the bureaucracy. To show this, we focus on career employees of the Senior
Executive Service (SES) and on employees in the General Schedule (GS). The GS is the
classification system that covers the majority of white-collar federal bureaucrats. It is com-
posed of 15 grades, with increasing levels of responsibility and qualifications requirements.
Advancement between grades depends on a combination of seniority and merit.32 Given that
only GS grades 13­15 include managerial positions, we can distinguish between three layers
of hierarchy in the civil service: simple white-collar positions (GS grades 1­12), managerial
positions (GS grades 13­15), and senior executives (SES).33
    Panel A of Figure 7 shows that the overrepresentation of Democrats increases as we
move up the hierarchy. Among employees in grades 1-12 of the GS, we find about 50% of
Democrats (30% of Republicans and 20% of independents), which rises to approximately
56% at the top of the GS (grades 13-15), and to 63% among career SES.34
    Intriguingly, this finding appears to be driven in large part by selection on observables.
First, Democrats have, on average, higher levels of human capital than Republicans. In
Table 4, we report estimates from regressing indicators for educational attainment on a
bureaucrat's political affiliation. In order to measure education at entry, we restrict the
sample to the first quarter in which the employee is observed.35 According to our results,
Democrats are 6.6 p.p. more likely than Republicans to hold a college degree (column 1),
and 8.3 p.p. more likely to have some form of post-graduate education (column 4). We
continue to observe differences in human capital after controlling for bureau (columns 2 and
5) and pay-level fixed effects (columns 3 and 6)--although the gap between Democrats and
Republicans does narrow. The pattern of coefficients in Table 4, therefore, suggests that
higher human capital allows Democrats to be hired in bureaus and occupations that require
more advanced skills as well as at higher steps of the hierarchy (see also Appendix Table A3).
  32
     See link for details.
  33
     Among the set of bureaucrats for whom we have information on partisan affiliation, 72% of bureaucrat-
quarter observations belong either to the GS or to the career SES. Among them, approximately 70% belong
to grades 1­12 of the GS, about 29% belong to grades 13­15 of the GS, and only 1% are career SES.
  34
     Appendix Figure D16 shows that the same basic pattern is present throghout the entire sample period.
  35
     Since an individual may enter the sample several times when exhibiting multiple employment spells, we
cluster standard errors by individual.

                                                   17
Moreover, the fact that there do remain residual differences after accounting for bureau and
pay grade implies that, even within comparable jobs, Democrat civil servants tend to be
positively selected.
     In addition to being positively selected at the time of hire, Democrats are more likely to
be promoted after they enter the bureaucracy. In Table 5, we present estimates of partisan
differences in promotions from grades 13­15 of the GS to the career SES (columns 1­3), as
well as promotions from grades 1­12 of the GS to grades 13-15 (columns 4­6).36 Given that
promotions are rare events at the quarterly level, all estimates in Table 5 are multiplied by
1,000. The results show that Democrats are more likely than Republicans to be promoted
to higher levels of the hierarchy (columns 1 and 4), with a sizeable share of the gap being
attributable to differences in educational attainment and the bureaus in which they serve
(columns 2­3 and 5­6).37
     The second factor that helps to explain greater overrepresentation of Democrats at higher
levels of the bureaucracy is their lower propensity to exit. To illustrate this, Panel A of
Figure 8 plots survival curves by partisan affiliation. While about 5% of civil servants of either
party exit after the first quarter, the share of those who remain within the federal government
as time progresses is significantly higher for Democrats. In Panel B of Figure 8, we repeat
the exercise in regression form, controlling for bureau × quarter-of-entry fixed effects. After
10 years, Democrats are about 4.5% more likely than Republicans and independents to be
still employed in the civil service.
     In sum, even conditional on pay grade, Democrats have higher levels of human capital
when they enter the bureaucracy, and, once they enter, they are less likely to exit the civil
service. Taken together these facts may hint at a higher proclivity for public service.
     In Panel B of Figure 7, we empirically substantiate the claim that selection on observables
explains most of the widening gap in the share of Democrats and Republicans in managerial
and senior executive positions. The figure presents estimates of  T opGS and  SES in the
following regression model:

                 Democrati =  T opGS · Top GS it +  SES · SES it + Xit  + it .                               (1)

The unit of observation is an individual bureaucrat i, observed in quarter t. Democrati is an
indicator equal to one if the bureaucrat is a Democrat, while Top GS it and SES it indicate
whether, in t, i held a position in either grades 13­15 of the GS or as a career SES. By
  36
      Most of the promotions to grades 13­15 of the GS are from lower GS grades, whereas most of the
promotions to career SES positions are from grades 13-15 of the GS. Only 5% (12%) of new appointments
to grades 13­15 (career SES) are from other positions within the federal bureaucracy.
   37
      In unreported results, and consistent with our null findings in Table 3, we detect no significant alignment
effects on promotions.

                                                       18
construction,  T opGS and  SES measure the extent to which we observe a higher presence of
Democrats (relative to Republicans and independents) as we move from grades 1­12 of the
GS to higher steps of the hierarchy.
    We estimate four versions of the regression model in Equation 1, with different sets
of controls (i.e., Xit ). The baseline specification only includes quarter fixed effects. We
then progressively add bureau × quarter fixed effects, a measure of experience (i.e., the
number of quarters i had served in the federal bureaucracy up to time t), and education
fixed effects. As shown in Panel B of Figure 7, each control explains part of the increase in
Democratic overrepresentation along the hierarchy. Collectively these three factors explain
essentially all of the differences relative to grades 1­12 of the GS. This suggests that greater
overrepresentation of Democrats among high-ranking bureaucrats is a result of differential
sorting into bureaus and selection on observables.


4       Ideological alignment and procurement performance
Our descriptive analysis shows that, at any one point in time, a sizeable share of federal
bureaucrats are ideologically misaligned with the administration they serve. This raises the
question of whether (mis)alignment has any bearing on their performance.
    Since our analysis covers the vast majority of federal workers, obtaining a comparable
measure of performance among such a varied set of employees is difficult. To make progress,
we focus on a subset of bureaucrats that specialize in fulfilling a comparable and impor-
tant function across all arms of the federal government: procurement officers. Procurement
officers are in charge of purchasing a wide range of goods and services on behalf of the gov-
ernment. They play a crucial role in both the ex ante selection of buyers and the ex post
monitoring of contract execution. Procurement contracts make up a sizeable share of the
federal budget. In 2017, the combined value of these contracts amounted to 9.3% of the U.S.
gross domestic product.38
    Appendix Figure E19 shows the share of procurement officers by party over time. The
patterns therein mirror Facts 2 and 3 above. That is, we do not observe partisan cycles, and
Democrats make up the largest share of officers.


4.1      Empirical evidence
To study the implications of ideological misalignment among procurement officers, we con-
struct two measures of performance: in-scope cost overruns and delays. Cost overruns and
 38
      Congressional Research Service (2021). IF11580, v. 4 UPDATED.


                                                  19
delays constitute ex post deviations from the initial contract and are standard measures
of contract performance in the procurement literature (see, e.g., Bajari and Tadelis, 2001;
Decarolis et al., 2020b; Kang and Miller, 2020). Each measure is defined as the difference be-
tween the realized and the (ex ante) expected outcome, relative to the initial expectation.39
In symbols:

                                              (actual costj - initial costj )
                          cost overrunj =                                     ,                             (2)
                                                      initial costj

where actual costj is the ex post realized cost, and initial costj denotes the expected cost of
contract j . We construct our measure of delay in the same way.
   With these performance measures in hand, we estimate the following contract-level re-
gression model:

                       yj =  · Politically aligned I (j )T (j ) + I (j ) + T (j ) + j                       (3)

where yj is the procurement outcome of contract j (e.g. its cost overrun), which was created
in year × month t = T (j ). i = I (j ) denotes the procurement officer who created it, and
Politically aligned I (j )T (j ) is an indicator equal to one if and only if the officer is affiliated
with the same party as the president when the contract was created. I (j ) and T (j ) are
procurement officer and year × month fixed effects, respectively. To account for the fact
that officers handle multiple contracts, we cluster standard errors at the officer level.40
    To see how  is identified, note that turnover in the White House creates shocks to
the political alignment of individual procurement officers. Since we control for time fixed
effects,  is identified by comparing over-time changes in the performance among officers who
experience shocks, i.e., officers who switch from being aligned with the apex of government
to being misaligned and vice versa.
    Results from estimating our baseline specification in Equation 3 are reported in column
1 of Table 6. Procurement officers who are ideologically aligned with the president have, on
average, lower cost overruns. The estimated effect size is economically significant, amounting
to 1% of initial contract value, which corresponds to about 8% of the average overrun.
    In column 2, we assess whether lower cost overruns for aligned officers are driven by
differences in workload or procurement tasks. If ideologically aligned procurement officers
enjoy a lighter workload or are assigned simpler contracts, then smaller overruns may reflect
  39
     This definition follows Carril et al. (2021). Our results are robust to using alternative measures, such as
those in Decarolis et al. (2020b).
  40
     In Equation 3, Independents are never aligned and experience no changes in alignment. They, therefore,
do not contribute any identifying variation. Including them, however, helps to improve the precision of our
estimates by pinning down T (j ) .


                                                      20
differential task assignment rather than better performance. To that end, we add controls
for a wide range of contract characteristics, such as initial contract size, expected duration,
award type fixed effects, fixed effects for the type of contract pricing, industry fixed effects,
as well as product and service type fixed effects. We also control for the total number of
contracts a given officer has created in the same year and month. The coefficient of interest,
however, remains virtually unchanged.41
    In column 3, we include even more-granular fixed effects, comparing only procurement
officers in the same department and year. If the observed alignment effects were driven by
departments with more aligned procurement officers receiving lighter workloads or easier
procurement tasks, then we would expect the point estimate to noticeably decrease after
controlling for bureau × year fixed effects. This is not the case.
    Our measure of political alignment in columns 1­3 of Table 6 captures ideological con-
gruence between procurement officers and the White House at the time of contract award.
The execution of larger and longer term contracts, however, can span multiple presidencies.42
In addition to alignment at the time of the award, there is thus intensive margin variation
in how long contracts were managed by an aligned officer. We exploit this fact to refine
our measure of alignment by computing for what fraction of a given contract's life-cycle the
assigned procurement officer was ideologically aligned with the current administration. By
contruction, this new measure varies continuously between zero and one.
    Columns 4 and 5 of Table 6 replicate our baseline results using our refined measure of
alignment. Reassuringly, the results are, if anything, somewhat larger and more precise. In
other words, contracts that were handled by an officer that was aligned for a longer period of
time exhibit significantly lower cost overruns. In fact, as shown in Figure 9, the relationship
between our continuous measure of alignment and cost overruns appears to be approximately
linear (conditional on controls).
    In the Appendix, we provide a series of additional robustness checks for our main finding.
In Appendix Table B7, we show that the results are robust to alternative definitions of cost
overrun. Following Decarolis et al. (2020b), we also restrict the sample to contracts over
$25,000. These tend to be contracts that are more complex and for which discretion--and
hence the individual officer's effort--is likely more important. Consistent with this view, we
find larger alignment effects for contracts over $25,000 (cf. Appendix Table B8). Appendix
Table B9 shows that the results are also robust to using a variety of alternative thresholds
for dropping outliers. Finally, we find alignment effects for both presidential transitions in
  41
      As Appendix Table B6 shows, contract type and workload are essentially uncorrelated with political
alignment.
   42
      In our sample, 6.2% of contracts span two presidencies. These are also contracts that tend to require
more monitoring and for which ex post modifications are more frequent.


                                                    21
our data (i.e., Bush­Obama, and Obama­Trump), which suggests that our results are not
driven by the peculiarities of the Trump presidency (cf. Appendix Table B10).
    In Table 7, we consider a range of additional procurement outcomes that could perhaps
offset any negative effect on cost overruns. In column 1, we examine whether the contract
was prematurely terminated.43 The probability of contract termination does not differ sig-
nificantly by political alignment. In column 2, we ask whether delays vary significantly with
alignment. Our measure of delay is constructed in the same fashion as the cost overrun
measure in Equation 2. Again, we do not find any evidence to suggest that delays system-
atically vary with political alignment. In columns 3­5, we study the number of ex post
contract modifications, whether contracts were awarded based on an open competition, and,
finally, the number of bidders. Overall, we do not find offsetting positive effects of political
alignment on other procurement outcomes; and, with the exception of the bidder margin,
all of our null effects are precisely estimated.
    Taken together, the evidence in this section suggests that ideological misalignment of
individual officers has a nontrivial impact on cost overruns. Since there appear to be no
counterbalancing effects on other margins, we conclude that political misalignment is detri-
mental to contract performance.


4.2     Discussion and mechanisms
Our research design compares the performance of contracts assigned to the same officer over
time. Since we address the potential for changes in task assignment by conditioning on a
rich set of observable contract characteristics, the perhaps most likely mechanism behind the
effect of political alignment on cost overruns is, in our view, differential effort.
    There are at least two reasons for why we may expect to see procurement officers' effort
to vary with ideological alignment. One explanation is that performance is rewarded less
when civil servants are misaligned with the apex of the government. To the extent that
procurement performance and political alignment are complements for career progression,
the incentives that civil servants face might induce them to exert greater effort when they are
aligned. An alternative explanation may be a general "morale effect," whereby misaligned
civil servants are less motivated. This latter channel is succinctly described by Besley and
Ghatak (2005), who argue that "the productivity of the bureaucracy will change endoge-
nously if there is a change in the mission due to the principal being replaced, unless there
is immediate rematching. This provides a possible underpinning for the difficulty in reorga-
  43
    Terminations are rare events in which the contract is either terminated due to the failure of the seller
to meet contractual obligations (terminate for default), or because the procurement good or service was no
longer needed (terminate for convenience).


                                                    22
nizing public sector bureaucracies and a decline in morale during the process of transition"
(p. 629).

4.2.1    Promotion incentives

We investigate whether promotion incentives change with alignment by aggregating our
contract-level panel to the procurement officer-quarter level. This allows us to relate career
progression events to cost overruns and delay as well as their interactions with political align-
ment. We focus on four measures of career progression: promotions (defined as an increase
in the officer's paygrade), demotions (a decrease in paygrade), exit from the civil service, and
annual pay. The results are reported in Table 8. Given the rare nature of promotion, demo-
tion and exit events, the respective coefficients are scaled by 100 to correspond to percentage
point changes. Our two performance measures in these regressions are the average relative
cost overrun and the average delay of projects that were completed in the same quarter,
both of which are standardized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.
    We find no evidence that career progression patterns change markedly with alignment.
In Table 8, Column 1, the dependent variable is an indicator for promotions. We do not
find that officers with greater cost overruns or delays are less likely to be promoted, and,
importantly, we do not observe that the link between our two measures of performance
changes significantly with alignment. In column 2, the dependent variable is an indicator for
demotions. According to our estimates, greater delays increase the likelihood of demotion;
but the relationship is nearly equally strong for aligned and misaligned officers. We also find
that higher cost overruns are associated with fewer demotions, with a statistically significant
difference by alignment. The sign of the interaction term, however, is inconsistent with
greater promotion incentives and its magnitude is economically quite small.44 If anything,
the results in column 2 thus suggest that alignment and performance may be substitutes,
which would imply negative incentive effect. The estimates for exit are likewise inconsistent
with positive incentive effects (column 3). Finally, column 4 examines total pay. Total pay
is the only category of career outcomes, for which our estimates imply positive incentive
effects. Their magnitude, however, is economically small. Among politically aligned officers,
a 1 SD increase in delays is associated with only 0.1% lower pay. Taken together, the results
in Table 8 are mixed, suggesting that differential promotion incentives are unlikely to be a
major driver of the observed alignment effects.
  44
     The differential change in the likelihood of demotion in response to a 1 SD increase in cost overruns is
only 2.7% when compared to the mean demotion rate.




                                                     23
4.2.2    Morale effects

We now provide evidence consistent with a morale effect. To that end we make use of the Fed-
eral Employee Viewpoint Survey (FEVS). Collected by the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM), this survey measures employees' perceptions and attitudes towards their workplace.
FEVS is designed to be representative of non-political, non-seasonal federal workers, and re-
peated cross-sections are regularly drawn in proportion to office size. The electronic survey
is administered to both full-time and part-time employees of departments and large inde-
pendent agencies. The mean response rate is 47%.45 We use data for 2006­2019, for a total
of 4,949,609 responses.
    There are two important limitations to the FEVS. (i) It does not elicit partisanship, and
(ii) respondents remain anonymous. Together these make it impossible for us to precisely
measure ideology for any given individual. To address this issue, we resort to imputing re-
spondents' likely political affiliation. As we discussed in Section 3.3, there exists significant
variation in the share of Democrats and Republicans across departments. Similarly, gender
and minority status are strong predictors of partisanship.46 Our imputation procedure pro-
ceeds by calculating the share of Democrats in each sex × minority-status × department
cell. We focus on Democrats as they comprise the plurality across 90% of the cells. We then
define respondents to be Likely Democrats if the share of Democrats in their cell is larger
than 50%.47 Using this definition, 40 out of the 64 sex × minority-status × department cells
are classified as Likely Democrat.48
    To test whether the political alignment of individual i in year t = T (i) affects their morale
and attitude towards their department's mission, we estimate the following regression model:

             yi =  · Likely Democrat i · Democrat President T (i) + T (i) + µi + i                        (4)

where yi captures agreement with different statements on the survey (e.g., "The work I do
is important"). These responses are measured on a Likert scale (ranging from 1=Strongly
disagree to 5=Strongly agree), which we standardize to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one. Likely Democrat i is our imputed indicator for whether an i is a likely
Democrat (as opposed to a Republican/Independent) and Democrat President t denotes an
  45
     This number is from the published Technical reports available online for 2008­2019.
  46
     In our data, the share of Democrats is 54% for female civil servants but only 42% for men. Similarly,
the share of Democrats is 69% for minorities and 40% for non-minority federal employees.
  47
     Since most of the variation in party shares is driven by Democrats, a limitation of this design is that
we are only able to rely on a (likely) Democrat vs. Republican/Independent comparison. We do not have
sufficient variation to separately disentangle Republican/Independents.
  48
     Our results are qualitatively robust to using alternative definitions, such as a continuous probabilistic
measure (cf. Appendix Table C12).


                                                     24
indicator equal to one if the president in year t is a Democrat (as opposed to a Republican).
The key coefficient of interest is  , which captures the differential response of a likely Demo-
crat under a Democrat president. T (i) are year fixed effects, and µi are sex × minority ×
bureau fixed effects. We cluster standard errors at the sex × minority× department level,
corresponding to the level at which our imputed measure of partisanship varies.
    In Figure 10, we report how civil servants' assessment of the general morale (Panel A)
and perceived identification with the mission (Panel B) varies with political alignment. Each
row reports the estimated coefficient on the interaction term in the model above (i.e.,   ^) for a
different survey outcome.49 This estimate measures how the attitudes of "likely Democrats"
change when they become politically aligned. Consistent with a general morale effect, likely
Democrats report that they find their work significantly more important and are more willing
to exert more effort when they are politically aligned with the president (Panel A). The size
of the estimated coefficients is comparable across all morale measures. In Panel B, we
investigate the impact of alignment on attitudes towards the organization's mission. The
results suggest that Democratic civil servants are more likely to identify with the mission
of their organization when serving under Democratic presidents. Once again, the estimates
are similar across all measures of mission and when using a combined index (for which we
average across individual outcomes to obtain a summary measure). Taken together, our
results provide suggestive evidence of a greater "morale effect" due to alignment.


5       Conclusion
A central question in the governance of any organization is how to align the objectives
of leaders with those of their subordinates. In this paper, we turn to the U.S. federal
bureaucracy to study the role of mission alignment in organizations.
    To this end, we combine administrative data on the near universe of federal government
workers with data on all registered voters in the U.S. The resulting dataset allows us to
shed some of the first light on the ideological leanings of a large number of individual civil
servants, and thereby peek into the black box of "bureaucratic politics."
    We establish three stylized facts. First, politicians do use the limited power they have
over personnel policies in order to achieve greater ideological alignment between themselves
and the upper echelon of the bureaucracy. The political cycles in our data are consistent
with the use of the spoils system to better align the highest layers of the bureaucracy with
the goals of the president. Second, we find a remarkable degree of political insulation among
career civil servants. In contrast to political appointees, we see virtually no political cycles
 49
      The regression tables can be found in Appendix Table C11.


                                                    25
in the civil service. Our findings, therefore, suggest that, at its lower levels, the federal
government resembles a "Weberian" bureaucracy, which is largely protected from political
interference. Third, Democrats make up the plurality of civil servants. In addition, we
show that Democratic civil servants are especially overrepresented in higher layers of the
bureaucracy. Any observed difference in career progression, however, is in large part due to
selection on observables. Democratic-leaning bureaucrats have on average higher levels of
educational attainment, and they are less likely to exit the civil service, which results in a
greater accumulation of experience. Both of these two facts are consistent with the idea that
Democrats have a higher proclivity for public service.
    The existence of an impartial and politically insulated career civil service is often seen as
the hallmark of good governance and a "Weberian state." While the insulation of the career
civil service prevents political interference, civil servants may have their own preferences
and ideological leanings, which can conflict with those of the president. As a consequence,
to implement an administration's agenda, politicians and department heads often need to
work with bureaucrats whose personal values are not aligned with the present mission of the
organization. To shed light on the costs of such misalignment, we focus on a subset of civil
servants who work across all departments of the government and for whom we can measure
performance: procurement officers. Linking procurement contracts to the matched personnel
and voter registration data allows us to study the mission-alignment of procurement officers
across nearly all departments of the federal bureaucracy. Strikingly, we find that political
misalignment increases cost overruns by 8%. We provide evidence that suggests that a general
"morale effect" is an important mechanism behind this finding, whereby bureaucrats who are
ideologically misaligned with the organizational mission have lower motivation. As political
turnover leads to sizable mission-misalignment between politicians and civil servants, our
findings provide direct evidence on the costs of political insulation of the bureaucracy, which
should be traded off against the benefits of avoiding political interference. As more and more
organizations embrace a mission-driven focus, our findings may have implications beyond the
public sector.




                                               26
Bibliography
Aghion, P. and J. Tirole (1997): "Formal and Real Authority in Organizations," Journal
 of Political Economy, 105, 1­29.

Akhtari, M., D. Moreira, and L. Trucco (2020): "Political Turnover, Bureaucratic
 Turnover, and the Quality of Public Services," Working Paper.

Ashraf, N. and O. Bandiera (2018): "Social Incentives in Organizations," Annual
 Review of Economics, 10, 439­463.

Ashraf, N., O. Bandiera, E. Davenport, and S. S. Lee (2020): "Losing Prosociality
 in the Quest for Talent? Sorting, Selection, and Productivity in the Delivery of Public
 Services," American Economic Review, 110, 1355­94.

Ashraf, N., O. Bandiera, and B. K. Jack (2014): "No margin, no mission? A field
 experiment on incentives for public service delivery," Journal of Public Economics, 120,
 1­17.

Bajari, P. and S. Tadelis (2001): "Incentives versus Transaction Costs: A Theory of
 Procurement Contracts," The RAND Journal of Economics, 32, 387­407.

Baltrunaite, A. (2019): "Political Contributions and Public Procurement: Evidence from
 Lithuania," Journal of the European Economic Association, 18, 541­582.

Baltrunaite, A., C. Giorgiantonio, S. Mocetti, and T. Orlando (2020): "Dis-
 cretion and Supplier Selection in Public Procurement," The Journal of Law, Economics,
 and Organization, ewaa009.

Bandiera, O., M. C. Best, A. Q. Khan, and A. Prat (2020): "The Allocation
 of Authority in Organizations: A Field Experiment with Bureaucrats," Working Paper
 26733, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bandiera, O., A. Prat, and T. Valletti (2009): "Active and Passive Waste in Gov-
 ernment Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment," American Economic Review, 99,
 1278­1308.

Barbosa, K. and F. V. Ferreira (2019): "Occupy Government: Democracy and the
 Dynamics of Personnel Decisions and Public Finances," mimeo.




                                           27
Bertelli, A. M. and C. R. Grose (2011): "The Lengthened Shadow of Another Insti-
 tution? Ideal Point Estimates for the Executive Branch and Congress," American Journal
 of Political Science, 55, 767­781.

Bertelli, A. M. and D. E. Lewis (2020): "Policy Influence, Agency-Specific Expertise,
 and Exit in the Federal Service," Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory,
 23, 223­245.

Bertrand, M., R. Burgess, A. Chawla, and G. Xu (2019): "The Glittering Prizes:
 Career Incentives and Bureaucrat Performance," The Review of Economic Studies, 87,
 626­655.

Besley, T. and M. Ghatak (2005): "Competition and Incentives with Motivated
 Agents," American Economic Review, 95, 616­636.

Best, M. C., J. Hjort, and D. Szakonyi (2016): "Individuals and Organizations as
 Sources of State Effectiveness, and Consequences for Policy Design," mimeo.

Bolton, A., J. M. de Figueiredo, and D. E. Lewis (2020): "Elections, Ideology, and
 Turnover in the US Federal Government," Journal of Public Administration Research and
 Theory, muaa051.

Bonica, A., J. Chen, and T. Johnson (2015): "Senate Gate-Keeping, Presidential
 Staffing of "Inferior Offices," and the Ideological Composition of Appointments to the
 Public Bureaucracy," Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 5­40.

Brassiolo, P., R. Estrada, and G. Fajardo (2020): "My (running) mate, the mayor:
 Political ties and access to public sector jobs in Ecuador," Journal of Public Economics,
 191, 104286.

 ´nabou, R. and J. Tirole (2003): "Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation," The Review of
Be
 Economic Studies, 70, 489­520.

Carril, R., A. Gonzales-Lira, and M. Walker S. (2021): "Competition under In-
 complete Contracts and the Design of Procurement Policies," mimeo.

Clinton, J. D., A. Bertelli, C. R. Grose, D. E. Lewis, and D. C. Nixon (2012):
 "Separated Powers in the United States: The Ideology of Agencies, Presidents, and
 Congress," American Journal of Political Science, 56, 341­354.

Clinton, J. D. and D. E. Lewis (2008): "Expert opinion, agency characteristics, and
 agency preferences." Political Analysis, 16, 3­20.

                                           28
Cole, R. L. and D. A. Caputo (1979): "Presidential Control of the Senior Civil Service:
 Assessing the Strategies of the Nixon Years," American Political Science Review, 73, 399­
 413.

Colonnelli, E., M. Prem, and E. Teso (2020): "Patronage and Selection in Public
 Sector Organizations," American Economic Review, 110, 3071­99.

Davis, C. M. and M. Greene (2017): "Presidential Appointee Positions Requiring Senate
 Confirmation and Committees Handling Nominations," Congressional Research Service.

Decarolis, F., R. Fisman, P. Pinotti, and S. Vannutelli (2020a): "Rules, Discre-
 tion, and Corruption in Procurement: Evidence from Italian Government Contracting,"
 Working Paper 28209, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Decarolis, F., L. M. Giuffrida, E. Iossa, V. Mollisi, and G. Spagnolo (2020b):
 "Bureaucratic Competence and Procurement Outcomes," The Journal of Law, Economics,
 and Organization.

Deserranno, E. (2019): "Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from
 the Recruitment of Village Promoters in Uganda," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 11, 277­317.

Dewatripont, M., I. Jewitt, and J. Tirole (1999): "The Economics of Career Con-
 cerns, Part II: Application to Missions and Accountability of Government Agencies," The
 Review of Economic Studies, 66, 199­217.

Doherty, K., D. E. Lewis, and S. Limbocker (2019): "Executive control and turnover
 in the senior executive service." ournal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 29,
 159­74.

Evans, P. and J. E. Rauch (1999): "Bureaucracy and Growth: A Cross-National Analysis
 of the Effects of "Weberian" State Structures on Economic Growth," American Sociological
 Review, 64, 748­765.

File, T. (2018): "Characteristics of Voters in the Presidential Election of 2016," mimeo.

Fiva, J. H., B. Geys, T.-R. Heggedal, and R. Sørensen (2021): "Political Alignment
  and Bureaucratic Pay," Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory.

Halper, E. (2017): "Civil servants charge Trump is sidelining workers with expertise on
 climate change and environment," Los Angeles Times, October 4.


                                            29
Iyer, L. and A. Mani (2011): "Traveling Agents: Political Change and Bureaucratic
  Turnover in India," Review of Economics and Statistics.

Kang, K. and R. A. Miller (2020): "Winning by Default: Why is There So Little
 Competition in Government Procurement?" mimeo.

Khan, A. Q., A. I. Khwaja, and B. A. Olken (2016): "Tax Farming Redux: Experi-
 mental Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 131, 219­271.

------ (2018): "Making Moves Matter: Experimental Evidence on Incentivizing Bureaucrats
  through Performance-Based Postings," American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Khan, Y. (2021): "Mission Motivation and Public Sector Performance: Experimental Evi-
 dence from Pakistan," Job market paper.

Leaver, C., O. Ozier, P. Serneels, and A. Zeitlin (2020): "Recruitment, Effort, and
  Retention Effects of Performance Contracts for Civil Servants: Experimental Evidence
  from Rwandan Primary Schools," American Economic Review.

Nixon, D. C. (2004): "Separation of Powers and Appointee Ideology," Journal of Law,
  Economics, and Organizations, 20, 438­457.

Pfiffner, J. P. (2001): "Presidential Appointments: Recruiting Executive Branch Lead-
 ers," in Innocent Until Nominated: The Breakdown of the Presidential Appointments Pro-
 cess., ed. by G. C. Mackenzie.

Plumer, B. and C. Davenport (2019): "Science Under Attack: How Trump Is Sidelining
 Researchers and Their Work," The New York Times, December 28.

Shimabukuro, J. O. and J. A. Staman (2019): "Categories of Federal Civil Service
  Employment: A Snapshot," mimeo.

Subcommittee on Manpower and Civil Service (1976): "Final Report on Violations
  and Abuses of Merit Principles in Federal Employment," Government Printing Office.

Szucs, F. (2020): "Discretion and Favoritism in Public Procurement," Job Market Paper.

The Plum Book (2020): "United States Government Policy and Supporting Positions,"
 Government Printing Office.

Xu, G. (2018): "The Costs of Patronage: Evidence from the British Empire," American
 Economic Review, Forthcoming.

                                          30
Figures and Tables

   Figure 1: Categorization of Positions in the U.S. Federal Bureaucracy

                   Political Appointments                             Civil Servants
                                                               (non-political appointments)



                    Presidential Appointments
                          58,671 (0.06%)


                Noncareer Senior Executive Service               Career Senior Executive Service
                         57,715 (0.06%)                                 476,061 (0.46%)
    Authority




                      Schedule C appointees
                         110,215 (0.11%)

                                                     Competitive Service             Excepted Service
                                                     68,820,392 (66.71%)            33,646,191 (32.61%)



 Notes: Breakdown of positions in the U.S. federal bureaucracy by the type of appointment (political
 appointments vs. non-political civil service appointments). The numbers reported are the total number
 of unique employee-quarter observations in each position type between 1997-2019. The shares are shown
 in parentheses.




                                                     31
                Figure 2: Partisan Affiliation of Political Appointees

           1

           .9

           .8

           .7

           .6
   Share




           .5

           .4

           .3

           .2
                                                                                  Republican
           .1                                                                     Democrat
                Clinton   Bush        Bush       Obama      Obama    Trump        Independent
           0
                19 7
                19 8
                20 9
                20 0
                20 1
                20 2
                20 3
                20 4
                20 5
                20 6
                20 7
                20 8
                20 9
                20 0
                20 1
                   12

                20 3
                20 4
                20 5
                20 6
                20 7
                20 8
                   19
                   1
                   9
                   9
                   9
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   1



                   1
                   1
                   1
                   1
                   1
                   1
           19




                20


                                        Year

Notes: Share of political appointees (presidential appointments, non-career senior executive service,
schedule C appointees) by party over time. Dashed vertical lines mark presidential terms.




                                               32
                                Figure 3: Share of Political Appointees Leaving Around Presidential Transitions

                     100                                                                                              100
                                      Obama                                     Trump                                                          Bush                                Obama
                      90                                                                                               90

                      80                                                                                               80

                      70                                                                                               70

                      60                                                                                               60
             Share




                                                                                                              Share
                      50                                                                                               50

                      40                                                                                               40

                      30                                                                                               30

                      20                                                                                               20

                      10                                                                                               10

                       0                                                                                                0
                           15




                                       16




                                                         17




                                                                                  18




                                                                                                        19




                                                                                                                            06




                                                                                                                                          07




                                                                                                                                                           08




                                                                                                                                                                    09




                                                                                                                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                                                              11
                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                       20




                                      20




                                                        20




                                                                                20




                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                        Year                                                                                                       Year

                                           Republican   Democrat            Independent                                                               Republican   Democrat    Independent




                                    (a) Obama-Trump Transition                                                                                 (b) Bush-Obama Transition
33




                                                                 100
                                                                                       Clinton                                         Bush
                                                                  90

                                                                  80

                                                                  70

                                                                  60
                                                         Share




                                                                  50

                                                                  40

                                                                  30

                                                                  20

                                                                  10

                                                                   0
                                                                       98




                                                                                     99




                                                                                                   00




                                                                                                              01




                                                                                                                                  02




                                                                                                                                                 03
                                                                   19




                                                                                  19




                                                                                                  20




                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                             Year

                                                                                              Republican     Democrat             Independent




                                                                                          (c) Clinton-Bush Transition
     Notes: Share of exits among political appointees around presidential transitions. Exit at t takes place if an individual is present in quarter t and
     not in t + 1. Dashed vertical line marks the first quarter in the year of the transition.
                    Figure 4: Partisan Affiliation of Civil Servants

           .8


           .7


           .6


           .5
   Share




           .4


           .3


           .2


           .1                                                                          Republican
                                                                                       Democrat
                Clinton     Bush        Bush       Obama        Obama    Trump         Independent
           0
                19 7
                19 8
                20 9
                20 0
                20 1
                20 2
                20 3
                20 4
                20 5
                20 6
                20 7
                20 8
                20 9
                20 0
                20 1
                   12

                20 3
                20 4
                20 5
                20 6
                20 7
                20 8
                   19
                   1
                   9
                   9
                   9
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   0
                   1



                   1
                   1
                   1
                   1
                   1
                   1
           19




                20


                                           Year

Notes: Share of other (non-political) civil servants (competitive service, career senior executive service,
excepted service) by party over time. Dashed vertical lines mark presidential terms.




                                                  34
                              Figure 5: Share of Civil Servants Leaving Around Presidential Transitions

                    16                                                                                               16

                    14           Obama                                         Trump                                 14                     Bush                                 Obama
                    12                                                                                               12

                    10                                                                                               10
            Share




                                                                                                             Share
                     8                                                                                                8

                     6                                                                                                6

                     4                                                                                                4

                     2                                                                                                2

                     0                                                                                                0
                         15




                                  16




                                                     17




                                                                                 18




                                                                                                      19




                                                                                                                          06




                                                                                                                                       07




                                                                                                                                                         08




                                                                                                                                                                  09




                                                                                                                                                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                            11
                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                     20




                                 20




                                                    20




                                                                               20




                                                                                                     20




                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                    Year                                                                                                         Year

                                       Republican   Democrat               Independent                                                              Republican   Democrat    Independent




                               (a) Obama-Trump Transition                                                                                     (b) Bush-Obama Transition
35




                                                                 16

                                                                 14                   Clinton                                        Bush
                                                                 12

                                                                 10
                                                         Share




                                                                  8

                                                                  6

                                                                  4

                                                                  2

                                                                  0
                                                                      98




                                                                                    99




                                                                                                 00




                                                                                                            01




                                                                                                                                02




                                                                                                                                                03
                                                                  19




                                                                                 19




                                                                                                20




                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                           Year

                                                                                            Republican     Democrat             Independent




                                                                                         (c) Clinton-Bush Transition
     Notes: Share of exits among (non-political) civil servants around presidential transitions. Exit at t takes place if an individual is present in
     quarter t and not in t + 1. Dashed vertical line marks the first quarter in the year of the transition.
Figure 6: Share of Democratic Employees and Agency Ideology Score (Clinton
and Lewis 2008)

                       85



                       75
                                     Education
                                                  EPA                  State
                       65
     Share Democrats




                                        HHS
                                                HUD
                                                                 SSA
                                              Labor
                       55                                                                                    Commerce
                                                                              Justice                    Treasury
                                                                 Veterans Affairs        Interior
                                                                                  Energy
                       45
                                                                                                    Homeland Sec.
                                                                                     Agriculture
                                      = - 4.91
                       35                                                          Transportation
                                 (p-value = 0.015)



                       25
                            -2         -1.5           -1   -.5                 0           .5        1          1.5     2
                                 Agency Ideology Score (Clinton and Lewis 2008), Liberal to Conservative

  Notes: Relationship between the share of Democrats in the OPM data and the Agency Ideology Score
  of Clinton and Lewis (2008), which measures expert assessments' of the degree to which a department or
  agency is liberal (low) to conservative (high). The graph includes all the departments and major agencies,
  for which we observe at least 100 civil servants in our data. Departments and the largest agencies are
  highlighted. The best-fit line, coefficient and p-value are from a regression of Share Democrats on the
  Agency Ideology Score, using data from all departments and agencies with at least 100 civil servants in
  our data.




                                                                     36
Figure 7: Share of Democratic Employees Increases Along the Hierarchy

                         .8
                        .75
                         .7
                        .65
                         .6
                        .55
                         .5
                        .45
          Share




                         .4
                        .35
                         .3
                        .25
                         .2
                        .15
                         .1                                                                                       Republican
                        .05                                                                                       Democrat
                                                                                                                  Independent
                         0
                   General Schedule                   General Schedule Top Level               Senior Executive
                                                       Level of the Hierarchy


                                        (a) Average Share of Democrats Along the Hierarchy


                          .2

                        .18

                        .16

                        .14

                        .12
          Coefficient




                          .1

                        .08

                        .06

                        .04

                        .02

                          0                                                                     General Schedule Top Level
                                                                                                Senior Executive
                        -.02
                              Quarter       Quarter-Bureau   Quarter-Bureau   Quarter-Bureau
                                                              +Experience      +Experience
                                                                                 +Educ.
                                                         Controls


                        (b) Increase in Democratic Presence Relative to General Schedule Level
Notes: Panel (a) shows the share of civil servants by party at the lower General Schedule level (below
grade 13), the top General Schedule level (grade 13 or above) and the Senior Executive level. Panel
(b) reports coefficients from estimating four different versions of Equation 1, and show the gap in the
share of Democrats at the top General Schedule level and the Senior Executive level relative to the
lower General Schedule level. These gaps are reported after conditioning only on quarter fixed effects,
on bureau-quarter fixed effects, adding a control for the number of quarters of experience in the federal
bureaucracy, and adding education level fixed effects. Reporting 95% confidence intervals, based on
standard errors clustered at the individual level.
                                                                      37
            Figure 8: Democratic Employees are Less Likely to Leave

                                                                   100

          % Who Stay Up to This Quarter                             95

                                                                    90

                                                                    85

                                                                    80

                                                                    75

                                                                    70

                                                                    65

                                                                    60

                                                                    55

                                                                    50

                                                                    45

                                                                    40
                                                                          2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40

                                                                                                                             Quarter from Entry

                                                                                                               Republican              Democrat              Independent



                                                                                      (a) Survival Probability Across Partisan Affiliations
          Coefficient on Democrat / Mean Dep. Var. for Rep./Ind.




                                                                   .05




                                                                   .04




                                                                   .03




                                                                   .02




                                                                   .01




                                                                    0

                                                                          2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40

                                                                                                                             Quarter from Entry


                                                                         (b) Democrats vs Republicans/independents Survival Probability
Notes: Panel (a) shows the share of civil servants who did not leave (i.e. survived) as a function
of quarter from entry, broken down by party. Panel (b) shows the difference in the probability of
survival between Democrats and Republicans/independents as a function of quarter from entry. The
differential survival probability is expressed relative to the mean survival probability among Republicans
and independents.



                                                                                                                                 38
                                     Figure 9: Greater political alignment decreases cost overrun

                                    .015




                                     .01
   Residual relative cost overrun




                                    .005




                                       0




                                    -.005




                                     -.01


                                            -1         -.5              0              .5           1
                                                              Residual share aligned


Notes: The figure shows the partial correlation between share of political alignment and relative cost
overrun in a bin scatter plot. The relationship shown is after partialing out individual fixed effects and
year × quarter fixed effects (see Table 6, column 1).




                                                                  39
                                                 Figure 10: Morale and mission increase with political alignment

                                  The work I do is important                                                          My work relates to agency goals and priorities




         Employees have a feeling of personal empowerment
                                                                                                                         Satisfied with information from organization



         Work gives me a feeling of personal accomplishment

                                                                                                                           I know what is expected of me on the job

              Constantly looking for ways to do my job better
40




                                                                                                                      Agency is successful at accomplishing mission
                                   I like the kind of work I do




                                     Morale index (average)                                                                                 Mission index (average)
                                                                  -.02          0        .02        .04         .06                                                     -.02      0        .02      .04      .06      .08
                                                                         Likely Democrat x Democrat President                                                                  Likely Democrat x Democrat President


                                  (a) Measures of general morale                                                                        (b) Measures of identification with mission
     Notes: Each row reports the regression coefficient of Likely Democrat × Democrat President from equation Equation 4 for different dependent
     variables. All dependent variables are on the Likert scale (1: Strongly disagree, 5: Strongly agree) and standardized to have a mean 0 and SD 1.
     Morale index and Mission index are averages of all measures in their respective panel. The regression table is reported in Appendix Table C11.
     Reporting 95% confidence intervals, based on standard errors clustered at the Sex × Minority × Department-level.
Table 1: Average Differences in Observables Between Matched and Unmatched
Bureaucrats

                                           (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)         (6)
                                              Matched              Unmatched          Matched - Unmatched
                                          Mean    Std. dev.     Mean    Std. dev.   Difference Standard error
 Age less than 30                         0.413      0.492      0.448     0.497       -0.035       0.001
 Age 30-40                                0.263      0.440      0.250     0.433       0.013        0.001
 Age 40-50                                0.176      0.381      0.161     0.368       0.015        0.000
 Age 50-60                                0.113      0.316      0.102     0.302       0.011        0.000
 Age more than 60                         0.035      0.184      0.038     0.192       -0.003       0.000
 Highest education: college               0.237      0.425      0.219     0.413       0.019        0.001
 Highest education: more than college     0.278      0.448      0.247     0.432       0.030        0.001
 Quarters in federal bureaucracy         43.838     43.903     34.920    41.980       8.918        0.052
 Annual pay in USD                        41,216    34,994      38,812   33,214        2,404       41.480
 Employed in DC                           0.117      0.321      0.134     0.341       -0.018       0.000
 Observations                           1,263,181             1,546,726             2,809,907
  Notes: Descriptive statistics of individuals (mean and standard deviation) for which party affiliation
  is available (matched, columns 1-2) and for those for which party affiliation is unavailable (unmatched,
  columns 3-4). Column 5 reports the mean differences and column 6 the corresponding standard errors.
  Sample includes all civil servants with non-redacted names serving between 1997-2019.




                                                     41
   Table 2: Political Cycles Among Political Appointees and Civil Servants

                         (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
                       Employee is Democrat      Employee is Republican     Hire is Democrat      Hire is Republican
Panel A: Political Appointees
President Democrat      0.497***    0.494***                               0.550***    0.551***
                         (0.011)     (0.011)                                (0.011)     (0.011)
President Republican                             0.459***     0.459***                            0.508***   0.508***
                                                  (0.011)      (0.011)                             (0.011)    (0.011)

Observations            82,735       82,733       82,735       82,733        6,716      6,665      6,716       6,665
Effect size             +152%        +151%        +504%        +504%        +191%      +192%      +677%       +687%
Panel B: Civil Servants
President Democrat      -0.001***   -0.002***                              0.012***    0.005***
                         (0.000)     (0.000)                                (0.001)     (0.001)
President Republican                             0.001***      0.000**                            0.004***     0.000
                                                  (0.000)      (0.000)                             (0.001)    (0.001)

Observations           38,671,839   38,671,833   38,671,839   38,671,833   1,246,262   1,246,248 1,246,262   1,246,248
Effect size              -0.2%        -0.4%        +0.3%        +0.2%       +2.7%       +1.2%     +1.6%       +0.0%
Bureau FEs                No           Yes          No           Yes          No         Yes        No         Yes

  Notes: Regression estimates of the party alignment effect. The unit of observation is the individual-
  quarter. The sample covers all matched individuals between 1997-2019. Panel A restricts the sample
  to political appointees (presidential appointments, non-career senior executive service, schedule C ap-
  pointees). Panel B restricts the sample to civil servants (competitive service, career senior executive
  service, excepted service). All regressions include a linear time trend. In columns 1-2, the dependent
  variable is a dummy that is 1 if the civil servant is a Democrat. In columns 3-4, the dependent variable
  is a dummy that is 1 if the civil servant is a Republican. Columns 5-8 restrict the sample to new en-
  trants. New entrants are defined as individuals we observe in that quarter in the OPM data, but not in
  the previous quarter. In columns 5-6, the dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if the new entrant
  is a Democrat. In columns 7-8, the dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if the new entrant is a
  Republican. President Democrat is a dummy that is 1 if the president is a Democrat, and 0 otherwise.
  President Republican is a dummy that is 1 if the president is a Republican, and 0 otherwise. Bureau
  FEs are fixed effects for departmental sub-units (agency/subelement). The effect size is defined as the
  estimated coefficient divided by the mean of the dependent variable when the president is Republican
  (columns 1, 2, 5, and 6) or Democrat (columns 3, 4, 7, and 8). The standard errors are clustered at the
  individual-level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                         42
              Table 3: Political Alignment and Career Progression

                                  (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)     (6)
                                   Log total pay                  Transferred away from DC
 Politically aligned          0.0006*** -0.0003**           0.0002     0.0001    -0.0005 -0.0006
                               (0.0001)     (0.0001)       (0.0001) (0.0001) (0.0007) (0.0007)
 Observations                 37,795,051   37,794,485     3,791,990   3,790,618    93,437     89,536
 Sample                           All          All        Non-SES     Non-SES       SES        SES
 Individual FEs                  Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
 Year-Quarter FEs                Yes           No            Yes         No         Yes         No
 Year-Quarter-Bureau FEs          No          Yes            No          Yes         No        Yes

Notes: Regression estimates of the party alignment effect on pay and transfers away from DC. The unit
of observation is the individual-quarter. The sample covers all matched (non-political) civil servants
between 1997-2019. In columns 3-4, the sample is restricted to civil servants who work in DC and are
not members of the Senior Executive Service. In columns 5-6, the sample is restricted to Senior Executive
Service civil servants who work in DC. In columns 1-2, the dependent variable is the log annual total pay.
In columns 3-6, the dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if the individual's work location changed
from DC to outside DC. Politically aligned is a dummy that is 1 if the civil servant and president are
from the same party. Bureau FEs are fixed effects for departmental sub-units (agency/subelement). The
standard errors are clustered at the individual-level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                 43
Table 4: Democrats have higher education when they enter the bureaucracy

                                      (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
                                            Has college degree           Has more than college degree
     Democrat                      0.029***     0.005***    0.010***    0.044***    0.020***    0.020***
                                    (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
     Republican                    -0.037***    -0.028***   -0.029***   -0.039***   -0.027***   -0.027***
                                    (0.002)      (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
     Observations                  1,597,048    1,593,070   1,389,662   1,597,048   1,593,070   1,389,662
     Mean dep. var. independents     0.544        0.544       0.536       0.280       0.280       0.270
     Year-Quarter FEs                 Yes          No          No          Yes         No          No
     Year-Quarter-Bureau FEs          No           Yes         Yes         No          Yes         Yes
     Year-Quarter-Pay FEs             No           No          Yes         No          No          Yes

 Notes: The unit of observation is the individual-quarter. Sample is restricted to entrants of the civil
 service between 1997-2019. New entrants are defined as individuals we observe in that quarter in the
 OPM data, but not in the previous quarter. In columns 1-3, the dependent variable is a dummy that
 is 1 if the entrant has a college degree (bachelor's or 4-years college degree). In columns 4-6, the
 dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if the entrant has more than a college degree (graduate-level
 degree). Democrat is a dummy that is 1 if the individual is a Democrat and 0 otherwise. Republican
 is a dummy that is 1 if the individual is a Republican and 0 otherwise. The omitted category are
 independents. Bureau FEs are fixed effects for departmental sub-units (agency/subelement). "Mean
 dep. var. independents" is the mean of the dependent variable among independents. The standard
 errors are clustered at the individual-level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                    44
Table 5: Democrats are more likely to be promoted to higher steps of the hier-
archy

                                      (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
                                  Promotion   from top GS to SES         Promotion from GS to top GS
    Democrat                      0.007***     0.004**   0.003*        0.064***    -0.011**     -0.001
                                   (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)        (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)
    Republican                      -0.003    -0.005**    -0.003      -0.104*** -0.063*** -0.029***
                                   (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)        (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.006)

    Observations                  8,004,963   8,003,767   7,960,755   19,525,090   19,523,408   18,909,511
    Mean dep. var. independents    0.0406      0.0406      0.0408       0.6305       0.6304       0.6511
    Year-Quarter FEs                 Yes         No          No          Yes           No           No
    Year-Quarter-Bureau FEs          No          Yes         Yes          No          Yes          Yes
    Education FEs                    No          No          Yes          No           No          Yes
  Notes: The unit of observation is the individual-quarter. Sample is restricted to individuals serving
  in the general schedule, grades 13-15 (columns 1-3) and grades 1-12 (columns 4-6) between 1997-2019.
  The dependent variable is a dummy that is 1 if the individual was promoted to career SES (columns
  1-3) or to grades 13-15 of the GS (columns 4-6). Democrat is a dummy that is 1 if the individual is
  a Democrat and 0 otherwise. Republican is a dummy that is 1 if the individual is a Republican and 0
  otherwise. For ease of interpretation, all estimates are multiplied by 1000. Bureau FEs are fixed effects
  for departmental sub-units (agency/subelement). "Mean dep. var. independents" is the mean of the
  dependent variable among independents. The standard errors are clustered at the individual-level. ***
  p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1.




                                                     45
                 Table 6: Political alignment reduces cost overrun

                                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)                (5)
                                                      Relative cost overrun
  Mean of dep. var                   0.127        0.127      0.127      0.127              0.127
  Politically aligned              -0.010**     -0.011** -0.010**
                                    (0.005)      (0.004)    (0.004)
  Share politically aligned                                           -0.019***          -0.016***
                                                                       (0.005)            (0.005)
  Year × Month FEs                    Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes
  Individual FEs                      Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes                Yes
  Controls                                         Yes        Yes                           Yes
  Department × Year FEs                                       Yes                           Yes
  Observations                      718,362      718,362 718,182       718,362            718,182
Notes: The unit of observation is the contract. Relative cost overrun is the difference between the actual
costs and the expected costs, normalized by the expected costs (see Equation 3). Politically aligned is a
dummy that is 1 if the procurement officer and president are from the same party when the contract was
created, and 0 otherwise. Share politically aligned is the share of a given contract's duration in which the
procurement officer and the president were from the same party. Controls comprise: Log(Contract size in
USD), Log(expected duration in days), Log(total contracts created in a given year and quarter), industry
(NAICS) fixed effects (1322), award type FEs (4), contract pricing FEs (18), product service code FEs
(1636). Standard errors are clustered at the procurement officer-level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.




                                                  46
         Table 7: Political alignment does not impact other outcomes

                               (1)          (2)            (3)                     (4)           (5)
                          Terminated Delay Modifications                        Competed        Offers
Mean of dep. var             0.00638       0.387          1.236                   0.246         3.468
Panel A: Political alignment at time of award
Politically aligned           0.000       -0.000         -0.004                    -0.005       0.625
                             (0.001)     (0.008)        (0.033)                   (0.005)      (0.580)
Observations                 718,182     718,182       718,182                    718,182      718,182
Panel B: Share of contract duration politically aligned
Share politically aligned     0.000       -0.004         -0.049                   -0.009*       0.692
                             (0.001)     (0.009)        (0.032)                   (0.005)      (0.641)
Observations                 718,182     718,182       718,182                    718,182      718,182
Year × Month FEs               Yes          Yes            Yes                      Yes          Yes
Individual FEs                 Yes          Yes            Yes                      Yes          Yes
Sample                         All          All            All                      All          All
Controls                       Yes          Yes            Yes                      Yes          Yes
Department × Year FEs          Yes          Yes            Yes                      Yes          Yes
Notes: The unit of observation is the contract. Terminated is a dummy that is 1 if the contract was
terminated. Delay is the difference between the actual contract duration and the expected duration,
normalized by the expected duration (see Equation 3). Modifications is the number of post-award
modifications to the contract. Competed is a dummy that is 1 if the contract was awarded by full
and open competition. Offers is the number of bids for the contract. Politically aligned is a dummy
that is 1 if the procurement officer and president are from the same party in the year the contract was
created, and 0 otherwise. Share politically aligned is the share of a given contract's duration in which the
procurement officer and the president were from the same party. Controls comprise: Log(Contract size in
USD), Log(expected duration in days), Log(total contracts created in a given year and quarter), industry
(NAICS) fixed effects (1322), award type FEs (4), contract pricing FEs (18), product service code FEs
(1636). Standard errors are clustered at the procurement officer-level. *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, *
p < 0.1.




                                                  47
  Table 8: Promotion incentives do not change with political alignment

                                                         (1)            (2)      (3)       (4)
                                                     Promoted       Demoted     Exit   Log Pay
Mean of dep. var                                       0.145          1.798     1.112     11.21
Current political alignment                           -0.069*         -0.121   -0.040    -0.004
                                                      (0.035)        (0.158)  (0.124)   (0.002)
Average relative overruns                               0.126         -1.266   -0.836  0.059***
                                                      (0.228)        (1.096)  (0.744)   (0.020)
Average relative delays                                -0.003       0.436*** -0.033***   -0.000
                                                      (0.003)        (0.094)  (0.011)   (0.001)
Current political alignment × Avg. relative overruns    0.000        -0.050*  -0.015* -0.001***
                                                      (0.002)        (0.028)  (0.008)   (0.000)
Current political alignment × Avg. relative delays     0.012           0.032   -0.006    -0.001
                                                      (0.028)        (0.138)  (0.229)   (0.003)
Year × Month FEs                                          Y              Y        Y         Y
Department × Year FEs                                     Y              Y        Y         Y
Individual FEs                                            Y              Y        Y         Y
Party × Avg. cost overrun & delay                         Y              Y        Y         Y
Observations                                           65,000         65,000   65,000   64,884
Notes: The unit of observation is the individual × year × quarter. Promoted is a dummy that is 1 if
the officer saw an increase in the pay grade. Demoted is a dummy that is 1 if the officer experienced
a decrease in the pay grade. Exit is a dummy that is 1 if the officer left the civil service in the given
quarter. Promoted, Demoted and Exit are scaled by 100 to ease the legibility of the resulting coefficient
estimates. Log Pay is the (log) annual earnings of the civil servant. Current political alignment is a
dummy that is 1 if the procurement officer and president are from the same party in the current year and
quarter. Average relative overruns (delays) are the average relative cost overruns (delays) for contracts
that were completed in the given quarter. Both average contract performance measures are standardized
to have a mean 0 and SD 1. Party × Avg. cost overrun & delay comprise the average relative overrun
and delay measures interacted with the Democrat and Republican dummies. Standard errors clustered
at the individual-level. *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1




                                                 48
