                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ADDRESSING BIASES THAT IMPACT HOMEOWNERS' ADOPTION OF SOLAR PANELS

                                      Howard Kunreuther
                                         Anna Polise
                                      Quinlyn Spellmeyer

                                      Working Paper 28678
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28678


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




Support for this research comes from a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
(G-2018-11100/SUB18-04), the Travelers­Wharton Partnership for Risk Management, and the
Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center. Our thanks to Alex Gelber, Geoff
Heal, Alice Hill, Steve Kimbrough, Robert Rabinowitz, Naresh Raheja and Lisa Robinson for
their helpful comments on an earlier draft of the paper and to Carol Heller for her comments and
editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Howard Kunreuther, Anna Polise, and Quinlyn Spellmeyer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Addressing Biases that Impact Homeowners' Adoption of Solar Panels
Howard Kunreuther, Anna Polise, and Quinlyn Spellmeyer
NBER Working Paper No. 28678
April 2021
JEL No. H31,Q42,Q54

                                         ABSTRACT

Solar power is now economically competitive with fossil fuels in many countries, yet relatively
few homeowners have installed solar panels on their property. A principal reason for this
behavior stems from cognitive biases--such as myopia, inertia and herding--that cause
consumers to avoid investing in long-term measures, even those that are financially attractive to
them and produce social benefits such as reducing the long-term consequences of climate change.
A behavioral risk audit can demonstrate ways to address these cognitive biases, in concert with
short-term economic incentives and social influences. We focus on the installation of solar
panels, an issue that has relevance to residents in the United States and the European Union, and
to property owned by businesses and governments.

Howard Kunreuther                               Quinlyn Spellmeyer
Wharton Risk Management                         University of Pennsylvania
 and Decision Processes Center                  3730 Walnut Street
The Wharton School                              Philadelphia, PA 19104
University of Pennsylvania                      quinlynspellmeyer@gmail.com
3819 Chestnut Street, Suite 330
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6366
and NBER
kunreuth@wharton.upenn.edu

Anna Polise
University of Pennsylvania
3730 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
apolise@sas.upenn.edu
           Addressing Biases that Impact Homeowners' Adoption of Solar Panels




Nature of the Problem

Today, we face the challenge of significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions to avoid major

climate-related disasters in the coming years. Experts tell us that by 2050 we can expect massive

property losses from floods, hurricanes, tropical cyclones and wildfires, in addition to negative

health impacts, if we do not address climate change now. To illustrate, an analysis of 136 major

coastal cities around the world reveals that sea level rise will cause average annual flood losses

to increase to between $1.2 and $1.6 trillion by 2050. 1 The World Health Organization estimates

that there will be 250,000 additional deaths every year between 2030 and 2050 due to climate

change. In addition, climate change will cause numerous other adverse effects on human health

and health systems. 2 Climate change scenarios are far worse if one stretches the time horizon to

2100. 3



Since electricity generation is responsible for 27% of US greenhouse gas emissions, a case can

be made for expanding the use of renewable energy technologies, such as solar and wind, to

reduce the impacts of climate change now. In particular, solar technology has greatly advanced

over the past decade and is an economically viable option for replacing fossil fuels as an energy

source. Today, electricity costs per kilowatt hour in the U.S. from using coal are between 6 cents

and 16 cents whereas community solar 4 is between 7 cents and 18 cents, reflecting cost

competitiveness between solar and coal. 5 Economies of scale, increased competition, improved

institutional arrangements like straightforward permitting processes, technological innovations,




                                                 1
and supply chain efficiencies promise to drive the cost of solar energy down by another 15-20%

over the next decade. 6 A recent study by Wood Mackenzie indicates that by 2022, solar will be

cheaper than any other form of power generation in 44 states, and in every state by 2030. 7

Homeowners can take advantage of the Solar Investment Tax Credit and apply a 26% credit to

their federal income taxes on the installation cost of a solar panel system. After these tax credits,

the cost to install solar panels is between $11,144 and $14,696 for an average-sized house in the

United States. 8 Furthermore, a study by Zillow in 2019 revealed that houses with solar-energy

systems sold for 4.1% more on average than comparable houses without solar power. For the

median-valued house, that translates to an additional $9,274. 9



A December 2020 survey of voters in the U.S. by Yale University and George Mason

University10 reveals that most respondents support policies that would encourage the adoption of

energy efficient measures--notably, solar panels on houses, schools, and other buildings--to

assist in reducing CO2 emissions. Nevertheless, according to a survey by the Pew Research

Center in October 2019, only 6% of residents in the United States get their power from solar. 11

Similarly, relatively few homeowners in the European Union had their houses supplied by solar

energy in 2019. The European Union had the solar capacity to produce 295 mega-watts of solar

energy per capita, slightly more than the United States, which generated 231 mega-watts per

capita. This indicates similar levels of solar utilization. By comparison, Australia had the solar

capacity to produce 637 mega-watts per capita and Japan had the solar capacity to produce 498

mega-watts per capita. 12




                                                  2
Characterizing Cognitive Biases and Heuristics

Almost 75 years ago, Herbert Simon coined the term satisficing, with the observation that people

rarely make decisions optimally. 13 He noted that our cognitive limitations lead us to utilize

heuristics or rules-of-thumb that are adequate for solving most choice problems. Since then, a

large number of controlled experiments and field studies in psychology and behavioral

economics have focused on individuals' decision processes under conditions of risk and

uncertainty. Findings from many of these studies are summarized by Daniel Kahneman 14 by

contrasting two modes of thinking:



Intuitive thinking operates automatically and quickly with little or no effort and no voluntary

control. It is often guided by emotional reactions that have been acquired by personal

experience. In the case of climate change, individuals have had limited experience, so they have

a difficult time imagining the adverse impacts it will have on their lives. Thus, many individuals

are not concerned with investing in measures that will reduce greenhouse gas emissions.



Deliberative thinking allocates attention to effortful and intentional mental activities where

individuals undertake benefit-cost tradeoffs that incorporate long-term consequences. If the

impacts of future climate change factor into an individual's decision processes, installing solar

panels are likely be viewed as an attractive investment, not only because of its financial benefits

but also because of its accompanying societal benefits.




                                                 3
Theoretical and empirical studies have identified cognitive biases that characterize intuitive

thinking. Some of these biases may cause homeowners to underestimate or ignore the direct

economic benefits of investing in solar, as highlighted in Table 1.



                  Table 1: Biases that Discourage Investment in Solar Panels

·   Myopia ­ the tendency to focus on overly short future time horizons when appraising

    immediate costs and the potential benefits of investments

·   Inertia ­ the tendency to maintain the status quo

·   Herding ­ the tendency to base choices on the observed actions of friends and neighbors




Addressing Biases via the Behavioral Risk Audit

A behavioral risk audit characterizes how individuals are likely to perceive risks and why they

might not focus on the likelihood and consequences in the same way that experts do. Successful

strategies to address these biases will work with, rather than against, people's risk perceptions

and natural decision biases. 15



The behavioral risk audit draws on the principles of choice architecture 16 so individuals

understand that converting from fossil fuels to solar energy can significantly reduce greenhouse

gas emissions; however, they may still find ways to procrastinate installing solar panels. It is

therefore important to also provide economic incentives that meet households' immediate needs

and create social norms that lead homeowners to undertake these measures now.




                                                 4
Addressing the myopia bias

As noted above, individuals tend to focus on short time horizons when making decisions. More

specifically, many homeowners compare the high upfront costs of installing solar panels with the

benefits of lower electricity costs over the next two or three years and conclude that the purchase

of solar panels is not an attractive financial investment. A Power Purchase Agreement (PPA)

overcomes this bias: a solar provider installs and maintains solar panels on a residential property

free of charge with the owner then buying the power produced at a rate that is typically far lower

than the retail rate charged by the local utility. An empirical study by the North Carolina Clean

Energy Technology Center in 2019 revealed that by switching to solar power, property owners in

the 50 largest cities can expect to save on average between $44 and $187 per month, implying a

savings of $10,560 to $44,880 over the 20-year lifetime of the solar power equipment. 17



Addressing the inertia bias

When people are unsure about the best course of action, there is a tendency to maintain the status

quo, even when a more desirable alternative exists. 18 One way to address this uncertainty is to

make consumers understand that they will be financially better off by adopting the offered

alternative. For example, the PPA provider could provide a guarantee to homeowners that if the

retail price of electricity ever fell below the PPA's contracted price, then the customer would be

charged the lower price. As this is highly unlikely to happen, there is little risk to the seller.



This option could be introduced as the default, which would serve as the final choice unless buyers

went to the trouble of opting out in favor of some other alternative. Field and controlled experiments

in behavioral economics reveal that consumers are likely to stick with the default option. 19




                                                   5
In this case, real estate developers can present solar power as the default option by informing

buyers that solar panels will be installed on the roof of a new house unless the owners decide that

they would prefer not to have them. At the same time, the developer can provide an economic

incentive for the buyer to agree to this energy efficient measure via a PPA that highlights the

financial attractiveness of solar power.



Germany has utilized "green choice" defaults as a way of increasing the number of consumers

who adopt solar and other renewable energies (e.g., wind, thermal and biomass). Electric power

customers in two German communities were automatically enrolled in clean energy programs,

with 90% opting for the default green energy provider. It should be noted that their electricity

costs would have been lower had they opted out of the default and decided to stay with the

original provider. 20 In a similar controlled German study, researchers examined the impact of

nudges, or defaults, on customers' voluntary purchases of renewable energy contracts. Their

analysis of the data revealed that the implementation of an opt-out default increased the

voluntary purchase of green energy contracts by 60%. 21 A recent analysis in Germany found

that when customers were automatically enrolled in renewable energy programs and then given

the ability to opt out, they tended to stick with the default, especially those concerned with the

problem of climate change. 22 The absence of default options in the United States is likely to be a

contributor as to why renewables accounted for only 11% of the country's electricity

consumption in 2019 compared to 40% in Germany.




                                                  6
Local governments can play an important role in utilizing default options to encourage their

residents to adopt solar energy through Community Choice Aggregation (CCA) programs in the

states that have passed enabling legislation. For example, the city of Lancaster, CA had a 94%

acceptance rate with a default option. Local governments who establish CCAs can select an

alternative energy supplier, providing their communities with more control over their electricity by

allowing them to incorporate renewable energy into their portfolios. Thus, households receive the

benefits of solar energy--lower electricity costs and reduced carbon gas emissions--without

having to install panels on their home or property.



Addressing the herding bias

Given the tendency to imitate the behavior of friends and neighbors, one of the most cost-

effective means of encouraging individuals to install solar panels is to create a social norm. If a

homeowner observes solar panels on all their neighbors' roofs, they may follow suit. Early-

adopters in the community who are highly respected may encourage others to follow their

example.



Social norms can be complemented by well-enforced regulations. In this regard, California has

acknowledged solar energy's long-term economic benefits with a regulation that as of January 1,

2020, all new single and multifamily residences be constructed with solar panels. The California

Energy Commission, which approved this legislation, estimates that the monthly mortgage

payment on a house will increase by $40 a month but that the owner will save an average of $80

a month on electricity. 23 Because the cost of the solar panels is included in the mortgage, the

owner's costs are effectively lowered from the moment they purchase the house. Thus, this




                                                 7
policy also addresses the myopia bias by spreading the cost of solar panels over time while

reducing buyers' budgetary concerns about the financial impact of a new house with solar panels.



States and municipalities can use other financial incentives to motivate homeowners to install

solar panels. For example, in a regret lottery, similar in structure to the 1989 Dutch Postcode

Lottery, every house in the region would be given a lottery ticket, but only those with solar

panels would be eligible to win prizes. Homeowners who do not have solar panels would not

win a prize, even if their lottery number were drawn. Field studies and experimental data reveal

that individuals who did not qualify for a prize would feel considerable regret if their number

were drawn. 24



Summary and Conclusions

Cognitive biases may cause homeowners to avoid undertaking measures to mitigate greenhouse

gas emissions. A behavioral risk audit can play a role in showing property owners the short-term

financial benefits of investing in solar panels and the resulting long-term global benefits of

reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Local governments can develop programs and policies that

help residents overcome their biases and address the climate change challenge using economic

incentives. To further enable the switch to solar energy there is a need for research and

development that may result in innovations such as inexpensive storage batteries to deliver

energy during times when there is no sunlight. 25




                                                 8
1
 Hallegatte, S., Green, C., Nicholls, R. et al. (2013). Future flood losses in major coastal cities. Nature Climate
Change 3, 802­806. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1979
2
  Haines, A., & Ebi, K. (2019). The imperative for climate action to protect health. New England Journal of
Medicine, 380(3), 263-273.
3
  Berkley, A., & Letzing, J. (2020). The worst-case climate-change scenario could look like this. We need to avert
it. World Economic Forum. Sept. 23.
4
  Community solar refers to local solar facilities shared by multiple community subscribers who receive credit on
their electricity bills for their share of the power produced. For more details go to see https://www.seia.org
5
    https://www.lazard.com/perspective/levelized-cost-of-energy-and-levelized-cost-of-storage-2020/ (Lazard Estimate)
6
    Geman, B. (2021). Falling solar prices give Biden a head start on zero-carbon goal. Politics & Policy. Jan. 21.
7
  Manghani, R. (2021) Total Eclipse: How falling costs will secure solar's dominance in power. Wood Mackenzie.
January. https://www.woodmac.com/horizons/how-falling-costs-will-secure-solars-dominance-in-power
8
    Parkman, K. (2020) Solar Energy vs. Fossil Fuels. Consumer Affairs. March 31.
9
 Mikhitarian, S. (2019) Homes with Solar Panels Sell for 4.1% More. Zillow. April 16.
https://www.zillow.com/research/solar-panels-house-sell-more-23798/
10
   Leiserowitz, A., Maibach, E., Rosenthal, S., Kotcher, J., Carman, J., Wang, X., Goldberg, M., Lacroix, K., &
Marlon, J. (2021). Politics & Global Warming, December 2020. Yale University and George Mason University.
New Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate Change Communication.
11
   Pew Research Center (2019). U.S. Public Views on Climate and Energy November
https://documentcloud.adobe.com/link/review?uri=urn:aaid:scds:US:27907e95-ee25-4945-9913-16368e8a0c4f
12
     IRENA (2020), Renewable capacity statistics 2020 International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi.
13
     Simon, H.A. (1947). Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative Organization
14
     Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. Macmillan.
15
     Meyer, R. & Kunreuther, H. (2017) The Ostrich Paradox: Why We Underprepare for Disasters. Wharton School Press.
16
     Thaler, R.H. & Sunstein, C.R. (2008). Nudge. Penguin.
17
  Kennerly, J. & Proudlove, A. (2019) Going Solar in America: Ranking Solar's Value to Consumers in America's
Largest Cities. NC Clean Energy Technology Center https://nccleantech.ncsu.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/Going-Solar-in-America-Ranking-Solars-Value-to-Customers_FINAL.pdf
18
  Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status quo bias in decision making. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
1(1), 7-59. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2FBF00055564
 Jachimowicz, J., Duncan, S., Weber, E., & Johnson, E. (2019). When and why defaults influence decisions: A
19

meta-analysis of default effects. Behavioural Public Policy, 3(2), 159-186. doi:10.1017/bpp.2018.43
20
  Pichert, D., & Katsikopoulos, K.V. (2008). Green defaults: Information presentation and pro-environmental
behaviour. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 28(1), 63-73.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0272494407000758
21
   Ebeling, F., & Lotz, S. (2015). Domestic uptake of green energy promoted by opt-out tariffs. Nature Climate
Change, 5(9), 868-871. https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate2681
22
  Kaiser, M., Bernauer, M., Sunstein, C.R., & Reisch, L.A. (2020). The power of green defaults: the impact of
regional variation of opt-out tariffs on green energy demand in Germany. Ecological Economics, 174, 106685.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921800919317975
23
   Rogers, P. (2019). Solar power required for all new California homes starting Jan. 1. The Mercury News.
December 15. https://www.mercurynews.com/2019/12/15/solar-power-required-for-all-new-california-homes-
starting-jan-1/



                                                             9
24
  Zeelenberg, M., & Pieters, R. (2004). Consequences of regret aversion in real life: The case of the Dutch postcode
lottery. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 93(2), 155-168.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0749597803001067; Haisley, E., Volpp, K. G., Pellathy, T.,
& Loewenstein, G. (2012). The impact of alternative incentive schemes on completion of health risk assessments.
American Journal of Health Promotion, 26(3), 184-188. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.4278/ajhp.100729-
ARB-257
25
  For a summary of the current status of battery storage in the United States see U.S. Department of Energy (2020).
Battery Storage in the United States: An Update on Market Trends, July.
https://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/electricity/batterystorage/pdf/battery_storage.pdf




                                                        10
