                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CRIME AND GENDER SEGREGATION:
            EVIDENCE FROM THE BOGOTA "PICO Y GENERO" LOCKDOWN

                                        Brian G. Knight
                                 Maria Mercedes Ponce de Leon
                                          Ana Tribin

                                      Working Paper 28686
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28686


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions in this paper are entirely those of the authors and
do not necessarily represent the views of the organizations to which the authors are affiliated.
Thanks to Gabriela Diaz for helpful research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Brian G. Knight, Maria Mercedes Ponce de Leon, and Ana Tribin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Crime and Gender Segregation: Evidence from the Bogota "Pico y Genero" Lockdown
Brian G. Knight, Maria Mercedes Ponce de Leon, and Ana Tribin
NBER Working Paper No. 28686
April 2021
JEL No. J1,K4,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the link between gender and crime using information from a gender-based
lockdown policy in Bogota Colombia during the pandemic. Under the policy, men were allowed
out on odd days and women on even days, and we investigate whether overall crime rates differed
and whether crime was lower on women-only days. We compare crime in Bogota to other cities
and, within Bogota, the gender-based lockdown period to weeks with other lockdown policies.
Our key findings are that crime rates are higher during the gender-based lockdown policy and that
this is driven by more crime involving male victims and on men-only days. There is no evidence
that higher crime on men-only days is offset by less crime on women-only days. The higher
crimes on men-only days is driven by robbery, stolen cars and motorcycles, and homicides. We
find higher sexual crimes on women-only days and an increase in domestic violence on both
types of days. Taken together, our results suggest that gender segregation, if anything, tends to
increase crime.

Brian G. Knight                                 Ana Tribin
Brown University                                UNDP-RBLAC
Department of Economics, Box B                  Ana.tribin@undp.org
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
Brian_Knight@brown.edu

Maria Mercedes Ponce de Leon
Brown University
64 Waterman St
Providence, RI 02912
maria_ponce_de_leon@brown.edu
1        Introduction

This paper investigates the role of gender segregation in patterns of criminality. This research

is motivated by the fact that men are generally more prone to violence than women. That

is, men commit significantly more offences compared to women and they are also the major-

ity of victims for most crimes, with the exception of domestic and sexual violence (Smith,

2015; Steffensmeier et al. 2005; Buzawa et al., 2017). Given that men commit more crimes

than women, advocates of gender segregation argue that it can reduce crimes against women.

For example, many cities, such as Mexico City, have adopted women-only trains and buses

to protect women from male harassment, and Aguilar et al (2019) find that the segregation

program in Mexico does reduce sexual harassment towards females but increases non-sexual

aggression incidents among males.1 Another example involves gender segregation in schools,

and there is evidence that disruption and violence among male students increases when reduc-

ing the proportion of girls in the classroom (Lavy and Schlosser, 2011; Gee and Cho, 2014).

Outside of these settings, however, there is little quantitative evidence on the effect of gender

segregation on violence and crime.

        To investigate possible links between gender segregation and crime, we study crime pat-

terns in Bogota Colombia during a gender-based COVID lockdown in the spring of 2020.

Under the policy, coined Pico y Genero (peak and gender), only men were allowed to leave

their homes on odd-numbered days, while women were permitted to do so on even-numbered

days. Using daily crime data, and comparing Bogota to other cities in Colombia that did

not have a gender-based lockdown, we investigate overall crime rates during this period and

crime rates on men-only days, relative to women-only days. In this way, this experiment

allows us to examine whether gender segregation increases or decreases crime by analyzing

differences between women-only days and men-only days, differences between crimes involving

male victims and crimes involving female victims, and differences across types of crimes.

        We begin by documenting that the gender-based lockdown mattered, in the sense there is

evidence consistent with more females outside of their homes on women-only days and more

males outside on men-only days. Building upon this, we then investigate patterns of crime on

men-only days versus women-only days. Our key finding is that crime rates are much higher

on men-only days in Bogota, relative to the time period without a gender-based lockdown and
    1
        https://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/11/world/americas/11mexico.html
                                                    2
relative to other cities without a gender-based lockdown. In particular, crime increases by 24

percent on men-only days. Moreover, this increase is not offset by a reduction in crimes on

women-only days, meaning that crime tended to be higher overall as a result of the gender-

based lockdown. The increase in crime on men-only days is driven by an increase in crimes

with male victims, which increases by 34 percent on men-only days. We also find no evidence

of a reduction in crimes against females resulting from gender segregation; if anything, crimes

with female victims tend to increase during the policy. Investigating the types of crimes, we

find increases in robbery, stolen cars and motorcycles, and homicides on men-only days. On

women-only days, by contrast, we find higher sexual crimes. Finally, we document an increase

in domestic violence on both men-only and women-only days.

        The paper proceeds as follows. We next review the relevant literature and then provide

a more detailed overview of the setting. We then describe our empirical approach and data.

Following a presentation of our empirical results, the final section concludes.



2        Related Literature

This paper comes at the intersection of two literatures, one on crime and gender and another on

crime and COVID lockdowns. On the latter, recent literature finds that, except for domestic

violence, most crimes decreased as a result of lockdowns. Using data from 25 large US cities,

Abrams (2020) shows that, following stay-at-home orders, both criminal incidents and arrests

fell considerably, with the effect coming mainly from fewer drug crimes, theft, residential

burglaries, and most violent crimes. Similarly, Boman and Gallupe (2020) compare crime to

the pre-pandemic year and, using calls for service by law enforcement, found a decline in crime

rates for the US. They document that the decrease was driven by minor offenses committed

in groups, while more severe crimes, which are typically committed solo either increased

(partner violence) or remained constant (homicides).2 Estevez-Soto (2020) studies crime

patterns in Mexico City during the pandemic, comparing observed crime to forecasts based

on pre-pandemic trends. He finds a significant reduction in most crimes, partly attributed to

a decrease in urban mobility and under-reporting, but no change in domestic violence, which

was already increasing before the pandemic. Other studies have shown that quarantine led

to a reduction in crimes that are committed on the street (Ashby 2020; Campedelli et al.
    2
        Exploiting data from Philadelphia, the author argues that the drop is not due to a reduction in reporting.
                                                          3
2020; Mohler et al. 2020; Payne et al. 2020 and Cheung and Gunby, 2020) but an increase

in those that occur within the home, such as domestic violence. In particular, several papers

document an increase in calls to report domestic violence: Ag¨
                                                             uero (2020) for Peru, Perez-

Vincent et al. (2020) for Argentina, Leslie and Wilson (2020) and Chalfin (2020) for United

States, Ravindran and Shah (2020) for India, and Mohler et al (2020), who using data from

Los Angeles and Indianapolis, finds that domestic violence increased in both cities due to a

rise in the opportunities for incidents stemming from people being at home more. The link

between the increase in certain crimes and subsequent arrests has not been clear. Miller at

al (2020), using data from Los Angeles, find that, while domestic violence calls for service

increased after the city first went into lockdown, arrests for this crime decreased during that

same time. Bullinger et al (2020) find similar results for Illinois, where, even with domestic

violence calls on the increase following the stay-at-home order, reported crimes and arrests for

this particular crime fell considerably (arrests fell by over 26 percent). During the pandemic,

the police force had to take on new responsibility to ensure public safety while working with

limited resources. These papers highlight some possible unintended consequences of policing

priorities having to shift in order to enforce the new COVID-related measures.

   Concerning the link between gender and crime, the literature has documented a gender gap

in crime, by which men commit more crimes than women (Steffensmeier and Allan (1996)).

More recently, researchers have studied the evolution of this gender gap as well as explanations

for the fact that it appears to be closing. Lauritsen, Heimer, and Lynch (2009) use data from

the US between 1973 and 2005, documenting that the gap for aggravated assault, robbery,

and simple assault has narrowed as a result of male crime rates decreasing more quickly than

female crime rates. De Coster and Cornell (2010), using survey data from the US, provide

evidence that depression seemed to exacerbate the effect of anger over committing a crime,

but for males only. Hence, differences in crime rates between genders result from differences

in how the two genders process certain emotions and how these emotions interact. Using data

from Colombia, Khanna et al (2021) find that the probability of getting arrested increase after

mass layoffs but only for men. Chetty et. al. (2016) document that boys growing up in high

crime neighborhoods tend to work less than girls growing up in comparable neighborhoods and

suggest that this might involve substitution from formal employment into crime. Couttenier

et al (2019) show that male adult asylum seekers exposed to civil conflict during childhood

                                               4
have a higher probability of committing violent crimes, while this effect is absent for women.

Damm and Dustmann (2014) find strong evidence that early exposure to neighborhood crime

increases the probability of subsequent criminal convictions for males but not for females.

        Our paper contributes to these two literatures by studying the effects of crime during a

lockdown that created gender segregation, with men allowed out on some days and women out

on others. This setting provides us with a unique lens through which to study the relationship

between gender, segregation by gender, and patterns of crime.



3        Background

The coronavirus outbreak officially started in Colombia on March 6, 2020, when the first case

of COVID-19 was diagnosed in Bogota, the capital city. In the span of five days, between

March 12 and March 17, all public events were banned, airports and all transportation station

were closed until further notice, and the President of Colombia declared a national state of

emergency. Bogota's mayor then implemented a voluntary lockdown from March 20 to March

23. This initiative was followed by the President issuing a national shelter-in-place order

on March 24. While this was initially in place until April 13, it was subsequently extended

but with a re-opening of the manufacturing and construction sectors starting on April 27.

This was followed by a further loosening of restrictions on May 11, when even more areas of

commerce started to operate.

        In Bogota specifically, the city was under lockdown from March 20 to April 13. Starting

on April 13, there was an extension of the quarantine but Bogota implemented a gender-based

restriction on mobility called "pico y genero", translated as "peak and gender".3 Under this

policy, women could go outside for critical needs (i.e., banking, grocery shopping, medical

appointments) on even-numbered calendar days, while men were permitted to go outside on

odd-numbered calendar days.4 Anyone caught breaking the rule was subject to a fine of

USD240, about the minimum monthly salary in Colombia. Violators must pay half the fine

within five days or face an appearance in court.
    3
     The measure was inspired by the Colombian capital's "pico y placa" program ("peak and plate"), a policy
designed to reduce traffic congestion and pollution.
   4
     To the best of our knowledge, no other cities in Colombia implemented gender-based lock-
down.     Some other cities instead applied restrictions on entry to stores and banks based on
the last digit of the identification card.      See https://www.eltiempo.com/colombia/otras-ciudades/
pico-y-cedula-pico-y-genero-conozca-la-restriccion-en-cada-ciudad-de-colombia-484516

                                                     5
        There were exemptions from the gender-based lockdown for people working in critical

industries, such as food service and health care. Given these exemptions, the policy did

not lead to complete gender segregation, with some women allowed out on men-only days

and, likewise, some men allowed out on women-only days, all for work-related purposes.

Importantly, females were thus still potentially threatened by male perpetrators on women-

only days.

        On April 27, as noted above, the President mandated a loosening of restrictions to restart

some economic activity. The construction sector, which is highly male (94 percent), was

re-opened. Thus, adding to the original exemptions, there were even more males out on

women-only days during the second half of pico y genero, relative to women-only days during

the first two weeks of pico y genero. Family courts also re-opened, allowing victims of domestic

violence to report crimes. On May 11, even more sectors were allowed to re-open. The mayor

of Bogota responded by ending the pico y genero policy, noting that it was now impossible to

enforce gender-based mobility. Therefore, on May 11, the pico y genero restriction ended.

        To summarize, on March 20, the country moved to voluntary quarantine followed by

mandatory national quarantine on March 23. The city of Bogota started the gender-based

lockdown policy on April 13, and some sectors, such as construction, began re-opening on

April 27. Finally Bogota ended pico y genero on May 11.



4        Data

Our crime data are based upon administrative records from the National Police of Colombia.5

These data are based on crime incidents and, for the purposes of our analysis, we exploit

information on the city in which the crime occurred, the exact date of the crime, and the

gender of the victim. We aggregate these data to the city-date level. For comparability with

Bogota, the most populated city in Colombia, we drop small cities, those with population less

than 5,000.6 This leaves us with a sample of 897 municipalities.

        In terms of constructing our sample period, the pico y genero policy lasted 28 days, with

the first day on April 13 and the last day on May 10. Thus, we have 14 women-only days and

14 men-only days. As a comparison period, we focus on the three weeks before the policy,
    5
   These data were provided through a right of petition.
    6
   Population measures are based upon estimates from the National Administrative Department of Statistics
(DANE) as of 2020
                                                   6
from March 23 until April 12, and the three weeks after the policy, from May 11 until May

31. Thus, in total, our sample period consists of 70 days.

    To investigate whether pico y genero mattered, we also use mobility data from Google,

from which we gathered information on mobility in Colombia at the department level, which

are more aggregated than cities, but also for the city of Bogota specifically. These data

provide information on mobility day-by-day and separately for six place categories: Grocery

and Pharmacy, Parks, Transit Stations, Retail and Recreation, Residential and Workplaces.

Mobility measures are constructed with respect to a baseline, defined by Google as the median

value for each specific day of the week during the pre-lockdown period, covering January 3,

2020 until February 6, 2020.



5    Hypotheses and Methods

We examine the effects of pico y genero on total crimes, crimes with female victims, crimes

with male victims, and types of crimes. Our hypotheses are motivated by the fact that crimes

are disproportionately committed by men but that, as we will demonstrate below and across

all types of crimes, roughly one-half of victims are female in Bogota and roughly one-half

are male. Given this, we hypothesize that crimes with male victims should increase on men-

only days. This is driven by the fact that there are both more potential offenders and more

potential male victims on these days. In terms of crimes with female victims, predictions are

less clear. On men-only days, there are more potential perpetrators but fewer potential female

victims. Thus, crimes with female victims could either increase or decrease on men-only days.

Likewise, on women-only days, there are fewer potential perpetrators but more potential

female victims, leading again to an ambiguous prediction. An additional complicating factor

is that females out on women-only days might be more susceptible to crimes by male strangers

since they cannot have male companions. This lack of male companions could increase crimes

against females on women-only days. In terms of overall crimes, aggregated across both male

and female victims, we hypothesize that crime rates should be higher on men-only days since

the number of potential victims is similar but there are more potential perpetrators. In terms

of women-only days, we do not have a clear prediction. While there are fewer potential

perpetrators, females who are outside might be more susceptible to crime for the reasons


                                              7
described above.

   To investigate these hypotheses, we develop a difference-in-differences identification strat-

egy, exploiting the fact that the Pico y Genero policy only took place in Bogota and only

during four weeks of the broader lockdown period. Hence, to estimate the effect of gender

segregation on crime, we will compare reported crime in Bogota versus the rest of Colombia

for three specific time periods: men-only days, women-only days, and the non-gender lock-

down period, covering the three weeks before pico y genero and the three weeks after. More

specifically, throughout the empirical analysis, we estimate the following regression model:



Yc,t = 1 Bogota X pico X men only+2 Bogota X pico X women only+3 Bogota X odd+µt +c +                   c,t


Where Yc,t represents crime outcomes in city c on day t, µt and m correspond to time and

municipality fixed effects, respectively, and   m,t   represents the unobservable factors influencing

reported crime in city c on date t. Our key regressors include Bogota X pico X men only,

which captures excess crime in Bogota during the policy on days when only men can go out,

relative to other days outside of the pico y genero period, and Bogota X pico X women only,

which captures excess crime in Bogota during the policy on days when only women can go

out, again relative to other days outside of the pico y genero period. Finally, Bogota X odd

captures any differences in crime between odd days and even days in Bogota. Without this

control, any such differences between odd days (men only) and even days (women only) in

Bogota would be loaded onto Bogota X pico X men only. Our crime outcomes measures (Yc,t )

include the natural log (plus one) of the number of crimes in city c on date t, the natural log

(plus one) of the number of crimes involving male victims in city c on date t, and the natural

log (plus one) of the number of crimes involving female victims in city c on date t. We also

later investigate arrests and types of crimes.

   While our analysis is based upon a triple interaction, note that we cannot separately

control for Bogota X pico since this would be collinear with Bogota X pico X men only,

Bogota X pico X women only, and the Bogota city fixed effect. Said differently, our strategy

involves measuring the effects of pico y genero on crime rates but, importantly, allowing for

heterogeneity between men-only days and women-only days. Likewise, we cannot control

separately for Bogota X even since this would be collinear with Bogota X odd and the Bogota


                                                  8
city fixed effect. Finally, we cannot separately control for pico X men only and pico X women

only as these are date-specific and thus already fully captured in the date fixed effects.

        Given that we only have one treatment city, Bogota, and only 28 days during the pico

y genero period, p-values from conventional large sample inference techniques are likely to

be understated. Given this, we calculate p-values via permutation methods. In particular,

we run separate placebo regressions in which we assume that each of the cities in Colombia

other than Bogota adopted pico y genero. Running these placebo regressions separately for

each city gives up a placebo distribution of effects, and, following standard techniques, we

calculate p-values via the share of regressions in which the absolute value of the placebo

coefficient exceeded the corresponding coefficient from the regression using Bogota as the pico

y genero city. As a robustness check, we also run placebo regressions in which we hold Bogota

fixed as the treatment city but instead permute the distribution of dates, randomly assigning

14 days from our sample period to be pico y genero odd days and a different 14 days from

our sample period to pico y genero even days.



6        Did the Lockdown Matter?

Before investigating the effects of the lockdown on patterns of crime, we first provide some

evidence that the gender-based lockdown policy mattered. While we lack formal data on

mobility by gender during pico y genero, we provide three pieces of evidence consistent with

either enforcement of pico y genero or changes in gender-based mobility on men-only days

versus women-only days.

        First, according to anecdotal evidence, the measure was heavily enforced. In particular,

during the first two days of pico y genero, police sanctioned 104 women and 610 men in Bogota

for violating the gender-based mobility guidelines.7 Moreover, as mentioned above, the fine

of USD240 was significant, representing the minimum monthly salary in Colombia at current.

Thus, there were strong incentives to follow the gender-based lockdown policy.

        Second, we use mobility data to investigate whether our results are consistent with those

in Woskie and Wenham (2021), who study a similar policy in Panama and show that overall

mobility was lower on women-only days. Given this, we investigate whether overall mobility

in Bogota was lower on women-only days. To do so, we use Google mobility data and com-
    7
        See https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/15/world/americas/virus-colombia-bogota-men-women.html
                                                  9
pute mobility in Bogota relative to the rest of Colombia. We aggregate the 70 days in our

sample period into six categories: odd days pre-policy, even days pre-policy, men-only days

(odd) during pico y genero, women-only days (even) during pico y genero, odd days after the

policy, and even days after the policy. As shown in Figure 1, we find that, consistent with

Wolskie and Wenham (2021), mobility was indeed significantly lower on women-only days,

relative to men-only days, during pico y genero, relative to the rest of Colombia for three

mobility categories: retail and recreation, parks, and grocery and pharmacy. We find no such

differences between even days and odd days before the pico y genero period started or between

even days and odd days after the pico y genero policy ended. We also find lower mobility

on women-only days during pico y genero for workplace and transit. These differences are

smaller, however, presumably due to exemptions for certain sectors and the lesser degree of

discretion associated with employment-related mobility. Finally, we find more people at home,

as reflected in the residential category, on women-only days, relative to men-only days, dur-

ing pico y genero, relative to the rest of Colombia. These differences are also small, however,

presumably reflecting the significant amount of time spent at home at baseline. To conclude,

we find that mobility was lower on women-only days, relative to men-only days. Although we

lack formal evidence on the mechanism, we conjecture that females were hesitant to go out

alone in Bogota, a high crime city, and especially so during the lockdown policy, when the

streets were relatively deserted.8

       Third, we use the data on crime reports, which include information on the gender of the

victim, to compute the share of female victims in Bogota on each day during the lockdown

period. As shown in Figure 2 and, as expected, there were not significant differences between

odd days and even days prior to pico y genero in terms of the fraction of female victims,

which averages around one-half. Likewise, after the end of pico y genero, there are no obvious

differences between odd days and even days in terms of the fraction of female victims. During

the pico y genero period, however, the fraction of female victims spiked on women-only days,

averaging 54.5 percent, while this fraction dropped significantly on men-only days, averaging

44.1 percent. Outside of the pico y genero period, the share of female victims was similar

across odd days and even days, averaging 50.6 percent on even days and 49.1 percent on odd
   8
     This hypothesis is in line Harriott (2003), who found that, despite men being more likely to be more
victimized in Jamaica, females exhibit higher levels of fear of being victimized. Given this, females might take
more precautions to prevent this perceived high risk.

                                                      10
days. Thus, the fraction of females victimized on women-only days was roughly 10 percentage

points higher, representing a 20 percent increase, than the corresponding fraction on men-only

days, and we find no such differences between odd days and even days outside of the pico y

genero policy.



7    Crime Results

Having established that the lockdown mattered for gender mobility, we next investigate

whether or not gender segregation increased reported crime, whether crime was higher on

male-only days, how the distribution of the gender of the victims shifts, and how the results

vary across different types of crimes. We begin with Figure 3, which reports the total number

of crimes by day in Bogota during the three weeks leading up to gender segregation, the four

weeks of pico y genero, and the three weeks after the policy ended. As shown, reported crime

was relatively low during the period prior to the gender-based lockdown, and there were not

significant differences between odd days and even days. Starting on April 13, by contrast,

there is a large spike in reported crimes, and this is clearly driven by increases on men-only

days. When some sectors re-opened on April 27, the differences between men-only days and

women-only days remain but the size of these differences shrinks, presumably reflecting the

fact that many males were out on women-only days due to employment-related mobility.

Overall, reported crime rose during the pico y genero period. Following the end of gender

segregation, crime rates were flat for the subsequent three weeks and, again, there are not

obvious differences between odd days and even days.

    To more formally investigate these patterns, we next turn to our regression results. Con-

sistent with the results in Figure 3, Table 1 documents that, during the policy, crime in Bogota

was higher on men-only days during pico y genero, relative to odd days both before and after

the gender segregation policy. In particular, reported crime increased by 24 percent on these

men-only days, and this difference is statistically significant at conventional levels, with a

p-value of 4.69 percent. As shown in the second row, there is no evidence that this higher

crime on men-only days was offset by lower crime on women-only days, as crime is actually

four percent higher, a difference that is not statistically different from zero. As shown in the

second column, this large increase in crime on men-only days is driven by crimes involving


                                              11
male victims, as hypothesized above. In particular, crimes involving male victims increase

by 34 percent on men-only days, and this difference is statistically significant at conventional

levels, with a p-value of 0.22 percent. As shown in the second row of column 2, there is no

change in crimes involving male victims on women-only days. Finally, as shown in column

3, there are not clear patterns for crimes involving female victims, which tend to go up by

14 percent on both men-only and women-only days, although neither of these increases is

statistically significant at conventional levels. As noted above, there are opposing forces when

studying crimes involving female victims, as crime could increase on women-only days, due

to more potential female victims, or on men-only days, due to more potential male offenders.

       To investigate the robustness of our permutation-based approach to inference, we next

present p-values in which inference is based upon permutations of dates rather than permuta-

tions of municipalities. In particular, we take the 70 days of our sample period and randomly

assign 14 days to be designated as men-only and pico y genero and 14 days to women-only

and pico y genero. For the remaining 42 days, 22 days are assigned to be non-pico odd days

and the remaining 20 days are assigned to be non-pico even days.9 We repeat this process

1,000 times, and p-values report the fraction of cases in the placebo regressions in which

the absolute value of the placebo coefficient exceeded the coefficient using the actual date

formulation.

       As shown in Appendix Table 1, the p-values from this regression are broadly similar

to those in Table 1. In particular, the p-value for all victims on men-only days increases

slightly, from 4.69 percent to 6.00 percent, and the p-value for male victims on men-only

days increases from 0.22 percent in Table 1 to 2.30 percent in Table A.1. Thus, our key

results remain statistically significant at conventional levels when using inference based upon

permutations of dates rather than permutations of municipalities.

       We next investigate which types of crimes are driving the increase in crimes on men-only

days, breaking crimes into the following categories: robbery, store or house robbery, stolen car

or motorcycle, intra-family violence (i.e., domestic violence), sexual crimes, injuries, threats,

and homicides. As shown in Table 2, we find that the increase in crimes on men-only days

is driven by increases in robbery, stolen cars or motorcycles, and homicide.10 These types of
   9
     Given that March and May both have 31 days and that our sample period both begins and ends on an
odd day, there are more odd days than even days in our sample.
  10
     Note that the number of municipalities in the sample varies across types of crimes. This is due to us
dropping municipalities that do not report a given type of crime over the 70-day sample period. Since there is no
                                                       12
crimes tend to be committed by males, and most victims of homicides are also male. These

findings suggest that a men-only environment might lead to more aggression and more crimes

involving both male victims and male perpetrators, with a less secure environment overall. In

terms of women-only days, we find a large increase in sexual crimes, which disproportionately

involve female victims. This is presumably driven by the fact that there are more potential

female victims on women-only days, and, as noted above, these females cannot have male

companions, making them even more vulnerable to male perpetrators.

    In terms of intra-family violence, which has been the focus of many papers in the literature,

we find increases on both men-only days and women-only days, with increases of 18 percent

on both types of days. We conjecture that the increase in intra-family violence on women-

only days days is driven by increased reporting on women-only days associated with the

courts re-opening during the second half of pico y genero, as noted above. The increase on

men-only days, by contrast, is likely driven by women not being able to escape their homes

when threatened by their partners. Consistent with this interpretation, Appendix Figure 1

documents large spikes in domestic violence on men-only days during the first half of pico y

genero but large spikes on women-only days during the second half, when the courts re-opened.

Taken together, and combined with the increase in sexual crimes on women-only days during

pico y genero, this finding of a higher rate of domestic violence under pico y genero suggests

that gender segregation outdoors, conversely, might lead to a less secure environment overall

for females.

    In Appendix Table 2, we next investigate whether arrests tend to move in tandem with

these results involving reported crime.11 As shown, we find that, if anything, the results are

reversed, with fewer arrests under gender segregation, as shown in the first column. This

result is driven by fewer arrests of male suspects on women-only days, as shown in the second

column. We also find a corresponding reduction in arrests involving female suspects on men-

only days, as shown in the final column.

    Why do crimes tend to increase during pico y genero while arrests tend to decline? We

offer two potential explanations for this divergence. First, the efforts of police in Bogota may

have been diverted from arresting criminals to enforcing the pico y genero policy. Indeed, and
within-municipality variation in these cases, one cannot estimate a placebo coefficient for these municipalities.
  11
     The number of municipalities in this analysis, 731, is a bit lower than the number of municipalities in Table
1. This is due to the fact that some small municipalities do not report any arrests over the 70-day sample
period.
                                                       13
as noted above, over 700 individuals in Bogota were cited for violating pico y genero during

just the first two days of the policy. Second, there was a precautionary 14-day quarantine of

roughly 20 percent of the police force in Bogota beginning on April 8, just five days before the

start of pico y genero. Moreover, a police officer in Bogota was suspected of infection around

April 10, leading to additional quarantine of some police officers.12 Thus, the first part of

the pico y genero period involved a smaller than typical police force in Bogota, potentially

leading to fewer arrests, even during a period of increasing crime.



8    Conclusion

This paper studies a COVID-related quarantine measure established in Bogota, the capital

city of Colombia, in which only women could go out on even days and only men could go

out on odd days. This mobility restriction provides a unique lens through which to examine

the relationship between gender and crime and the role of gender segregation in particular.

We find that, if anything, crime tends to be higher under gender segregation, with higher

crimes on men-only days and no corresponding reduction in crime on women-only days. This

increase in crimes on men-only days is driven by crimes involving male victims, rather than

by crimes involving female victims. Regarding the types of crimes, we find that the increase

in crimes on men-only days is driven by robbery, stolen cars and motorcycles, and homicides.

We find an increase in sexual crimes on women-only days and an increase in domestic violence

on both men-only days and women-only days. Overall, we find little evidence that gender

segregation reduces crime and, conversely, crimes tend to increase on men-only days, a result

driven by crimes involving male victims.




  12
     See        https://www.rcnradio.com/bogota/el-20-de-la-policia-en-bogota-se-encuentra-en-aislamiento-
preventivo and https://www.policia.gov.co/sites/default/files/descargables/circularn o0 07.pdf
                                                   14
References

[1] Abrams, D. (2020). COVID and crime: An early empirical look. U of Penn, Inst for Law

   Econ Research Paper, (20-49).

[2] Ag¨
      uero, J. M. (2020). COVID-19 and the rise of intimate partner violence. World devel-

   opment, 137, 105217.

[3] Aguilar, A., Gutierrez, E. & Soto, P. (2019). Benefits and Unintended Consequences of

   Gender Segregation in Public Transportation: Evidence from Mexico City's Subway Sys-

   tem. Economic Development and Cultural Change. 10.1086/707421

[4] Ashby, M. P. (2020): "Initial evidence on the relationship between the coronavirus pan-

   demic and crime in the United States," Crime Science, 9, 1­16.

[5] Boman, J. H., & Gallupe, O. (2020). Has COVID-19 changed crime? Crime rates in the

   United States during the pandemic. American journal of criminal justice, 45(4), 537-545.

[6] Bullinger, L. R., Carr, J. B.,   Packham, A. (2020). COVID-19 and crime: Effects of

   stay-at-home orders on domestic violence (No. w27667). National Bureau of Economic

   Research.

[7] Buzawa, E. S., Buzawa, C. G., Stark, E. (2017). Responding to domestic violence: The

   integration of criminal justice and human services (5th ed.). SAGE

[8] Campedelli, G. M., & Aziani, A. & Favarin, S. (2020). Exploring the Immediate Effects

   of COVID-19 Containment Policies on Crime: an Empirical Analysis of the Short-Term

   Aftermath in Los Angeles. American Journal of Criminal Justice. 10.1007/s12103-020-

   09578-6.

[9] Chalfin, A., Danagoulian, S., Deza, M. (2021). COVID-19 Has Strengthened the Rela-

   tionship Between Alcohol Consumption and Domestic Violence (No. w28523). National

   Bureau of Economic Research.

[10] Cheung,L & Gunby,P. 2020. "Crime and Mobility during the COVID-19 Lockdown: A

   Preliminary Empirical Exploration," Working Papers in Economics 20/17, University of

   Canterbury, Department of Economics and Finance.
                                            15
[11] Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Lina, F., Majerovitz, J., Scuderi, B. (2016). Childhood Envi-

   ronment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood. American Economic Review, 106(5), 282-88.

[12] Couttenier, M., Petrencu, V., Rohner,D., Thoenig, M. 2019. "The Violent Legacy of

   Conflict: Evidence on Asylum Seekers, Crime, and Public Policy in Switzerland." Ameri-

   can Economic Review, 109 (12): 4378-4425.

[13] Damm, A. P., and Dustmann, C. 2014. "Does Growing Up in a High Crime Neighborhood

   Affect Youth Criminal Behavior?" American Economic Review, 104 (6): 1806-32.

[14] De Coster, S., & Cornell Zito, R. (2010). Gender and general strain theory: The gender-

   ing of emotional experiences and expressions. Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice,

   26(2), 224-245.

[15] Estevez-Soto, P. R. (2020). Crime and COVID-19: Effect of changes in routine activities

   in Mexico City.

[16] Gee, K. A., Cho, R. M. (2014). The effects of single-sex versus coeducational schools on

   adolescent peer victimization and perpetration. Journal of adolescence, 37(8), 1237-1251.

[17] Harriott, A. (2003). Fear of criminal victimization in a reputedly violent environment.

   Social and Economic Studies, 35-71

[18] Khanna, G., Medina, C., Nyshadham, A., Posso, C.,        Tamayo, J. (2021). Job Loss,

   Credit, and Crime in Colombia. American Economic Review: Insights, 3(1), 97-114

[19] Lauritsen, J. L., Heimer, K., & Lynch, J. P. (2009). Trends in the gender gap in violent

   offending: New evidence from the National Crime Victimization Survey. Criminology,

   47(2), 361-399.

[20] Lavy, V., Schlosser, A. (2011). Mechanisms and impacts of gender peer effects at school.

   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(2), 1-33.

[21] Leslie, E., Wilson, R. (2020). Sheltering in place and domestic violence: Evidence from

   calls for service during COVID-19. Available at SSRN 3600646.

[22] Miller, A. R., Segal, C., Spencer, M. K. (2020). Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on

   Domestic Violence in Los Angeles (No. w28068). National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          16
[23] Mohler, G., Bertozzi, A. L., Carter, J., Short, M. B., Sledge, D., Tita, G. E., ... &

   Brantingham, P. J. (2020). Impact of social distancing during COVID-19 pandemic on

   crime in Los Angeles and Indianapolis. Journal of Criminal Justice, 101692.

[24] Payne, J., Morgan, A., Piquero, A. R. (2020). Covid-19 and social distancing measures

   in queensland australia are associated with short-term decreases in recorded violent crime.

[25] Perez-Vincent, S., Carreras, E., Gibbons, M., Murphy, T. E., Rossi, M. (2020). COVID-

   19 Lockdowns and Domestic Violence: Evidence from Two Studies in Argentina (No. 143).

   Buenos Aires: Universidad de San Andres. doi, 10, 0002490.

[26] Ravindran, S., Shah, M. (2020). Unintended consequences of lockdowns: covid-19 and

   the shadow pandemic. NBER Working Paper, 27562.

[27] Smith G . (2014), `Long-Term Trends in Female and Male Involvement in Crime', in R.

   Gartner and B. McCarhty, eds, The Oxford Handbook of Gender, Sex, and Crime, 139­57.

   Oxford University Press.

[28] Steffensmeier, D., & Allan, E. (1996). Gender and crime: Toward a gendered theory of

   female offending. Annual review of sociology, 22(1), 459-487.

[29] Steffensmeier, D., Schwartz, J., Zhong, H., Ackerman, J. (2005). AN ASSESSMENT

   OF RECENT TRENDS IN GIRLS'VIOLENCE USING DIVERSE LONGITUDINAL

   SOURCES: IS THE GENDER GAP CLOSING?. Criminology, 43(2), 355-406.




                                             17
                       Figure 1: Mobility in Bogota Versus Rest of Colomiba

                       Retail and Recreation                                         Grocery and Pharmacy
1
                                                              10
0                                                              8
-1                                                             6
-2                                                             4

-3                                                             2
                                                               0
         Pre-policy         During policy      Post-policy              Pre-policy         During policy    Post-policy

                              Parks                                                     Transit Stations
5                                                              8
                                                               6
                                                               4
0
                                                               2
                                                               0

-5                                                            -2

         Pre-policy         During policy      Post-policy              Pre-policy         During policy    Post-policy

                            Workplace                                                     Residential
     0                                                        10
                                                               8
 -5
                                                               6
-10                                                            4
                                                               2
-15
                                                               0
          Pre-policy         During policy     Post-policy              Pre-policy         During policy    Post-policy


                                                             Men only

                                                             Women only




                                                        18
                                                                     Figure 2: Share of Female Victims in Bogota


               60
               55
               50
Share female victims
       40      35 45




                                    ar               e
                                                  tin Ma
                                                         r        pr         pr                   o
                                                                                                er Ap
                                                                                                     r            pr                     rs   pr               ay                  er
                                                                                                                                                                                      o ay      ay      ay
                    18
                                   M
                                                en 25           1A         8A                 en 15         22
                                                                                                               A                      cto 29A                6M                  en 13M        M       M
                                             ar
                                                a                                                                                   se                                                       20      27
                                           u                                             yG                                     e                                              yG
                                        yq                                          co                                    so
                                                                                                                             m                                            co
                                     or
                                     a                                            Pi                                   of                                               Pi
                                dnat                                                                                                                               of
                             onlu                                                                              ing                                             d
                          MVa
                                                                                                             en                                              En
                                                                                                           op
                                                                                                         Re
                                                                                                                          Date

                                                                                                          Women out                                Men out




                                                                                  Figure 3: Crimes in Bogota
               400
               300
Total Crimes in the Municipality
           200 100




                                    ar                e
                                                   tin Ma
                                                            r     pr         pr                  o
                                                                                               er Ap
                                                                                                    r             pr                    n  pr                  ay                  er
                                                                                                                                                                                      o ay      ay      ay
                                   M                            1A         8A                                  A                      pe A                   6M
                    18                           an 25                                       en 15          22                      eo 29                                        en 13M      20
                                                                                                                                                                                               M
                                                                                                                                                                                                     27
                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                              ar                                         y G
                                                                                                                             rs
                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                                                                               yG
                                           qu
                                       y
                                                                                  Pi
                                                                                    co                                    cto                                           Pi
                                                                                                                                                                          co
                                    or
                                    a                                                                                   se
                               dnat                                                                                e                                               of
                             nlu
                            ao                                                                                  m                                              d
                          MV                                                                                 So                                              En
                                                                                                                          Date

                                                                                                          Women out                                Men out




                                                                                                         19
                         Table 1: Regression Results for Crimes in Bogota




                                                        all victims                male victims                female victims
       Bogota X pico X men only                         0.2410**                    0.3437***                      0.1417
                                                         (0.0469)                    (0.0022)                     (0.1016)
       Bogota X pico X women only                         0.0408                     0.0089                        0.1427
                                                         (0.6864)                    (0.9219)                     (0.1038)
       municipal FE                                           Y                          Y                            Y
       day FE                                                 Y                          Y                            Y
       municipalities                                       897                        897                          897
       dates                                                 70                         70                           70
       total sample size                                  62790                       62790                        62790
       notes: *** denotes 99 percent significance, ** denotes 95 percent significance, * denotes 90 percent 
       significance. All regressions include Bogota X even controls. Dependent variable is in natural logs. Pvalues 
       from permutation tests in parantheses.




                          Table 2: Regression Results for Types of Crimes




                                     store or 
                                      house  stolen car or  intrafamily        sexual 
                       robbery       robbery     motorcycle violence           crimes       injuries     threats      homicide
Bogota X pico X men  0.4257***       0.1050*     0.4425*** 0.1846**            0.0171      0.2180**     0.0975*      0.3221***
only                   (0.0046)      (0.0870)     (0.0000)     (0.0400)       (0.6134)     (0.0257)     (0.0919)        (0.0027)
Bogota X pico X        0.0546       0.1911**      0.1085*      0.1772*       0.2862*** 0.2394**         0.1688**         0.0071
women only             (0.2511)      (0.0302)     (0.0780)     (0.0538)       (0.0035)     (0.0227)     (0.0188)        (0.6504)
municipal FE               Y             Y            Y             Y             Y             Y           Y               Y
day FE                     Y             Y            Y             Y              Y            Y           Y               Y
municipalities           220           564          283           725            570          662          534            370
dates                     70            70           70            70             70           70           70             70
total sample size       15400         39480        19810        50750          39900         46340        37380          25900
notes: *** denotes 99 percent significance, ** denotes 95 percent significance, * denotes 90 percent significance. All 
regressions include Bogota X even controls. Dependent variable is in natural logs. Pvalues from permutation tests in 
parantheses.




                                                           20
                                                                             Figure A.1: Intrafamily Violence in Bogota


          120
          100
INTRA-FAMILY VIOLENCE
  60      40   80




                         ar                            tin
                                                          e     ar      pr           pr               er
                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                    Ap
                                                                                                                         r
                                                                                                                                    Ap
                                                                                                                                       r                             rs     Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                 r               ay                           er
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o        ay        ay       ay
                  18
                        M
                                                     en     25
                                                              M      1A            8A               en         15              22                                 cto     29                   6M                          en         M         M          M
                                                  ar
                                                     a                                                                                                          se                                                                  13        20        27
                                               qu                                                 yG                                                        e                                                            yG
                                                                                             co                                                            m                                                        co
                                       aor
                                           y
                                                                                          Pi                                                            so                                                       Pi
                                   dnat                                                                                                            of                                                       of
                                 nlu
                                ao                                                                                                           ing                                                        d
                              MV                                                                                                           en                                                         En
                                                                                                                                     op
                                                                                                                                  Re
                                                                                                                                                Date

                                                                                                                             Women out                                               Men out




                                                                                                                             21
             Table A.1: Robustness Check with Date Permutation




                                          all victims             male victims           female victims
Bogota X pico X men only                   0.2410*                 0.3437**                  0.1417
                                           (0.0600)                (0.0230)                 (0.2530)
Bogota X pico X women only                  0.0408                  0.0089                   0.1427
                                           (0.7600)                (0.9500)                 (0.2170)
municipal FE                                    Y                       Y                       Y
day FE                                          Y                       Y                       Y
municipalities                                897                     897                     897
dates                                          70                      70                      70
total sample size                           62790                   62790                    62790
notes: *** denotes 99 percent significance, ** denotes 95 percent significance, * denotes 90 percent 
significance. All regressions include Bogota X even controls. Dependent variable is in natural logs. Pvalues 
from permutation tests in parantheses. 1000 permutations.




              Table A.2: Regression Results for Arrests in Bogota




                                          all suspects           male suspects           female suspects
Bogota X pico X men only                    0.1189                 0.0892                  0.2507***
                                            (0.1658)               (0.2493)                 (0.0014)
Bogota X pico X women only                 0.2866**               0.3541**                  0.0294
                                            (0.0178)               (0.0110)                 (0.2411)
municipal FE                                     Y                     Y                        Y
day FE                                           Y                     Y                        Y
municipalities                                 731                   731                      731
dates                                           70                    70                       70
total sample size                             51170                 51170                    51170
notes: *** denotes 99 percent significance, ** denotes 95 percent significance, * denotes 90 percent 
significance. All regressions include Bogota X even controls. Dependent variable is in natural logs. Pvalues 
from permutation tests in parantheses.




                                             22
