                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DIVERSITY AND PERFORMANCE IN ENTREPRENEURIAL TEAMS

                                     Sophie Calder-Wang
                                      Paul A. Gompers
                                        Kevin Huang

                                      Working Paper 28684
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28684


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




Support for this research was provided by the Division of Research at the Harvard Business
School. Patrick Sweeney provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Sophie Calder-Wang, Paul A. Gompers, and Kevin Huang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Diversity and Performance in Entrepreneurial Teams
Sophie Calder-Wang, Paul A. Gompers, and Kevin Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 28684
April 2021
JEL No. J1,J15,J16

                                           ABSTRACT

We study the role of diversity and performance in the entrepreneurial teams. We exploit a unique
dataset of MBA students who participated in a required course to propose and start a real micro-
business that allows us to examine horizontal diversity (i.e., within the team) as well as vertical
diversity (i.e., team to faculty advisor) and their effect on performance. The design of the course
allows for identification of the causal implications of horizontal and vertical diversity. The course
was run in multiple cohorts in otherwise identical formats except for the team formation
mechanism used. In several cohorts, students were allowed to choose their teams from among
students in their section (roughly 90 students). In other cohorts, students were randomly assigned
to teams based upon a computer algorithm. In the cohorts that were allowed to choose, we find
strong selection based upon shared attributes. Among the randomly-assigned teams, greater
diversity along the intersection of gender and race/ethnicity significantly reduced performance.
However, the negative effect of this diversity is alleviated in cohorts in which teams are
endogenously formed. Finally, we find that teams with more female members perform
substantially better when their faculty section leader was also female. Because the gender of the
faculty section leader is exogenous to the gender make-up of the entrepreneurial team, the
positive performance effects can be interpreted as causal. These findings suggest that diversity
policies should take adequate consideration of the multiple dimensions of diversity.

Sophie Calder-Wang                                Kevin Huang
University of Pennsylvania                        University of California, Los Angeles.
Wharton School                                    kanyuan.huang.phd@anderson.ucla.edu
sophiecw@wharton.upenn.edu

Paul A. Gompers
Harvard Business School
Baker Library 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu
    1. Introduction


         Economics research on diversity has explored both impediments to team diversity (Becker, 1957;

Morgan and Vardy, 2009), the performance effects of diversity on team performance (Mello and Ruckes,

2006), as well as the effects of diversity in the mentor-employee relationship and its effects on performance

and promotion (Athey, Avery, and Zemsky, 2000). Most of this work has focused on theoretical models that

derive predictions about factors that may hinder or promote workplace diversity or shared attributes of

supervisor and employees may aid groups with acquiring human capital and increasing the likelihood that

they are promoted. Our paper fills the empirical gap in much of this research by exploring in a quasi-

experimental setting the factors which shape team diversity and how both horizontal (team-level) diversity

as well as vertical (supervisor-team) diversity affects performance.

         In this paper, we contribute three major findings to the literature on diversity and its effects on

performance. Our experimental design allows us to examine both exogenous horizontal diversity (i.e., team

diversity) as well as vertical diversity (i.e., diversity at the advisor-team level). First, we explore what factors

are important for limiting diversity in forming entrepreneurial teams. Becker (1957) was the first to model

factors that might lead to homogeneity in organizations. More recently, both Cornell and Welch (1996) and

Morgan and Vardy (2009) develop models in which the ability to better evaluate signals of quality in those

who are similar to recruiters leads organizations to hire more people who look like their existing work force.

Research has also documented the existence of homophily, the desire to associate with those similar to you,

in various social networks, from the strongest social ties such as in marriage (Kalmijn 1998, Fiore and Donath

2005), close friendships (Marsden, 1987, 1988, Currarini, Jackson and Pin 2009), to professional networks

(Gompers et al. 2016; Kleinbaum et al. 2013; Ruef et al. 2003; Reagans 2011;Sorenson and Stuart 2001) and

acquaintances (Hampton and Wellman 2000).

         Homophily can arise from the similarities in endowed demographic characteristics, such as

race/ethnicity, country of origin, age, and gender. It can also be based on acquired characteristics, such as

education, occupation and religion (Lazarsfeld and Merton 1954). Most past research has focused on

                                                         2
homophily in race/ethnicity and gender. Relatively few studies1 have examined homophily in educational

and professional backgrounds due to limitation in data. However, given that diversity in professional

background can impact team performance (Beckman et al. 2007), it is also important to understand the

extent to which acquired characteristics affect team formation. Verbrugge (1977) and Louch (2000) explore

homophily in both demographic and socioeconomic characteristics. While they confirm the existence of

homophily along both dimensions, they do not distinguish the relative strength of homophily that each

dimension engenders nor do they explore the interaction of those characteristics.


         We estimate the relative economic magnitudes of homophily in race/ethnicity, gender, education,

and work experience, i.e., which shared attributes are more likely to lead to team membership? Using a novel

dataset of Harvard Business School MBA students' choices to co-found real micro-businesses, we find

selection into team based upon endowed demographic characteristics is stronger than team selection based

upon acquired characteristics. Individuals are 25% more likely to form groups with people of the same

race/ethnicity or gender relative to randomly matching. Selection based upon education history and work

experience is weaker than endowed demographic attributes, but it is still economically significant. School

ties and shared work experience increases the probability of co-founding a micro-business with someone of

the same school history or work experience by 17% and 11% respectively. Further, we find team selection

effects of shared education and work experience are stronger among male students than female students.

         When we examine how specific race/ethnic ties develop, we find homophily is weaker among Latinx

American and Black students, two relatively underrepresented ethnic groups within the HBS student body

compared to White Americans and Asian Americans in our sample. A likely explanation is that these

underrepresented groups are making a strategic decision to partner with White and Asian Americans to

broaden their networks among "in group" students. However, we find homophily is strongest among

international students, students who graduated from non-Ivy league schools, and students who worked in




1 Among studies that do include education homophily, most of them use education level instead of past educational
institution as a dimension of homophily
                                                         3
    industries that represent a small fraction of the MBA class's past experience2. Future theoretical work should

    explore the interaction between group size and different types of homophilic ties (other than race/ethnicity)

    with heterogeneous strengths.

            Second, our paper contributes to the understanding of the causal relationship between horizontal

    team diversity and performance. Theoretical work on diversity focuses on the trade-off between the

    information gains and the communication costs. Heterogeneous teams benefit from more diverse pools of

    skill and knowledge, but at the same time, differences in race/ethnicity, culture, and mother language hinder

    efficient communication among team members, thus potentially lowering productivity (Alesina and La

    Ferrara 2003, Lazear 1999). Mello and Ruckes (2006) model the formation of teams and their effects on

    performance, showing under what circumstances more diverse teams perform better. In experimental

    settings in which group identification is assigned (i.e., red group, blue group, etc.), Chen and Li (2009) and

    Chen and Chen (2011) show that teams with greater group diversity perform worse. The argue that group

    identification leads team members to work harder and help others more when their team has other members

    of their group. Several experimental studies seek alleviate the endogeneity concern. Hoogendoorn and Praag

    (2012) and Hoogendoorn et al. (2013) find the benefit of information sharing is greater than communication

    cost in more diverse teams. Marx et al. (2021) find horizontal diversity (i.e., at the same level of authority) in

    race/ethnicity decreases team performance because people in heterogeneous teams are more likely to

    complain about their teammates. Knippenberg and Schipper (2007) review empirical literature on team

    diversity and performance from 1997 to 2005, and they conclude that the empirical results on diversity are

    "highly inconsistent" because of the endogenous process of group formation in the majority of the existing

    research. Our research design allows us to estimate the effects of random diversity and endogenous diversity

    on outcomes.

            Most of the empirical literature on team diversity only focuses a single dimension, such as gender,

    racial/ethnic, or education. It rarely considers the interaction between different characteristics. However, a



2
  Students who worked in non-finance, non-consulting and non-technology industries. Most of the students are from
finance, consulting or technology industries
                                                            4
person's identity is often defined by an intersection of multiple attributes. Jackson et al. (2003) note the lack

of work on multi-dimensional diversity and argue that the interaction of different attributes is likely to be

important for understanding how these factors relate to team formation and success. Similarly, the idea of

multi-dimensional diversity is well recognized in the field of psychology and counselling (Reynolds and Pope

1991, Robinson 1993 and Jones and McEwen 2000). For example, Jones and McEwen (2000) argue that the

core of an individual's sense of self is defined by the intersection of multiple characteristics such as gender,

race, and culture. Lau and Murnighan (1998) view group diversity as many subgroups based on one or more

attributes. For instance, a team can be viewed as a subgroup of White males, White females, Asian females

and Asian males. The authors argue that these subgroups can be the source of team conflict. One example

of the examination of the intersection of attributes is Jackson and Joshi (2004), who examine the joint effect

of gender, race/ethnicity, and tenure diversity on team performance using data from a Fortune 500 company.

They find that the performance is best in teams with low tenure diversity, low gender diversity and low ethnic

diversity. These results are, however, complicated by the endogenous nature of team formation in their data.

        Our study provides a clean setting to test the causal relationship between horizontal diversity and

team performance. By exploiting a quasi-experimental setting of exogenous team assignments in the 2013

MBA cohort in which students were assigned teams for starting their micro-businesses, we find homogeneity

in race/ethnicity increases team performance. In other words, exogenously diverse teams performed worse

than exogenously formed homogeneous teams. When we look at the intersection of race/ethnicity and

gender, we find that the negative effect of diversity is driven by joint homogeneity of both gender and

race/ethnicity. Teams that had homogeneity on both dimensions at the same time performed the best. This

result is consistent with randomly-assigned diversity reducing communication efficiency and increasing the

probability of conflict within the team. However, the negative effect between gender-race/ethnicity diversity

and performance is eliminated when teams are endogenously formed in the 2014-2016 cohorts. Our results

highlight the performance effects that arise from forced versus endogenous diversity.

        Finally, our paper looks at the performance effects of diversity in the mentorship relationship

between supervisors and team members. Athey, Avery, and Zemsky (2000) model the role that shared

                                                       5
    characteristics in the mentor-subordinate relationship play in performance and promotion. Bednar and

    Gicheva (2014) look at NCAA Division I athletic departments and find no effect of the gender of the athletic

    director on female representation within coaching and staff positions. Matsa and Miller (2011), however,

    find that boards that have more female directors tend to increase the number of women in senior

    management positions. Marx et al. (2021) find that vertical diversity (i.e., at different levels of authority)

    increases team performance, as workers tend to exert more effort when the manager is from a different

    ethnic background. Calder-Wang and Gompers (2020) find that having more daughters increases venture

    partners' propensity to hire female investment partners. Using the number of daughters (relative to the total

    number of children) that senior venture partners have as the instrument for venture capital firm gender

    diversity, the authors find gender diversity causally improves venture capital firm's investment performance.

            Exploiting the random assignment of faculty advisors with micro-business teams, we find that

    vertical diversity has an effect on performance of the entrepreneurial teams. Each section of 90 students had

    a faculty member who served as section leader. The section leader both taught the material related to Field

    3 and directly supervised the student teams. We examined how gender ties between the section leader and

    the student teams affected performance. These gender ties are exogenous to the gender make-up of the team

    because students had no control over who their faculty members were.3 We find a significant effect of gender

    ties for teams with more female students. Teams for whom the section leader was a female had monotonically

    increasing performance as the number of female team members increased. The result is consistent with the

    importance of mentorship and the positive performance impact that woman have when they are mentored

    by woman.

            Our results on the diversity and its performance implications are important beyond the context of

    our research setting. First, the main criteria for evaluating the micro-businesses were related to the actual

    business concept and the ability to attract real customers. Second, a significant minority of these micro-

    businesses continued to operate after the term and many raised external funding including venture capital.



3
 We only look at gender ties because there was not enough heterogeneity of section leader race/ethnicity in order to
meaningfully look at race/ethnicity ties.
                                                              6
    Finally, among the 3,864 MBA students in our sample, over 30% of them work in venture capital or

    technology related areas after graduation4, representing a sizable labor inflow to the entrepreneurial eco-

    system. Thus, understanding the strength and performance implications of homophily in team formation, as

    well as the performance implications of team diversity, sheds light on the lack of diversity in entrepreneurship

    (Calder-Wang and Gompers 2018). Despite extensive research on diversity in various settings, only a few

    studies have explored the effect in entrepreneurship. Ruef, Aldrich, and Carter (2003) survey 830

    entrepreneurs5 on their founding team composition. They find that the probability of a team with the same

    gender or with the same race/ethnicity is higher than a random matching process would predict. However,

    they do not estimate the relative strength of homophily in each dimension, and their sample of entrepreneurs

    tend to be small business owners instead of VC-backed start-ups. Second, they cannot establish the potential

    partner set because they do not know the members of the entrepreneurs' social network, while we know

    each potential team member and each potential team member has been known to others for at least six

    months.

              Further, our findings have important implications on broader policy considerations for workplace

    diversity initiatives. Workplace diversity (or more broadly inclusivity) has both short-term and long-term

    performance implications for firms and workers, as well as long-term effects as decisions tend to be forward-

    looking and long-term (e.g., education, occupational choices, etc.) In recent years, some policymakers have

    promoted diversity in workplace by implementing gender (or race/ethnicity) quotas. For instance, the

    Norwegian government enforced a gender quota on corporate boards (Ahern and Dittmar 2012). More

    recently, California has become the first state in the US to mandate board diversity. Our results suggest that

    mandated diversity may not always bring the performance benefits that diverse teams engender because

    biases against certain groups remain.




4 https://www.hbs.edu/recruiting/data/Pages/detailed-charts.aspx?year=2016
5 The authors start with a random sample of 64,622 individuals in the US, and conduct detailed phone interviews with 830
individuals who meet their screen criteria of nascent entrepreneurs.
                                                             7
        2. Setting


            First year MBA students at the HBS from 2012 through 2016 were required to take a field course

    in the spring semester of their first year. Throughout the course, students were required to design and launch

    a real micro-business. At the beginning of the semester, students formed teams of 5-7 people from within

    the same section6. Two months into the semester, students presented their projects to faculty members

    (section leaders). If the faculty members believed the proposed project was achievable, the team then

    proceeded to present their project to a panel of judges at the end of semester (IPO day). The panel of judges

    then ranked all the projects based on teams' performance and the quality of the idea during the IPO day.


            When the field course was first introduced to the students in the spring semester of 2012 for the

    MBA Class of 20137, the school assigned each student to the teams based a computer algorithm. One goal

    of the assignments was to make teams somewhat diverse in terms of gender, race/ethnicity, education, and

    past working experience. After 2013, the school changed the team formation policy and started to have

    students choose teammates themselves. The school did not impose any restriction on how students formed

    their teams. Anecdotal evidence suggests that students frequently formed teams with friends who had similar

    demographic backgrounds. Figure 1 plots the probability of a student being matched to her classmate

    conditional on having the same race/ethnicity, gender, education, or industry backgrounds. The conditional

    probability of matching increases in all four dimensions when students were allowed to find teammates

    freely. This provides evidence on the existence of homophily during the process of team formation. In the

    next section, we explore the relative strength of homophily based upon race/ethnicity, gender, education

    and past industry experience. From there, we explore the performance implications of diversity on

    performance.


            Because teams were assigned by the MBA Administration for the Class of 2013, the diversity of



6 Harvard Business School students are assigned to one of ten sections in their first year and take all of their first year
classes with the same roughly 90 students.
7 2013 refers to the class year of 2013, so do 2014, 2015 and 2016 later in the paper. Students take the field course during their

first year, e.g., class year 2013 students took the field course in 2012.
                                                                8
teams is exogenous to each team member. As such, the causal implications of diversity for performance

can be estimated for the Class of 2013. We also explore the performance impact of diversity for the Classes

of 2014-2016, although endogeneity of team diversity makes interpretation of the performance results

difficult.




      3. Data


             Our data were provided by the HBS MBA Program. In the data, we observe the gender,

race/ethnicity, home country, undergraduate institution, past employer, and the industry of each MBA

student from class year 2013 to 2016. We were not provided with students' actual names. Table I reports the

summary statistics for the 3,684 MBA students in our sample. Females make up 40% of total student

population. Approximately 40% of the students are white Americans, 12% are Asian Americans, 5% are

Black, 4% are Lantinx Americans, and 35% are international students. India, Canada, and China represent

the top three origin countries for international students8. In terms of past work experience, roughly half of

the students worked in finance or consulting prior to business school, and not surprisingly, the big three

consulting firms (McKinsey, Bain and BCG) and bulge bracket investment banks (Goldman and Morgan

Stanley) are the top five past employers for Harvard MBA students (Table II). Approximately 11% of

students had experience in the technology industry, and this number increased by more than 50% from 2013

to 2016. 27% of the MBA students graduated from Ivy League schools. Harvard, Stanford, and University

of Pennsylvania are the top 3 undergraduate institutions (Table II).

             We also observe the team selection of each student. From 2013 to 2015, there are 150 teams in each

class year and the average team size is 6. In 2016, the average team size was changed to 5 and there were 180

teams. To examine the effects of homophily on team formation, we construct student-student pairs by

matching each student to every other student within the same section and year. This process creates 335,686



8   Online Appendix Table 1.


                                                         9
potential pairs. We then create a dependent variable real_match which equals to 1 if the two students are

members of the same team and 0 otherwise. The independent variable ethnic (gender, education, industry)

tie equals to 1 if two students belong to the same ethnic (gender, education, industry) group. Our data

construction method is similar to Louch (2000). To illustrate, consider the following example: James Brown

is a Section A student in 2013, and he has 5 teammates. We match Mr. Brown to all his section mates (89 of

them) by creating 89 student-student pairs. Intuitively, each pair is a potential teammate with whom Mr.

Brown could be paired. If the match happened randomly, Mr. Brown would pair with an arbitrary teammate

with a probability of 5.6%9. Variable real_match equals 1 for the 5 pairs for which Mr. Brown is matched to

his real teammates. To measure the effect of homophily on matching, we compare the probability of

matching conditional for a pair having the same race/ethnicity (Gender, Education and Industry) to the

probability of matching for a pair with different ethnicities (Gender, Education and Industry). Our baseline

results are estimated using the following regression models:

                  = 11    + 12    +   + 

                   = 21    + 22    +   + 

                  = 31    + 32    +   + 

                  = 41    + 42    +   + 


      4. Empirical Results on Matching

          In this section, we examine the relative strength of homophily for race/ethnicity, gender, educational

background and past work experience. While homophily is an economically significant force across all four

dimensions, it is strongest in endowed demographic characteristics, namely race/ethnicity and gender. Table

III Panel A presents the regression results for matching from 2014 to 2016, the years in which students were

allowed to choose their own teams. Race/ethnicity ties increase the probability of matching by 1.38%. Given

the base rate of matching is 5.6%, this represents a 25% increase from the baseline probability of randomly



9   5/89=5.6%


                                                       10
matching with a student from the same race/ethnicity. Similarly, we find common shared gender increases

the probability of matching by 1.33%. The relative increase in propensity to match based upon shared

education and past industry experience is smaller than the effect for gender and race/ethnicity. Attending

the same undergraduate institution increases the probability of matching by 0.976%, a 17% increase from

the baseline, and having the same industry experience increases the matching rate by 0.637%, an 11% increase

from the baseline. Both these results are significant and economically meaningful. Panel B reports the

regression result using 2013 subsample. Given that teams were exogenous assigned, we do not expect shared

attributes to increase team matching. The coefficients on race/ethnicity tie, school tie and industry tie are

negative and close to zero. The coefficient on gender tie is -1.67% and statistically significant at 1% level.

The matching rate is much lower among student pairs of the same gender compared to student pairs of

different genders. This reflects HBS's assignment scheme, which appears to have matched males to females

to balance the gender ratio within each team. Interestingly, other dimensions do not seem to have been

important in team assignment.

        Table IV tests whether homophily based on endowed demographic characteristics is stronger than

homophily based on acquired characteristics. In the regression, the dependent variable is a dummy variable

if the pair is a real match as defined before. The independent variable Endowed Demographic Match is a

dummy variable equals to 1 if race/ethnicity tie or gender tie equals to 1; Acquired Characteristics Match

equals to 1 if school tie or industry tie equals to 1. In 2014-2016 subsample, the coefficient on Endowed

Demographic Match (=0.015) is more than twice as large as the coefficient on Acquired Characteristics

Match (=0.0066), and the difference is statistically significant at 1% level (F=32). The results indicate that

when matching is voluntary, homophily based on endowed demographics is at least twice as strong as

homophily based upon acquired characteristics.


        Our results are largely consistent with prior research. McPherson et al (2001) give a comprehensive

review on homophily in social networks. It is well documented that homophily exists in both endowed

demographic characteristics and acquired characteristics. Verbrugge (1977) provides some early evidence that

homophily bias is stronger in demographic characteristics (i.e., age) in friend formation, however, he does
                                                     11
not examine race/ethnicity as a dimension of homophily. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first

attempt to estimate and compare the relative strength of various characteristics for ties in an entrepreneurial

setting.

4.1 Race/Ethnicity Diversity


           The strength of matching with someone of the same race/ethnicity varies across different ethnic

groups. We attempt to look at how the relative size of the ethnic group influences how strong the attraction

is. We find increase in the propensity to match is strongest among international students, followed by Asian

Americans and White Americans. It is relatively weaker among Blacks and non-existent among Lantinx

Americans.


           In Table V, the first two columns show that the probability of matching based upon shared

race/ethnicity increases by 1.08% and 1.16% among White American and Asian American MBA students

respectively. Given the base rate of matching is 5.6%, this represents a 20% increase in the matching rate.

The coefficient for Black students is 0.96%, but it is not statistically significant. Lantinx American MBA

students are no more likely to match to another Latinx American MBA student. Breaking down the

matching rate by year (Online Appendix Table 2), we observe large variance among Lantinx American

students. The matching rate was 11.29% among Lantinx Americans in 2014, and it is twice as large as the

sample average (5.6%). However, the matching rate drops to 3.7% and 0% in 2015 and 2016. The large

variance in matching rates may be due to the small number of Lantinx American students in each class

year. On average, there are only 3.8 Lantinx American students in each section. Similarly, the average

number of Black students in each section is 5 and homophily among Black MBA students is relatively

weak. One potential mechanism could be strategic decision making by underrepresented minorities. Black

and Lantinx American students may intentionally form teams with White American and Asian American

students to broaden their networks to groups that are potentially more heavily represented in the

entrepreneurial and venture capital eco-system.


           The propensity to match is highest among international students from the same region. An

                                                      12
 international MBA student is 3.77% more likely to find a teammate from the same region10, three times

 greater than the effect among White and Asian Americans. A detailed breakdown of international students

 by region (Online Appendix Table 3) shows that the increase is highest among students from East Asia,

 the Middle East, and Latin America. The coefficients for these groups are around 6%, twice as large as the

 coefficients for Europeans and South Asian students. There are only 3-4 students from East Asia, Middle

 East and Latin America per section. One possible explanation is that our measure of the increase matching

 probability for international students also captures characteristics such as language, culture, and religion in

 these regions. The strength of ties is substantially stronger among these very small groups than it is for

 similarly sized minority groups, e.g., Black or Lantinx American students.


 4.2 Gender Diversity


           Gender is another important attribute that may affect team matching. In Table VI we look at how

 shared gender affects the probability of matching. We find that the increase in propensity to match based

 upon shared gender is for males and females is 0.72% and 1.22% respectively (p<1%). Not surprisingly, the

 coefficient on shared gender is negative and significant for both males and females in 2013, reflecting the

 group assignment scheme used by the school that was intended to increase gender diversity in teams.


           Table VII breaks down race/ethnicity homophily by gender. The interaction between gender and

 race/ethnicity yields several interesting results. On average, males are more likely to form teams with people

 from the same race/ethnic background. The first and third column shows that race/ethnicity tie increases

 the probability of match by 1.54% among males and 1.14% among females. More specifically, white male

 students are 50% more likely to choose to form a team with another white male student than white female

 students are to form a team with another white female student. Among Lantinx American and international

 students, race/ethnicity homophily is also stronger among males than females. Black female students, on the



10For other international students, we categorize their home countries by regions: Europe (7.7 students per section),
South Asia (6.1 students per section), East Asia (4 students per section), Latin America (4 students per section), Middle
East (3.3 students per section), Africa (1.6 students per section). Two exceptions are Canadians and Australians, we
counted them also as white Americans (Online Appendix Table I).
                                                            13
contrary, have a higher probability of matching to another Black female student than are Black male students.

The coefficient for Black female students is 2.45%, while the coefficient for Black male students is only

0.326%. The interaction between gender and ethnic is less well understood (Block and Grund 2014, Wimmer

and Lewis 2010), as previous studies often treat gender and race/ethnicity as separate categorizes. The above

results suggest the lack of diversity in entrepreneurship is not a simple problem of one gender or one

race/ethnicity. It is a more complex story about the interactions of gender and race/ethnicity. Policies that

fail to consider this interaction effects may be effective in one part of the population but futile for the rest.

In Section 5 below, we explore the role that the intersection of race/ethnicity and gender diversity plays on

performance.


4.4 Education Diversity


        School ties have been shown to be an important source of social interaction. Individuals are more

likely to interact with people with same level of education (Verbrugge 1977; Louch 2000; Marsden 1988).

People form long-term friendships with their classmates (Neckerman 1996). Equity analysts are more likely

to build relationship and acquire superior information through school ties with the management (Cohen,

Frazzini and Malloy 2010).


        In Table VIII, we examine the effect of education ties on matching in the student teams. The effect

of shared education is relatively weaker than gender and race/ethnicity. Attending the same undergraduate

institution increases the probability of matching by 0.976%, while the for shared gender and race/ethnicity

it was 1.33% and 1.38% respectively. In column 2 and 3, we observe the effect is much stronger among

students from non-Ivy league schools which typically have a lower number of students at HBS. While

attending the same college increases the matching probability by 1.88%, among non-Ivy school graduate, it

only increases the matching rate by 0.219% among Ivy-school graduates, despite the fact that there are far

more Ivy graduates who attend HBS. It is important to note that the group size is much larger for Ivy-

league graduates. 24% of students are from the eight Ivy-league schools. The remaining 76% of students are

from 85 non-Ivy league schools and each school represents less than 1% of the student population.

                                                       14
        Table IX explores the effect of school ties among male and female students. Brashears (2008) finds

that homophily in education level is uniform among males and females using data from a 1985 general social

survey. Our results point to a different story. The effect of a school ties is much stronger among males than

it is among females. A school tie increases the matching rate by 1.71% among male students while it increases

matching rate by only 0.096% among female students. Further, it is the strongest among male students from

non-Ivy league schools. Our difference with Brashears (2008) could be caused by difference in the setting

that we examine. Brashears (2008) examines common educational attainment in American's core discussion

groups, people with whom Americans discuss important matters while we focus on actual school tie.


    4.5 Past Industry Experience Diversity


        Shared work experience is an important for socialization and friendships. This might encourage

students with similar work experience to match. On the other hand, entrepreneurial teams may desire

functional diversity as a way to improve performance, thus one might also expect that students who are

seeking broad sets of skills may form teams with diverse work history (Ruef, Aldrich and Carter 2003). Table

X reports the results on industry matching. Our results show that at least in the context of the micro-business

formed as a part of Field 3, functional diversity was not an organizing principal. Shared industry experience

increases the probability of matching by 0.637%. Breaking down the relative increase in matching by industry

sectors, we find the effect strongest among people who worked in non-finance, non-consulting, and non-

technology industries, increasing the matching rate by 2.12%. The magnitude of the effects is similar among

finance, technology, and consulting industries, which is around 0.35%.


        Table XI investigates the effect of shared work experience among male and female students. Much

like race/ethnicity and school matching, male students are more likely to form groups with people who have

the same industry experience. Industry ties increases the probability of matching by 0.887% among males.

This is primarily driven by male students with experience in finance and technology. In contrast, industry

ties only increase the matching rate by 0.292% among females. There is a large difference in the effect on

matching between male and female students who worked in finance. Male students with finance backgrounds

                                                      15
are 0.8% (1% statistical significance) more likely to form teams with people from finance, but having worked

in finance does not increase the propensity of woman to match to other women with finance backgrounds.



     5. Diversity and Performance
     5.1. Team Diversity and Performance


        The results in the previous section demonstrate that when students are allowed to choose their own

teams to start a micro-business, the propensity to pair up is increased by common personal characteristics

including race/ethnicity, gender, education, and work experience. Given that teams were exogenously

assigned for the Class of 2013, we can examine the causal relationship between performance and diversity.

In this section, we examine the effect of diversity on team performance. While we look at the results for all

classes, the results for the Classes of 2014-2016 need to be viewed with caution because of the endogeneity

of group diversity.


        Our unit of performance analysis is at the team level. There are 150-180 teams in each class year,

and each team has 5-7 students. We measure team diversity across four different dimensions: Race/Ethnicity,

Gender, Education and Industry, and construct the homophily measure for each dimension as the following:

                               #         
        =
                                        


         To illustrate our diversity measure, consider a team with six people: Three of them are White, two

of them are Asian Americans, and one is an international student from South America. Race/Ethnicity Score

in this team will be (3+1)/(5+4+3+2+1)=4/15, as there are three ties between three white team members11,

one tie between two Asian American students and fifteen possible ties between six team members. Diversity

is lower the higher the score. It equals to zero if everyone in the team has different characteristics and equals



11When counting the tie between White students, we count Canadians (3.41%) and Australians (1.26%) as White
Americans. For other international students, we categorize their home countries by regions: Europe (8.8%), South
Asia (6.9%), East Asia (4.6%), Latin America (4.6%), Middle East (3.8%), Africa (1.5%). A homophilous tie is
recorded if two international students are from the same region (Online Appendix Table I).


                                                        16
 one if everyone is the same type.


             Table XII provides summary statistics on team diversity by year. The average Race/Ethnicity Score

 from 2014 to 2016 is 0.281, implying on average, there are 3 to 4 students with the same race/ethnic

 background in a team of 6 people. The standard deviation is also high (0.216), suggesting the existence of

 highly diverse teams and highly homogenous teams. The benchmark measure is the race/ethnicity score of

 the entire section. The average team race/ethnicity score is 19% higher than the race/ethnicity score of the

 entire section from 2014 to 2016, while it is roughly equal to the benchmark in 2013 which would be expected

 if teams were generally randomly assigned across this dimension. Further, we observe the increasing

 prevalence of teams with all White American students. The number of teams with all White American

 students was 1 in 2013, and average 4.7 after 2013 (Online Appendix Table 4).


             The average Gender Score from 2014 to 2016 is 0.574, implying that, on average, 4 to 5 people have

 the same gender in a team of 6. The average team Gender Score is 12.38% higher in 2014-2016 than the

 section benchmark in 2014-2016, and it is lower than the benchmark in 2013, reflecting the team assignment

 scheme utilized by the MBA administration. In addition, in 2013, there are no teams with all male or all

 female members. From 2014 to 2016, there are, on average, 20 teams with all male members and 8.3 teams

 with all female members per year12.


             The average School Score is 0.018. Approximately 1 out of 4 teams will have a pair of students from

 the same school. The School Score is 20% higher than the section benchmark from 2014 to 2016, while it is

 5% lower than the benchmark in 2013. It is interesting that the benchmark of School Score is much higher

 in 2013. This may due to higher proportion of top college graduates (41.2%) in 2013 compared to 2014 to

 2016 (37%)13. The average Industry Score is 0.21, implying that, on average, approximately 3 people have

 the same industry background in a team of 6. The Industry Score is 8% higher than the section benchmark

 in 2014-2016. Comparing the 2013 cohort to the 2014-16 cohorts, homophily increases in all four



12   See Online Appendix Table 4
13   See Table I
                                                         17
dimensions in the 2014-2016 cohorts.


        The HBS MBA Program office also provided the outcome of each team's micro-business.

Outcomes were determined based upon the performance of the micro-business during IPO Day. Teams

presented their micro-business first within their sections to a panel of judges that scored the teams based

upon a variety of criteria. The top 3 teams within each section were then judged in a separate round to

determine the overall class top 3. We coded outcomes into four binary indicators: (1) IPO Day: whether the

team presented their micro-business on the IPO Day. Approximately 75% of the teams were determined to

be sufficiently developed to present on IPO Day; (2) Viable: whether the team that presented on IPO Day

was deemed by judges to be a viable business. Roughly 50% of all projects were deemed viable; (3) Section

Top 3: whether the project was ranked in the top 3 of their section by a panel of judges. Approximately 20%

of the projects were ranked in their section top 3; (4) Class Top 3: whether the project was top 3 in the entire

class in a given year (2%).


        We construct our performance measure based upon the median of the quantile of the team's

outcome. For example, if a team did not present on IPO Day, their performance equals 0.125, i.e., 25% of

teams do not present, hence the median of this quantile is 0.125. Similarly, if a team presented on IPO Day,

but the project was deemed not viable, the performance equals 0.375. The quantile in which this project

performs falls between 25% and 50% of the class. Projects that are deemed viable but are not top 3 in the

section have performance equal to 0.65, as their quantile falls between 50% and 80%. Projects that are top

3 in the section but not in the class year top 3 have performance equal to 0.9, i.e., falling between 80% and

98%. Finally, if the project is top 3 in the entire class year, the performance is 0.99. Our performance measure

is increasing in project outcome. The distribution of performance does not vary significantly by year.


        Panel C of the Table XII provides correlation table between variables. We could interpret the results

from the previous section through the lens of our score measures. From 2014 to 2016, years in which

matching is voluntary, we observe highly positive correlation between team race/ethnicity score and school

score, this is driven by White Americans and Asian Americans who attended top colleges. The correlation

                                                      18
 between gender score and industry score is also high driven by the high percentage of male students with

 finance and technology industry experience. In 2013, in which the matching was exogenously imposed by

 HBS, school score and industry score have slightly negative correlation with race/ethnicity score and gender

 score. There is also a high correlation between gender score and race/ethnicity score in 2013. Finally,

 race/ethnicity score is highly correlated with performance both in 2013 and in 2014-2016.


             We split the sample into two groups: 2013 teams and 2014-2016 teams, and run OLS regression on

 each sample. Because team assignments in 2013 are exogenous, it provides a clean identification of the effect

 of diversity on performance when diversity is exogenously imposed. We estimate the following regression

 models:

                              = 11    +  + 

                              = 21    +  + 

                            = 31    +  + 

                             = 41    +  + 


             Our performance measures are the median quantile of the team's project ranking. As our

     race/ethnicity (gender, education, or industry) score increases our team diversity decreases, i.e., teams with

     higher scores are more homogenous. Control variables include team size, percentage of students who

     graduated from a top college, and percentage of students who had start-up experience. Top college and start-

     up experience are potentially proxies for students' skill in starting a business and we expect these two

     variables to be positively correlated with performance.


             Table XIII reports the regression result of diversity on performance. Panel A column 1 shows that

     one unit increase in our race/ethnicity score (less diversity) increases team performance by 0.482 (p<1%),

     or equivalently, one standard deviation increase in race/ethnicity score increases performance by 0.08414.

     Given the average performance of all teams is 0.5, this represents a 16.8% increase in performance. In other



14We simulated the distribution of race/ethnicity score under the assumption of random matching. The SD of
race/ethnicity score is 0.174 (Online Appendix Table 6, Panel C). 0.174* 0.482= 0.084
                                                          19
     words, in 2013 where teams were exogenously assigned, relatively less diverse teams (in terms of

     race/ethnicity) performed better than more diverse teams. Panel B of Table XIII reports the results of

     performance regression using 2014-2016 sample, where the team formation was endogenous. The coefficient

     on race/ethnicity score is still positive and significant, but the magnitude is less than half of the 2013 result.

     The difference between these two coefficients are statistically significant at 5% level15. These results suggest

     that voluntary team formation alleviates much of the underperformance of forced diversity. As a robustness

     test, we also use excess diversity score, defined as diversity score minus benchmark, as independent variables

     in Online Appendix Table 6. Our results are qualitatively identical with this adjustment.


             In addition to race/ethnicity, lower diversity in educational background was also positively

     correlated with performance. A one unit increase in school score (less diversity background) increases

     performance by 92.5%. A one standard deviation increase in the school score increases team performance

     by 0.027 16 , a 5.4% increase from the average performance. In column 6 of the panel A, the statistical

     significance on school score drops when we control for percentage of students who graduated from a top

     school and students who had start-up experience. Diversity in gender and past industry experience were not

     statistically significantly related to performance. Interestingly, the coefficients on school score and industry

     score reverse sign in 2014-2016 subsample (Panel B), but the coefficients remain statistically insignificant.


             In Table XIV we look at the intersection of race/ethnicity and gender. Much like our diversity score

     variables for individual characteristics, we now calculate the race/ethnicity-gender diversity score by looking

     at the number of team members who share both the same race/ethnicity as well as gender. In column (1),

     we see that race/ethnicity score (lower diversity) in the 2013 cohort has a positive impact on performance.

     Once we include the race/ethnicity-gender diversity score in column (2), however, its magnitude is greatly

     reduced and becomes insignificant. The effect of the race/ethnicity-gender score is now large and statistically

     significant indicating that the negative relationship between race/ethnicity diversity and performance is

     driven by the intersection of race/ethnicity and gender. In columns (4) and (5) we find that the intersection


15
     Z = (0.482-0.176)/(sqrt(0.139^2+ 0.0536^2)=2.05 (Clogg et al. 1995)
16   The SD of school score is 0.029 (Online Appendix Table 5, Panel C). 0.029*0.925= 0.027
                                                              20
effect is similar for both male and female students. Our result indicates that looking at multiple aspects of

diversity at the same time may be important for understanding performance implications of diversity. In

Panel B, we explore the relationship between race/ethnicity-gender and performance when team formation

is endogenous. For teams from the 2014-2015 cohort, there is no relationship between the teams'

race/ethnicity-gender score and performance. Allowing students to choose their team members eliminates

the detrimental performance effects of diversity.


        In Table XV, we investigate the relative impact of diversity on each measure of performance. We

divide our performance measure into four dummy variables: ipo_day, viable, section top 3 and class year top

3. The results in panel A show that the higher race/ethnicity-gender diversity score increases the outcome

in all four performance measures (i.e., less diversity is associated with higher outcomes for all four measures).

The effect is relatively similarly across all four outcomes. The consistency of the race/ethnicity-gender

diversity score to predict performance further supports a role for understanding more complex intersectional

measures of diversity.


        We explore the relationship between team diversity and performance when students were able to

endogenously choose their team members in table XVI. To make the comparison of the performance

implications comparable to the 2013 cohort when teams were exogenously defined, we include interactions

for cohorts after 2013 and team characteristics. In columns (2) to (4), we find that the interaction of

race/ethnicity-gender diveristy score and a dummy for post-2013 cohorts finds that the interaction is large,

negative, and of similar magnitude to the coefficient on race/ethnicity-gender score. The result indicates that

the negative effects of forced diversity on the race/ethnicity-gender intersection is eliminated when teams

are endogenously formed.


        The analysis of looking at diversity along two dimensions (race/ethnicity and gender) provides two

important insights. First, the analysis demonstrates the importance of looking at the intersection of attributes.

Our results indicate that there are profound differences between men and women in terms of homophily

based upon race/ethnicity. There are also important performance implications that are discerned when

                                                       21
looking at diversity along the intersection of race/ethnicity and gender. Second, we find that when team

formation process is forced, more diverse teams underperform more homogenous team (in terms of

race/ethnicity-gender). When team formation process is voluntary, such underperformance is alleviated. In

other words, forced diversity does not guarantee harmony, as biases may still exist within the team. In fact,

research has shown that mandatory diversity training can reduce diversity in organizations (Dobbin and

Kalev 2016; Dobbin, Kalev and Kelly 2007).


         One limitation of our results on race/ethnicity-gender is that it lacks generalizability beyond the

range of diversity we see in our sample. Because the assignment of teams was done by the school with the

intent of having relatively diverse teams, most teams in 2013 were at least modestly diverse in terms of

race/ethnicity and gender. In Figure 2, the graph plots team performance against race/ethnicity score. The

race/ethnicity score for most of teams falls below 50%, with the mean equal to 23.7%. This implies that,

on average, a team of 6 is comprised of students from 3-4 different ethnic groups17. Since there are too few

extremely homogenous teams, we are not able to draw a conclusion on the effect of race/ethnic diversity

across the entire spectrum of diversity. Similarly, Figure 3 shows that gender score for the Class of 2013

cohort concentrates between 40%-45% and has very little variation.


     5.2. Student-Professor/Judges Shared Gender and Performance

         The role of diversity has been examined not only on a horizontal, i.e., team member setting, but

vertically, i.e., supervisor to subordinate level. In our setting, we explore the vertical relationships in the Field

3 setting; the role of the professor/section leader and the role of judges. The results in this section can also

be viewed as causal because from the teams' perspectives, the gender of the professor/section leader is

exogenous. We examine the effect of student group-professor and student group-judge ties on performance.

We examine whether greater overlap of team attributes with attributes of students' professor and/or judges

influences outcomes. In particular, we look at gender ties between the professor or judges and students.



17For a team of 6, if 3 people are white, 1 person is Asian American, 1 person is Lantinx American and another
person is from Europe, this team will have race/ethnicity score = 315=20%


                                                         22
        As discussed earlier, the outcomes for each team was determined through the development of a

micro-business and evaluation of those business by a panel of judges. Each team presented its project to a

panel of judges at the end of the Field 3 class. These presentations were judged initially within sections, i.e.,

each section of 90 students had their businesses evaluated relative to their section peers. The key judge on

each panel was the section leader. The section leaders was the member of the HBS faculty who supervised

the section over the course of the entire year. The role of the section leader was critical to the performance

of the team because of their role teaching and advising students over the course of the year.


        Each panel then had an additional three or four judges from industry. Because of the important role

played by the section leader, we separately analyzed the attributes of the section leader and the judges. Table

XVII reports the summary statistics on section leader and judges' gender and race/ethnicity from 2014 to

2016. HBS did not have data on section leaders and judges for the class of 2013. Among the ten section

leaders in each class year, there were two or three females each year, one or two Black section leaders, one

Lantinx, one South Asian, and six to seven White section leaders. There were no East Asian section leaders

in our sample. There were more than 40 judges in each class year in our sample. The percentage of female

judge increased from 14% in 2014 to 34% in 2016, and the percentage of ethnic minority judge varied

between 5% and 10%. Because there were so few minority judges, we focus on the gender ties between the

section leader or judges and the students.


        In Figure 4, we sort all teams into four quantiles based on the percentage of female team members.

Conditional on the section leader being female, team performance increases monotonically as the percentage

of women on the team increases. Specifically, the percentages of teams presenting on the IPO day, being

rated as viable and being ranked section top 3 are 53%, 28% and 8% respectively for teams with a low

fraction of members (Quantile 1) in sections with female section leaders. These numbers increase to 90%,

76% and 38% respectively for teams with a high female percentage (Quantile 4) in sections with female

section leaders. The economic magnitude of performance increase is significant. For instance, teams with

the highest number of female members were four times more likely to be in the section top 3 than teams


                                                       23
with few or no female members if the section leader was a female. However, we do not find any relationship

between male section leaders and the performance of male dominated teams. The second graph in Figure 4

shows that in section with male section leaders, team performance does not vary with the percentage of

female (or male) in the team. The results suggest that performance of women may be improved with female

mentors and supervisors.


         Table XVIII presents the regression results for performance conditional on shared gender attributes

of the Field 3 teams and the section leader or judges. The dependent variable is team performance, and the

key independent variable is the interaction term between female section leader and percentage of women on

a team. Consistent with Figure 4, the coefficient on the interaction term is positive and statistically significant

at the 1% level indicating teams with a greater number of female members perform significantly better in

sections with female section leaders.


         We do not find any performance impact of female judges for team with a greater number of female

team members. In the second column of Table XVIII, we regress performance on the interaction term

between Have Female Judge and percentage of females on the team. Have Female Judge is a dummy variable

equals to 1 if there is at least one female judge on the panel. The coefficient on the interaction term is

positive, but not statistically significant. The magnitude of the coefficient is also much smaller. We believe

that this highlights not the more favorable ranking of teams with female team members by female judges,

but rather by female section leaders providing better mentorship throughout the year and during the Field

3 course for the woman.


    6. Conclusion and Discussion

         In this paper we examine the effect of homophily on entrepreneurial team formation and the effects

of diversity on performance using a unique dataset of MBA students. We also investigate the causal

relationship between randomly-assigned horizontal (team) diversity and performance as well as the effect of

shared gender ties (vertical diversity) between team members and section leaders/judges on team

performance. Our results are particularly important because the goal was to form real micro-businesses and

                                                        24
many of those formed during Field 3 continued after the course with some attracting significant outside

funding. Additionally, a significant fraction of HBS students for the classes of 2013-2016 pursued to careers

in venture capital and startups.

        In our sample, the strength of endowed shared attributes demographic (gender and race/ethnicity)

for team formation is much stronger than team choice based upon acquired characteristics (education and

industry). Specifically, shared gender and race/ethnicity increased the probability of becoming team

members by 25%. Shared education and past industry experience increased the probability of becoming team

members by 17% and 11% respectively. The strength of homophily in school ties and shared industry

experience is significantly higher for males than it is for females. Male students exhibited significantly greater

propensity to match with others from the same school or who worked in the same industry, particularly male

students who had worked in technology and finance industry.


        While prior research has shown that homophily is often stronger among smaller groups, our results

indicate varying results based upon subgroup size. The effect on propensity to pair was strongest among

international students from the same region, students who attended non-Ivy league schools, and students

who worked in non-finance, non-consulting, or non-technology industries (small industries).


        When we look at the effect of diversity on team performance, we find that teams in the 2013 cohort

for which team membership was exogenously assigned, greater diversity across the intersection of

race/ethnicity and gender was associated with poorer perform than more homogenous teams. This is

consistent with forced diversity increasing conflicts and hindering communication efficiency within the

group. When team formation was endogenous, however, such underperformance was not present. Second,

we find that shared gender ties for female students with their professor/section leader improved

performance of teams with more females. The results highlight the potentially important role that female

mentors provide for the performance of females in a business setting.


        Our results have important real-world implications given a significant portion of the MBA students

will be working in the start-ups and venture capital industry. First, documenting the relative strength of the

                                                       25
forces that cause people to associate in a business setting sheds light on which factors are critical for limiting

diversity in organizations like venture capital and entrepreneurship. To the extent that we observe the

significant effect of various measures of homophily among MBA students forming real micro-businesses, it

is reasonable to infer that such homophily also exists in start-up team formation, venture capital investing,

and hiring. If one goal of research is to identify the primary drivers that limit diversity, understanding the

relative contribution of various factors is critical.


         Second, in order to ensure benefits of diversity in entrepreneurship, one needs to think carefully

about how subtle treatment effects may dislodge the biases that exist. We find that forced diversity does not

improve team performance. To harness the full benefits of diversity, policymakers first need to eliminate

bias against underrepresented groups. For instance, Calder-Wang and Gompers (2020) show that when

venture capitalists have more daughters, they are more likely to hire a female investor, and subsequent firm

performances improve after hiring. Our hope is the more research can explore the effectiveness of such

subtle treatment effects for promoting greater organizational diversity.


         Our results for the performance effects of vertical diversity have potentially important implications

for female-led startups. The relationship between female teams and female section leaders in our setting

resembles the relationship between female entrepreneurs and female VCs. Calder-Wang and Gompers

(2020) and Gompers et al. (2020) document that females VC (and entrepreneurs) are underrepresented and

under-supported. An effective policy to help women succeed in entrepreneurship and venture capital needs

to take advantage of the superior mentorship that female venture capitalists may be able to provide to female

entrepreneurs. This argues for increasing the number of woman in venture capital as a prerequisite for greater

representation and performance of female entrepreneurs.


         Finally, there are two limitations to our results. First, we define homophily as the probability of two

students with the same characteristics being matched (i.e., gender, race/ethnicity), however, this measure

may capture factors that are unobservable but correlated with the observed characteristics (i.e., career goals,

etc.). Second, we do not attempt to trace the source of the desire to match. There are different views on why

                                                        26
homophily exists in the economics literature. One view is that homophily is in an agent's preference function

(Jackson, 2014). Another view is that homophily is the result of agents' strategic decisions to reduce

uncertainty (Kets and Sandroni, 2016). Presumably, homophily that arises from these two different

motivations may have different implications on the team formation process and performance. We do not,

however, distinguish between these motivations. Additional research in this area is also warranted and

important to answering these critical questions.




                                                     27
Reference

Ahern, K. R., & Dittmar, A. K. (2012). The changing of the boards: The impact on firm valuation
of mandated female board representation. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(1), 137-197.

Alesina, A., & Ferrara, E. L. (2005). Ethnic diversity and economic performance. Journal of
Economic LOiterature, 43(3), 762-800.

Athey S., Avery, C., & Zemsky, P. (2000). Mentoring and diversity. American Economic Review 90(4),
765-786.

Becker, G.S. (1957). The Economics of Discrimination." Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Beckman, C. M., Burton, M. D., & O'Reilly, C. (2007). Early teams: The impact of team
demography on VC financing and going public. Journal of Business Venturing, 22(2), 147-173.

Bednar, S., Gicheva, D. (2014). Are female supervisors more female-friendly. American Economic
Review, 104(5), 370-375.

Block, P., & Grund, T. (2014). Multidimensional homophily in friendship networks. Network
Science, 2(02), 189-212.

Brashears, M. E. (2008). Gender and homophily: Differences in male and female association in Blau space.
Social Science Research, 37(2), 400-415.

Calder-Wang, S.Q. & Gompers, P. A. (2018a). Diversity in innovation. Harvard Business School Working
Paper, No. 17-067, January 2018.

Calder-Wang, S.Q. & Gompers, P. A. (2020). And the children shall lead: The effect of children's
gender on hiring and performance in venture capital. Forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.

Chen, R.,& Chen, Y. (2011). The potential of sical identity for equilibrium selection. American
Economic Review, 101(6), 2562-2589.

Chen, Y., & Li, S.X. (2009). Group identity and social preferences. American Economic Review, 99(1)
431-457.

Clogg, C. C., Petkova, E., & Haritou, A. (1995). Statistical methods for comparing regression coefficients
between models. American Journal of Sociology, 100(5), 1261-1293.

Cohen, L., Frazzini, A., & Malloy, C. (2010). Sell-side school ties. Journal of Finance, 65(4), 1409- 1437.

Cornell, B. and Welch, I., 1996. Culture, information, and screening discrimination. Journal of political
Economy, 104(3), 542-571.

Currarini, S., Jackson, M. O., & Pin, P. (2009). An economic model of friendship: Homophily,
minorities, and segregation. Econometrica, 77(4), 1003-1045.

Dobbin, F., & Kalev, A. (2016). Why diversity programs fail. Harvard Business Review, 94(7), 14.


                                                       28
Dobbin, F., Kalev, A., & Kelly, E. (2007). Diversity management in corporate America. Contexts, 6(4), 21-
27.

Fiore, A. T., & Donath, J. S. (2005, April). Homophily in online dating: when do you like someone like
yourself?. In CHI'05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1371-1374). ACM.

Gompers, P. A., Mukharlyamov, V., & Xuan, Y. (2016). The cost of friendship. Journal of Financial
Economics, 119(3), 626-644.

Gompers, P. A., Mukharlyamov, V., Weisburst, E., & Xuan, Y. (2020). Gender effects in venture
capital. Forthcoming Journal of Finance and Quantitative Analysis.

Hampton, K. N., & Wellman, B. (2000). Examining community in the digital neighborhood: early results
from Canada's wired suburb. In Digital cities (pp. 194-208). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

Hoogendoorn, S., Oosterbeek, H., & Van Praag, M. (2013). The impact of gender diversity on the
performance of business teams: Evidence from a field experiment. Management Science, 59(7), 1514-
1528.

Hoogendoorn, S., & Van Praag, M. (2012). Ethnic diversity and team performance: a field
experiment. Working Paper.

Jackson, M. O. (2014). Networks in the understanding of economic behaviors. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 28, 3­22.

Jackson, S. E., Joshi, A., & Erhardt, N. L. (2003). Recent research on team and
organizational diversity: SWOT analysis and implications. Journal of management, 29(6), 801-
830.

Jones, S. R., & McEwen, M. K. (2000). A conceptual model of multiple dimensions of
identity. Journal of college student development, 41(4), 405-414.

Kalmijn M. 1998. Intermarriage and homogamy: causes, patterns and trends. Annu. Rev. Sociol.
24:395­421

Kets, W., & Sandroni, A. (2016). A belief-based theory of homophily. Working Paper.

Kleinbaum, A. M., Stuart, T. E., & Tushman, M. L. (2013). Discretion within constraint: Homophily and
structure in a formal organization. Organization Science, 24(5), 1316-1336.

Lau, D. C., & Murnighan, J. K. (1998). Demographic diversity and faultlines: The compositional dynamics
of organizational groups. Academy of Management Review, 23(2), 325-340.

Lazear, E. P. (1999). Globalisation and the market for team-mates. The Economic Journal, 109(454), 15-40.

Lazarsfeld, P. F., & Merton, R. K. (1954). Friendship as a social process: A substantive and
methodological analysis. Freedom and control in modern society, 18(1), 18-66.

Louch, H. (2000). Personal network integration: transitivity and homophily in strong-tie

                                                     29
relations. Social networks, 22(1), 45-64.

Marsden, P. V. (1987). Core discussion networks of Americans. American sociological review, 122-131.

Marsden, P. V. (1988). Homogeneity in confiding relations. Social networks, 10(1), 57-76.

Marx, B., Pons, V., & Suri, T. (2021). Diversity and team performance in a Kenyan organization.
Working paper.

Matsa, D.A., & Miller, A.R. (2011). American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 101(3), 635-639

McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
networks. Annual review of sociology, 27(1), 415-444.

Mello, A.S., & Ruckes, M.E., (2006). Team composition. Journal of Business 79(3), 1019-1039.

Morgan, J., and Vardy, F. (2009). Diversity in the workplace. American Economic Review 99(1), 472-485.

Neckerman, H. J. (1996). The stability of social groups in childhood and adolescence: the role of the
classroom social environment. Social Development, 5(2), 131-145.

Reagans, R. (2011). Close encounters: Analyzing how social similarity and propinquity contribute to strong
network connections. Organization Science, 22(4), 835-849.

Reynolds, A. L., & Pope, R. L. (1991). The complexities of diversity: Exploring multiple oppressions. Journal
of Counseling & Development, 70(1), 174-180.

Robinson, T. (1993). The intersections of gender, class, race, and culture: On seeing clients whole. Journal of
multicultural Counseling and Development, 21(1), 50-58.

Ruef, M., Aldrich, H. E., & Carter, N. M. (2003). The structure of founding teams: Homophily,
strong ties, and isolation among US entrepreneurs. American sociological review, 195-222.

Sorenson, O., & Stuart, T. E. (2001). Syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital
investments 1. American journal of sociology, 106(6), 1546-1588.

Van Knippenberg, D., & Schippers, M. C. (2007). Work group diversity. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 58, 515- 541.

Verbrugge, L. M. (1977). The structure of adult friendship choices. Social forces, 576-597.

Wimmer, A., & Lewis, K. (2010). Beyond and below racial homophily: ERG models of a friendship
network documented on Facebook. American Journal of Sociology, 116(2), 583-642.




                                                      30
Figure 1. Probability of Matching Conditional on Same Race/ethnicity, Gender, School, Industry

This figure plots the probability of a student being matched to another student with same race/ethnicity,
gender, school or industry background. In 2013, the matching is randomized by the school. From 2014 to
2016, the matching process is initiated by students.




                                                    31
                  Table I. Summary Statistics of MBA Backgrounds

       Table I presents the summary statistics of HBS MBA background from 2013
       to 2016.

                              2013          2014       2015            2016       Total
# of Students                  907           915        931             931       3684
Team Size                     6.06          6.13       6.25             5.2        5.91
Age                           28.89         29.1       29.07          29.21       29.06
% of Female                  39.25%       40.44%     41.14%          41.35%      40.55%
% of White American          37.16%       39.45%     37.70%          39.53%      38.46%
% of Asian American          14.33%       11.80%     11.92%          11.82%      12.46%
% of Black                   4.52%         5.68%      5.59%           5.80%       5.40%
% of Lantinxs American       3.75%         4.26%      4.83%           3.65%       4.13%
% International              34.07%       34.32%     34.59%          37.06%      35.02%
                                      Employment
% Finance Background         29.66% Background
                                          29.29%     33.83%          36.84%      32.44%
% Consulting Background      21.94%       20.55%     20.62%          25.13%      22.07%
% Technology Background      9.04%         9.84%     10.85%          13.96%      10.94%
% Healthcare Background      8.16%         7.87%      6.34%           8.92%       7.82%
                                  Education Background
% Ivy League                 26.90%       25.03%     23.63%          22.99%      24.62%
% Top School                 41.23%       37.92%     38.35%          34.26%      37.92%




                                          32
                                       Table II. Past Employment and Education Background

This table summarizes the employment and education background of HBS MBAs.

Rank   Company                               Obs   Percent            Rank    School                            Obs    Percent
  1    McKinsey & Company                    308    8.40%              1      Harvard University                286     8.17%
  2    Bain & Company                        184    5.02%              2      Stanford University               157     4.49%
  3    Boston Consulting Group               173    4.72%              3      University of Pennsylvania        151     4.31%
  4    Goldman Sachs                         166    4.53%              4      Yale University                   124     3.54%
  5    Morgan Stanley                        138    3.77%              5      Princeton University              102     2.91%
  6    Google                                 78    2.13%              6      Duke University                    81     2.31%
  7    Credit Suisse                          54    1.47%              7      MIT                                72     2.06%
  8    J.P. Morgan                            47    1.28%              8      United States Military Academy     70     2.00%
  9    Deloitte Consulting                    45    1.23%              9      Dartmouth College                  67     1.91%
 10    Booz & Company                         44    1.20%              10     University of California           64     1.83%
 11    UBS Investment Bank                    42    1.15%              11     Cornell University                 63     1.80%
 12    Bank of America Merrill Lynch          38    1.04%              12     Georgetown University              60     1.71%
 13    Bain Capital                           32    0.87%              13     Brown University                   57     1.63%
 14    United States Marine Corps             29    0.79%              13     Columbia University                57     1.63%
 15    Accenture                              26    0.71%              15     Northwestern University            56     1.60%
 15    Citigroup                              26    0.71%              16     University of Virginia             52     1.49%
 15    Barclays Capital                       25    0.68%              17     Indian Institute of Technology     50     1.43%
 15    Oliver Wyman                           25    0.68%              18     University of Texas                45     1.29%
 15    The Blackstone Group                   25    0.68%              19     University of Michigan             38     1.09%
 20    Deutsche Bank                          24    0.65%              20     Brigham Young University           37     1.06%
 20    The Carlyle Group                      24    0.65%
       Top 20 Total                         1553   42.37%                     Top 20 Total                      1689   48.26%
       Sample Total                        3,665                              Sample Total                     3,500




                                                               33
                                 Table III. Matching Regression

This table reports the regression results of matching on race/ethnicity (gender, education, industry)
ties. Each observation is a student-student pair. The dependent variable real_match equals to 1 if
the pair is in the same team. The independent variables race/ethnicity (gender, education, industry)
match equals to 1 if the pair has the same race/ethnicity (gender, education, industry). Robust
standard errors are clustered at the student level (i.e. one student is matched to 89 potential
matches, and they are treated as 1 observation).

Panel A. 2014-2016            (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
VARIABLES                 Real Match      Real Match      Real Match      Real Match      Real Match

Race/ethnicity Tie         0.0138***                                                        0.0136***
                           (0.00116)                                                        (0.00116)
Gender Tie                                 0.0133***                                        0.0131***
                                           (0.00107)                                        (0.00106)
School Tie                                                0.00976**                         0.00855**
                                                          (0.00384)                         (0.00383)
Industry Tie                                                             0.00637***        0.00625***
                                                                           (0.00120)        (0.00120)
Team Mem Count              0.0106***      0.0109***       0.0108***      0.0107***         0.0105***
                           (0.000114)      (5.65e-05)      (2.42e-05)     (5.04e-05)       (0.000132)
2015.ClassYear           -0.000746***    -0.000957***    -0.000983***    -0.00116***     -0.000895***
                           (0.000123)      (6.21e-05)      (2.52e-05)     (5.48e-05)       (0.000145)
2016.ClassYear            -0.00121***    -0.000945***     -0.00105***    -0.00167***      -0.00174***
                           (0.000162)      (7.82e-05)      (3.07e-05)     (0.000134)       (0.000223)
Constant                   -0.0112***     -0.0167***      -0.00958***    -0.00981***       -0.0186***
                           (0.000692)     (0.000680)       (0.000148)     (0.000273)       (0.000974)
Observations                 254,318        254,318          254,318        254,318          254,318
R-squared                     0.002          0.002            0.001          0.001            0.003
Panel B.2013                    (6)            (7)             (8)             (9)             (10)
VARIABLES                  Real Match     Real Match       Real Match     Real Match       Real Match

Race/ethnicity Tie          -0.00116                                                       -0.000837
                           (0.00170)                                                       (0.00170)
Gender Tie                                -0.0166***                                      -0.0166***
                                          (0.000716)                                      (0.000716)
School Tie                                                  -0.00303                        -0.00284
                                                           (0.00604)                       (0.00605)
Industry Tie                                                               -0.000367       -0.000271
                                                                           (0.00215)       (0.00215)
Team Mem Count             0.0106***      0.0106***        0.0106***      0.0106***       0.0106***
                           (5.93e-05)     (0.000220)       (5.49e-05)     (5.56e-05)      (0.000218)
Constant                  -0.00772***      0.000630       -0.00788***    -0.00789***        0.000883
                           (0.000490)      (0.00138)       (0.000359)     (0.000454)       (0.00143)
Observations                 81,368          81,368          81,368          81,368          81,368
R-squared                     0.000          0.001            0.000          0.000            0.001




                                                 34
    Table IV. Matching Regression: Endowed Demographic vs. Acquired Characteristics

This table reports the regression results of matching on endowed demographic and acquired
characteristics. Each observation is a student-student pair. In Panel A. the dependent variable real
match equals to 1 if the pair is in the same team. The independent variables Endowed
Demographic Match equals to 1 if the pair has the same race/ethnicity or gender. Acquired
Characteristics Match equals to 1 if the pair has the same education or industry. Panel B. reports F
statistics of null hypothesis that the coefficient on Endowed Demographic Match equals to the
coefficient on Acquired Characteristics Match. Robust standard errors are clustered at the student
level (i.e. one student is matched to 89 potential matches, and they are treated as 1 clustering
group).



      Panel A.
                                                              2014-2016           2013
                                                                  (1)               (2)
       VARIABLES                                              Real Match        Real Match

       Endowed Demographic Match                               0.0151***        -0.0149***
                                                                (0.00102)        (0.00110)
       Acquired Characteristics Match                         0.00662***         -0.000386
                                                                (0.00116)        (0.00210)
       Team Mem Count                                          0.0106***         0.0107***
                                                               (9.18e-05)       (0.000214)
       2015.ClassYear                                        -0.000963***
                                                               (0.000100)
       2016.ClassYear                                         -0.00172***
                                                               (0.000173)
       2013.ClassYear                                                                -

       Constant                                               -0.0189***         0.000764
                                                              (0.000811)         (0.00149)

       Observations                                            254,318            81,368
       R-squared                                                0.002             0.001
       Panel B.
       Endowed Demographic Match =Acquired
       Characteristics Match                                  F statistics
       2014-2016                                                 32.3
       2013                                                     37.04




                                                 35
                                      Table V. Race/ethnicity Match Regression

           This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on race/ethnicity ties. Each
           observation is a student-student pair. The dependent variable real match equals to 1 if the students
           are teammates. The independent variables are race/ethnicity characteristics equals to 1 if both
           students share the same race/ethnicity. Robust standard errors are clustered at the student level
           (i.e. one student is matched to 89 potential matches, and they are treated as 1 clustering group).




2014-2016                          (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)
VARIABLES                      Real Match     Real Match      Real Match      Real Match     Real Match      Real Match

Both White                     0.0108***                                                                      0.0118***
                               (0.00114)                                                                       (0.00116)
Both Asian American                            0.0116***                                                       0.0145***
                                               (0.00421)                                                       (0.00423)
Both Black                                                        0.00956                                        0.0126
                                                                 (0.00869)                                     (0.00870)
Both Lantinx American                                                          5.47e-05                         0.00306
                                                                               (0.0125)                         (0.0125)
Both International                                                                             0.0377***       0.0401***
                                                                                               (0.00506)       (0.00508)
Team Mem Count                   0.0106***     0.0108***      0.0108***        0.0108***      0.0109***        0.0107***
                                (0.000104)     (2.93e-05)      (2.32e-05)      (2.37e-05)      (4.89e-05)      (9.12e-05)
2015.ClassYear                -0.000773***   -0.000982***    -0.000983***    -0.000983***    -0.00105***    -0.000827***
                                (0.000111)     (3.18e-05)      (2.38e-05)      (2.42e-05)      (5.33e-05)      (9.79e-05)
2016.ClassYear                 -0.00121***    -0.00105***     -0.00104***     -0.00104***   -0.000966***     -0.00114***
                                (0.000146)     (3.75e-05)      (2.85e-05)      (3.03e-05)      (6.73e-05)     (0.000126)
Constant                        -0.0103***    -0.00960***     -0.00957***     -0.00951***     -0.0106***      -0.0118***
                                (0.000613)     (0.000179)     (0.000151)       (0.000153)     (0.000325)      (0.000564)
Observations                      254,318        254,318        254,318          254,318        254,318         254,318
R-squared                           0.001         0.001           0.001           0.001           0.001           0.002
2013                               (7)            (8)             (9)            (10)           (11)            (12)
VARIABLES                      Real Match     Real Match      Real Match      Real Match     Real Match      Real Match

Both White                       1.17e-05                                                                     -0.000239
                                (0.00174)                                                                     (0.00177)
Both Asian American                             0.00222                                                        0.00193
                                               (0.00508)                                                      (0.00512)
Both Black                                                       0.000214                                     -3.45e-05
                                                                 (0.0182)                                      (0.0182)
Both Lantinx American                                                          0.00439                         0.00414
                                                                               (0.0219)                        (0.0219)
Both International                                                                           -0.0158***      -0.0158***
                                                                                              (0.00530)       (0.00534)
Team Mem Count                 0.0106***       0.0106***      0.0106***       0.0106***      0.0106***        0.0106***
                               (6.02e-05)      (8.38e-05)      (7.71e-05)     (5.69e-05)      (7.45e-05)     (0.000117)
Constant                      -0.00794***     -0.00816***     -0.00794***    -0.00793***    -0.00750***     -0.00766***
                               (0.000372)      (0.000591)     (0.000451)      (0.000345)     (0.000478)      (0.000795)
Observations                     81,368          81,368          81,368         81,368          81,368          81,368
R-squared                         0.000           0.000           0.000          0.000           0.000           0.000


                                                            36
                                 Table VI. Gender Match Regression

This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on Gender ties. Each
observation is a student-student pair. The dependent variable real match equals to 1 if the students
are teammates. The independent variables are Both Male (Female) equals to 1 if both students are
male (female). Robust standard errors are clustered at the student level.



                                 2014-2016       2014-2016         2013             2013
                                     (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
      VARIABLES                  Real Match      Real Match      Real Match       Real Match

      Both Male                  0.00723***                      -0.00897***
                                 (0.000868)                       (0.000596)
      Both Female                                 0.0122***                       -0.0161***
                                                   (0.00130)                      (0.000897)
      Team Mem Count              0.0109***       0.0107***       0.0106***        0.0106***
                                  (9.28e-05)      (0.000106)      (0.000320)      (0.000370)
      2015.ClassYear            -0.000934***     -0.00104***
                                  (0.000101)      (0.000115)
      2016.ClassYear            -0.000880***     -0.00123***
                                  (0.000131)      (0.000151)
      Constant                   -0.0126***       -0.0109***      -0.00468**      -0.00550**
                                  (0.000680)      (0.000654)       (0.00195)       (0.00225)

      Observations                 254,318         254,318          81,368          81,368
      R-squared                     0.001           0.001            0.001           0.001




                                                 37
                            Table VII. Gender Match Breakdown by Race/ethnicity

This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on Gender and race/ethnicity
ties. Each observation is a student-student pair. The dependent variable real match equals to 1
if the students are teammates. The independent variable is race/ethnicity tie. First two columns
look at the matching results of male subsample, last two columns look at the female subsample.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the student level.


                                                                2014-2016
                                       Male               Male           Female        Female
                                         (1)                (2)            (3)            (4)
      VARIABLES                      Real Match         Real Match     Real Match     Real Match

      Race/ethnicity Tie             0.0154***                         0.0114***
                                     (0.00151)                         (0.00180)
      Both White                                       0.0135***                       0.00914***
                                                       (0.00150)                        (0.00180)
      Both Asian American                              0.0147**                         0.0141***
                                                       (0.00672)                        (0.00543)
      Both Black                                        0.00326                          0.0245*
                                                        (0.0107)                         (0.0142)
      Both Lantinx American                              0.0159                           -0.0249
                                                        (0.0158)                         (0.0186)
      Both International                               0.0427***                        0.0363***
                                                       (0.00650)                        (0.00815)
      Team Mem Count                   0.0105***       0.0106***         0.0107***      0.0107***
                                      (0.000170)      (0.000142)        (0.000143)     (0.000106)
      2015.ClassYear                -0.000759***    -0.000802***      -0.000742***   -0.000878***
                                      (0.000181)      (0.000146)        (0.000159)     (0.000126)
      2016.ClassYear                 -0.00112***     -0.00103***       -0.00132***    -0.00122***
                                      (0.000235)      (0.000192)        (0.000214)     (0.000160)
      Constant                        -0.0111***      -0.0118***        -0.0112***     -0.0116***
                                       (0.00101)      (0.000856)        (0.000896)     (0.000698)

      Observations                    150,093            150,093        104,225        104,225
      R-squared                        0.002              0.002          0.001          0.002




                                                   38
                                               Table VIII. Education Match Regression

    This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on education ties. Each observation is a student -student pair. The
    dependent variable real match equals to 1 if the students are teammates. The independent variables Both Same (Non) Ivy School
    equals to 1 if both students are graduated from the same (Non) Ivy schools. Robust standard errors are clustered at the student level.



                       2014-2016      2014-2016       2014-2016      2014-2016      2013           2013            2013           2013
                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
VARIABLES               Real Match     Real Match     Real Match     Real Match     Real Match      Real Match     Real Match     Real Match

School Tie              0.00976**                                                     -0.00303
                        (0.00384)                                                    (0.00604)
Both Ivy School                          0.00219                        0.00232                      0.00623                        0.00611
                                        (0.00490)                      (0.00490)                    (0.00852)                     (0.00852)
Both Non Ivy                                           0.0188***      0.0189***                                     -0.0145*       -0.0144*
                                                        (0.00600)      (0.00600)                                   (0.00821)      (0.00821)
Team Mem Count           0.0108***      0.0108***      0.0108***      0.0108***      0.0106***      0.0106***      0.0106***      0.0106***
                         (2.42e-05)     (2.30e-05)      (2.38e-05)     (2.45e-05)    (5.49e-05)     (5.64e-05)     (6.04e-05)     (6.35e-05)
2015.ClassYear         -0.000983***   -0.000981***    -0.000996***   -0.000994***
                         (2.52e-05)     (2.37e-05)      (2.64e-05)     (2.65e-05)
2016.ClassYear          -0.00105***    -0.00104***     -0.00104***    -0.00105***
                         (3.07e-05)     (2.83e-05)      (3.04e-05)     (3.08e-05)
Constant                -0.00958***    -0.00952***     -0.00960***    -0.00961***   -0.00788***    -0.00803***    -0.00786***    -0.00795***
                         (0.000148)     (0.000137)     (0.000148)     (0.000148)     (0.000359)     (0.000366)     (0.000372)     (0.000408)

Observations              254,318        254,318        254,318           254,318      81,368         81,368         81,368         81,368
R-squared                  0.001          0.001          0.001             0.001        0.000          0.000          0.000         0.000




                                                                     39
                                             Table IX. Education Match Regression by Gender

This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on education ties by gender. Each observation is a student-student pair.
The dependent variable real match equals to 1 if the students are teammates. The independent variables Both Same (Non) Ivy School
equals to 1 if both students are graduated from the same (Non) Ivy schools. Robust standard errors are clustered at the student level.



                                                                                2014-2016
                                                         Male            Male             Female         Female
                                                          (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)
                           VARIABLES                  Real Match       Real Match       Real Match      Real Match

                           School Tie                 0.0171***                         0.000960
                                                      (0.00540)                         (0.00540)
                           Both Ivy School                                0.00893                         -0.00391
                                                                         (0.00714)                       (0.00671)
                           Both Non Ivy                                 0.0250***                          0.00898
                                                                         (0.00804)                       (0.00889)
                           Team Mem Count              0.0108***        0.0108***       0.0108***       0.0108***
                                                       (3.59e-05)       (3.55e-05)      (3.42e-05)       (3.65e-05)
                           2015.ClassYear            -0.000971***     -0.000969***    -0.000993***      -0.00102***
                                                       (3.66e-05)       (3.65e-05)      (3.67e-05)       (4.40e-05)
                           2016.ClassYear             -0.00106***      -0.00106***     -0.00106***      -0.00105***
                                                       (4.53e-05)       (4.42e-05)      (4.35e-05)       (4.68e-05)
                           Constant                   -0.00961***      -0.00961***     -0.00948***      -0.00953***
                                                       (0.000212)       (0.000209)      (0.000220)      (0.000231)

                           Observations                150,093            150,093        104,225          104,225
                           R-squared                    0.001              0.001          0.001            0.001




                                                                     40
                                         Table X. Past Employment Regression

           This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on education ties. Each
           observation is a student-student pair. The dependent variable real match equals to 1 if the students
           are teammates. The independent variables are industry backgrounds equals to 1 if both students
           worked in the same industry prior to MBA. Robust standard errors are clustered at the student level.

2014-2016                             (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)
VARIABLES                         Real Match     Real Match         Real Match      Real Match     Real Match     Real Match

Industry Tie                      0.00637***
                                   (0.00120)
Both Finance Industry                             0.00346**                                                        0.00418***
                                                  (0.00142)                                                         (0.00144)
Both Tech Industry                                                    0.00362                                        0.00455
                                                                     (0.00378)                                      (0.00378)
Both Consulting Industry                                                            0.00354*                       0.00432**
                                                                                    (0.00190)                       (0.00191)
Both Small Industry                                                                                  0.0212***     0.0218***
                                                                                                     (0.00391)      (0.00392)
Team Mem Count                      0.0107***     0.0107***          0.0108***       0.0108***      0.0109***      0.0108***
                                    (5.04e-05)    (5.04e-05)          (2.36e-05)     (2.81e-05)      (3.59e-05)     (5.25e-05)
2015.ClassYear                     -0.00116***   -0.00107***        -0.000991***   -0.000985***   -0.000964***    -0.00108***
                                    (5.48e-05)    (4.73e-05)          (2.57e-05)     (2.66e-05)      (3.55e-05)     (5.02e-05)
2016.ClassYear                     -0.00167***   -0.00129***         -0.00108***    -0.00110***    -0.00112***    -0.00154***
                                    (0.000134)    (0.000113)          (5.04e-05)     (4.57e-05)      (5.00e-05)    (0.000132)
Constant                           -0.00981***   -0.00929***         -0.00952***    -0.00978***     -0.0102***     -0.0103***
                                    (0.000273)    (0.000229)         (0.000141)      (0.000216)     (0.000255)     (0.000309)
Observations                         254,318        254,318            254,318         254,318        254,318        254,318
R-squared                             0.001          0.001               0.001          0.001           0.001          0.001
2013                                  (7)            (8)                (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)
VARIABLES                         Real Match     Real Match         Real Match      Real Match     Real Match     Real Match

Industry Tie                       -0.000367
                                   (0.00215)
Both Finance Industry                             -0.000909                                                         -0.000839
                                                  (0.00254)                                                         (0.00258)
Both Tech Industry                                                   0.0215**                                       0.0213**
                                                                     (0.0102)                                        (0.0103)
Both Consulting Industry                                                             -0.00538                        -0.00517
                                                                                    (0.00380)                       (0.00384)
Both Small Industry                                                                                  0.00692          0.00681
                                                                                                    (0.00542)       (0.00544)
Team Mem Count                      0.0106***     0.0106***         0.0106***       0.0106***      0.0106***       0.0107***
                                    (5.56e-05)    (5.97e-05)         (9.53e-05)     (7.12e-05)     (6.61e-05)      (0.000111)
Constant                           -0.00789***   -0.00788***        -0.00818***    -0.00776***    -0.00817***     -0.00817***
                                    (0.000454)    (0.000402)        (0.000593)      (0.000451)     (0.000443)      (0.000759)
Observations                          81,368        81,368             81,368         81,368          81,368          81,368
R-squared                              0.000         0.000              0.000          0.000           0.000           0.000




                                                               41
                            Table XI. Past Employment Regression by Gender

This table reports the regression results of the probability of match on education ties by gender.
Each observation is a student-student pair. The dependent variable real match equals to 1 if the
students are teammates. The independent variables are industry backgrounds equals to 1 if both
students worked in the same industry prior to MBA. Robust standard errors are clustered at the
student level.

                                                              2014-2016
                                      Male              Male            Female       Female
                                        (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)
 VARIABLES                          Real Match        Real Match     Real Match     Real Match

 Industry Tie                       0.00887***                         0.00292
                                     (0.00159)                        (0.00181)
 Both Finance Industry                              0.00801***                         -0.00172
                                                     (0.00188)                        (0.00219)
 Both Tech Industry                                   0.00869*                         -0.00220
                                                     (0.00484)                        (0.00603)
 Both Consulting Industry                              0.00259                       0.00564**
                                                     (0.00278)                        (0.00265)
 Both Small Industry                                 0.0214***                       0.0226***
                                                     (0.00487)                        (0.00659)
 Team Mem Count                      0.0106***       0.0107***       0.0108***       0.0109***
                                    (8.76e-05)       (9.53e-05)      (5.00e-05)       (7.81e-05)
 2015.ClassYear                    -0.00107***     -0.00108***      -0.00114***     -0.000823***
                                    (7.66e-05)       (6.68e-05)      (0.000104)      (0.000132)
 2016.ClassYear                    -0.00182***     -0.00178***      -0.00139***     -0.00113***
                                    (0.000179)      (0.000181)       (0.000212)      (0.000223)
 Constant                          -0.00976***     -0.00998***      -0.00966***      -0.0106***
                                    (0.000468)      (0.000533)       (0.000295)      (0.000523)

 Observations                        150,093           150,093         104,225        104,225
 R-squared                            0.001             0.001           0.001          0.001




                                                 42
                  Table XII. Summary Statistics on Team Homophily and Performance

     This table reports the summary statistics on the team homophily scores and performance.

Panel A. Homophily Measures
2013
Variable              Obs Mean        Benchmark      Mean/Benchmark       Std. Dev.    SE      Min     Max
Team Member Count     150   6.047                                           0.268     0.022    5.0     7.0
Race/ethnicity Score  150   0.237         0.242            98.01%           0.166     0.014    0.0     1.0
Gender Score          150   0.444         0.518            85.71%           0.038     0.003    0.4     0.7
School Score          150   0.017         0.018            95.75%           0.039     0.003    0.0     0.2
Industry Score        150   0.163         0.164            99.65%           0.136     0.011    0.0     0.9
2014
Variable              Obs Mean        Benchmark      Mean/Benchmark       Std. Dev.    SE      Min     Max
Team Member Count     150   6.100                                           0.414     0.034    5.0     7.0
Race/ethnicity Score  150   0.290         0.247            117.70%          0.214     0.017    0.0     1.0
Gender Score          150   0.582         0.513            113.46%          0.216     0.018    0.4     1.0
School Score          150   0.017         0.015            110.82%          0.035     0.003    0.0     0.2
Industry Score        150   0.181         0.153            118.26%          0.164     0.013    0.0     1.0
2015
Variable              Obs Mean        Benchmark      Mean/Benchmark       Std. Dev.    SE      Min     Max
Team Member Count     150   6.207                                           0.496     0.040    5.0     7.0
Race/ethnicity Score  150   0.271         0.232            116.89%          0.228     0.019    0.0     1.0
Gender Score          150   0.558         0.511            109.21%          0.202     0.017    0.4     1.0
School Score          150   0.019         0.016            115.87%          0.039     0.003    0.0     0.2
Industry Score        150   0.183         0.183            99.99%           0.145     0.012    0.0     0.7
2016
Variable              Obs Mean        Benchmark      Mean/Benchmark       Std. Dev.    SE      Min     Max
Team Member Count     180   5.172                                           0.393     0.029    4.0     6.0
Race/ethnicity Score  180   0.280         0.230            122.06%          0.241     0.018    0.0     1.0
Gender Score          180   0.582         0.510            114.11%          0.227     0.017    0.4     1.0
School Score          180   0.019         0.015            133.33%          0.047     0.004    0.0     0.3
Industry Score        180   0.255         0.235            108.59%          0.177     0.013    0.0     1.0
2014-2016 Average
Variable             Obs Mean         Benchmark      Mean/Benchmark       Std. Dev.    SE      Min     Max
Team Member Count 480     5.785                                             0.644     0.029    4.0     7.0
Race/ethnicity Score 480  0.281           0.236            119.04%          0.228     0.010    0.0     1.0
Gender Score         480  0.574           0.511            112.38%          0.216     0.010    0.4     1.0
School Score         480  0.018           0.015            120.60%          0.041     0.002    0.0     0.3
Industry Score       480  0.210           0.193            108.45%          0.167     0.008    0.0     1.0


          Panel B. Performance Measures

          Class Year   Freq.   ipo year    viable section top 3     classytop3 Performance      SD
             2013       150    78.67%     46.67%    20.00%            2.67%       0.502        0.275
             2014       150    70.00%     39.33%    20.00%            2.00%       0.460        0.290
             2015       150    73.33%     55.33%    20.00%            2.00%       0.512        0.287
             2016       180    76.11%     52.78%    16.67%            2.22%       0.504        0.272
            Total       630    74.60%     48.73%    19.05%            2.22%       0.495        0.281
                                                      43
Panel C. Correlation Between Variables
                       Race/ethnicity Gender     School    Industry
2014-2016                  Score        Score    Score      Score   Performance
Race/ethnicity Score         1
Gender Score              -0.0262          1
School Score              0.1415        -0.016       1
Industry Score            0.0403       0.1253     0.0791      1
Performance               0.1556       0.0203    -0.0042   -0.0355       1
                       Race/ethnicity Gender      School   Industry
2013                       Score        Score     Score     Score   Performance
Race/ethnicity Score         1
Gender Score              0.1013           1
School Score              -0.0166       -0.017      1
Industry Score            -0.0371      -0.0819   0.0084       1
Performance               0.2907        0.0324   0.1303    0.0309        1




                                      44
                        Table XIII. Homophily and Performance Regression

This table regresses team performance on team diversity scores. The dependent variable
Performance=0.125 if the team does not present on IPO day (0-25%), =0.375 if present but not
viable (25-50%), =0.65 if viable but not top 3 (50-80%), =0.9 if top 3 in section (80-98%), =0.99 if
top 3 in class year (98-100%). The independent variables are diversity scores described in the
paper. Robust standard error is clustered at year-section level. Each coefficient's standard error
appears directly below the coefficient estimate. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

Panel A. 2013               (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
VARIABLES                                                  Performance

Race/ethnicity Score     0.482***                                              0.488***    0.450***
                          (0.110)                                               (0.105)    (0.0961)
Gender Score                            0.211                                   0.0249      0.0802
                                       (0.678)                                  (0.658)     (0.627)
School Score                                           0.925                    0.958*       0.809
                                                      (0.519)                   (0.476)     (0.469)
Industry Score                                                      0.0635      0.0842      0.0719
                                                                    (0.134)     (0.165)     (0.179)
Top School Ratio                                                                            0.0845
                                                                                           (0.0789)
Start-up Ratio                                                                               0.529
                                                                                            (0.363)
Team Mem Count             0.0471      0.0402          0.0491        0.0433     0.0538      0.0515
                          (0.0593)    (0.0713)        (0.0653)      (0.0689)   (0.0569)    (0.0656)
Constant                    0.585       0.377           1.115         0.294     1.576*       1.383
                           (0.358)     (0.662)         (0.723)       (0.429)    (0.844)     (0.894)
Observations                 150         150             150           150        150         150
R-squared                   0.087       0.003           0.019         0.003      0.107       0.122
Panel B. 2014-2016           (1)         (2)             (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)
VARIABLES                                                   Performance

Race/ethnicity Score     0.176***                                              0.185***     0.168***
                         (0.0542)                                              (0.0556)     (0.0600)
Gender Score                           0.0273                                   0.0434       0.0641
                                      (0.0585)                                 (0.0593)     (0.0608)
School Score                                          -0.0915                    -0.195       -0.298
                                                      (0.300)                   (0.295)      (0.315)
Industry Score                                                       -0.110      -0.121       -0.113
                                                                    (0.0837)   (0.0825)     (0.0839)
Top School Ratio                                                                             0.0907
                                                                                            (0.0604)
Start-up Ratio                                                                               0.341**
                                                                                             (0.138)
Team Mem Count           0.0885***   0.0991***    0.0997***        0.105***    0.0942***   0.0847***
                          (0.0262)    (0.0270)     (0.0266)        (0.0278)     (0.0273)    (0.0292)
Constant                   0.0455       -0.133       -0.238          -0.268       -0.256      -0.341
                           (0.165)     (0.178)      (0.314)         (0.200)      (0.313)     (0.309)
Fixed Effects               Year         Year         Year            Year         Year        Year
Observations                 480          480          480             480          480         480
R-squared                   0.049        0.030        0.030           0.033        0.056       0.074



                                                 45
                  Table XIV. Ethnic-Gender Homophily and Team Performance
This table regresses team performance on the interaction of Race/ethnicity Score and Gender
Score. The dependent variable Performance=0.125 if the team does not present on IPO day (0-
25%), =0.375 if present but not viable (25-50%), =0.65 if viable but not top 3 (50-80%), =0.9 if top
3 in section (80-98%), =0.99 if top 3 in class year (98-100%). The independent variables are
diversity scores described in the paper. Robust standard error is clustered at year-section level.
Each coefficient's standard error appears directly below the coefficient estimate. Statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.
Panel A. 2013                            (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)
VARIABLES                                                          Performance

Race/ethnicity Score                  0.482***            0.144       0.0611      0.0635      0.00585
                                       (0.102)          (0.176)      (0.144)      (0.228)     (0.200)
Gender Score                           -0.0103           -0.125      -0.0183      0.0715       0.121
                                       (0.638)          (0.644)      (0.610)      (0.692)     (0.678)
Ethnicity-Gender Score                                  0.728**     0.821***
                                                        (0.281)      (0.230)
Ethnicity-Gender Score (Male)                                                     0.762**    0.837**
                                                                                  (0.298)     (0.246)
Ethnicity-Gender Score (Female)                                                   1.292*      1.229*
                                                                                  (0.761)     (0.748)
Top School Ratio                                                     0.197**                 0.185**
                                                                     (0.0745)                (0.0753)
Start-up Ratio                                                         0.476                   0.474
                                                                      (0.317)                 (0.324)
Team Member Count                       0.0473          0.0528        0.0584      0.0448      0.0518
                                       (0.0620)        (0.0613)      (0.0700)    (0.0589)    (0.0679)
Constant                                 0.579           0.143      -0.00518       0.219      0.0623
                                        (0.621)         (0.595)       (0.623)     (0.577)     (0.612)
Observations                              150             150           150         150         150
R-squared                                0.087           0.112         0.141       0.118       0.145
Panel B. 2014-2016                        (6)             (7)           (8)         (9)         (10)
VARIABLES                                                          Performance

Race/ethnicity Score                  0.177***           0.205*        0.169       0.182       0.152
                                      (0.0536)          (0.118)      (0.121)      (0.120)     (0.123)
Gender Score                           0.0327            0.0454       0.0559      0.0470      0.0564
                                      (0.0588)         (0.0715)     (0.0724)     (0.0721)    (0.0725)
Ethnicity-Gender Score                                  -0.0471      -0.0142
                                                        (0.154)      (0.157)
Ethnicity-Gender Score (Male)                                                     -0.0507      -0.0181
                                                                                  (0.153)      (0.155)
Ethnicity-Gender Score (Female)                                                    0.157         0.150
                                                                                  (0.215)      (0.213)
Top School Ratio                                                     0.0748                     0.0692
                                                                    (0.0586)                  (0.0577)
Start-up Ratio                                                      0.360***                  0.353***
                                                                     (0.139)                   (0.140)
Team Member Count                     0.0882***        0.0882***   0.0792***     0.0866***   0.0783***
                                       (0.0264)         (0.0264)    (0.0284)      (0.0270)    (0.0288)
Constant                                 -0.148           -0.156      -0.142        -0.149      -0.136
                                        (0.171)          (0.174)     (0.172)       (0.174)     (0.172)
Year FE                                   YES              YES         YES           YES         YES
Observations                               480              480         480           480         480
R-squared                                 0.050            0.050       0.067         0.054       0.070


                                                  46
                           Table XV. Performance Breakdown Regression

This table reports logit regression results on the effect of Race/ethnicity-Gender Score. Robust standard
error is clustered at year-section level. The dependent variables IPO day/Viable/Section Top
3/Class year top 3 are indicator variables equals 1 if the team presented on IPO day/the project is
deemed viable by judges/the team is section top 3/the team is class year top 3. The independent
variables are diversity scores described in the paper. Robust standard error is clustered at year-
section level. Each coefficient's standard error appears directly below the coefficient estimate.
Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.

  Panel A. 2013                               (1)          (2)            (3)               (4)
  VARIABLES                                 IPO Day       Viable     Section Top 3   Class Year Top 3

  Race/ethnicity-Gender Score              10.45***      6.955***      4.002**           6.209***
                                            (3.105)       (1.998)       (1.575)           (1.465)
  Top School Ratio                          1.772**       1.289**         1.267             0.559
                                            (0.830)       (0.533)       (0.982)           (1.568)
  Start-up Ratio                             2.819        3.613**         3.428             2.246
                                            (2.964)       (1.766)       (3.318)           (8.201)
  Team Member Count                          1.103         0.397         -0.153            -0.867
                                            (0.738)       (0.626)       (0.645)           (0.591)
  Constant                                   3.374         2.984          2.367             6.600
                                            (5.372)       (4.485)       (3.266)           (4.045)
  Observations                                150           150            150               150
  Panel B. 2014-2016                           (5)           (6)           (7)               (8)
  VARIABLES                                IPO Day         Viable    Section Top3    Class Year Top 3

  Race/ethnicity-Gender Score               1.927**       1.066**       1.291**            2.319
                                            (0.803)       (0.472)       (0.620)          (1.438)
  Top School Ratio                           0.784        0.677*          0.102           -0.288
                                            (0.510)       (0.352)       (0.546)          (1.052)
  Start-up Ratio                            2.257*       2.772***      2.966***
                                            (1.286)       (1.023)       (1.123)
  Team Member Count                         0.474*       0.739***         0.304            0.766
                                            (0.257)       (0.250)       (0.245)          (0.673)
  Constant                                   -0.781     -4.424***        -2.323           -6.511
                                            (1.501)       (1.481)       (1.698)          (4.502)
  Fixed Effects                               Year          Year          Year             Year
  Observations                                480           480            480              375




                                                  47
                     Table XVI. Performance Under Endogenous Team Formation

This table studies the effect of endogenous team formation. The independent variable is interaction term
between dummy variable "after 2013" and diversity measures. Robust standard error is clustered at
year-section level. Each coefficient's standard error appears directly below the coefficient estimate.
Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.


                                                    (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)
    VARIABLES                                                       Performance

    Race/ethnicity Score                         0.484***                                  0.0600
                                                  (0.100)                                 (0.139)
    Gender Score                                  -0.0354                                 -0.0308
                                                  (0.611)                                 (0.572)
    Race/ethnicity Score * After 2013            -0.306**                                   0.109
                                                  (0.114)                                 (0.185)
    Gender Score * After 2013                      0.0683                                  0.0869
                                                  (0.613)                                 (0.575)
    Race/ethnicity-Gender Score                               0.916***      0.903***      0.825**
                                                                (0.178)      (0.153)      (0.227)
    Race/ethnicity-Gender Score * After 2013                  -0.708***    -0.700***     -0.839**
                                                                (0.188)      (0.166)      (0.275)
    Top School Ratio                                                        0.204***     0.198***
                                                                            (0.0743)     (0.0714)
    Start-up Ratio                                                             0.478        0.472
                                                                             (0.291)      (0.299)
    Top School Ratio * After 2013                                             -0.121       -0.123
                                                                            (0.0935)     (0.0925)
    Start-up Ratio * After 2013                                               -0.104       -0.111
                                                                             (0.321)      (0.328)
    Team Member Count                            0.0838***    0.0873***    0.0787***    0.0770***
                                                  (0.0244)     (0.0246)     (0.0261)     (0.0263)
    Constant                                        0.345      0.788***     0.726***        0.699
                                                   (0.422)      (0.221)      (0.206)      (0.421)
    Year FE                                         YES          YES           YES          YES
    Observations                                     630          630           630          630
    R-squared                                       0.058        0.058         0.081        0.084




                                                  48
                               Table XVII. Judge Characteristics
This table reports summary statistics on judges' gender and race/ethnicity. Each section has one
section leader judge, who is a faculty member from HBS, and 3-4 other judges from industry.

                                  %         %          %       % East     % South      %
      Class Year # Judges       Female     Black     Lantinx   Asian       Asian      White
     Section Leader Judges
         2014         10          30%       20%       10%        0%         10%        60%
         2015         10          30%       10%        0%        0%         20%        70%
         2016         10          20%       20%       20%        0%          0%        60%
     All Judges
         2014         49        14.29%     6.12%      4.08%     6.12%      6.12%      77.55%
         2015         43        27.91%     6.98%      0.00%     9.30%      9.30%      74.42%
         2016         44        34.09%    11.36%      4.55%     4.55%      6.82%      68.18%




                                                49
                  Table XVIII. The Effect of Judge Gender on Team Performance

This table regresses team performance on judge 's gender interacted with percent of female in the
team. Each observation is a team matched to judge's gender in the section. The dependent variable
performance =0.125 if the team does not present on IPO day (0-25%), =0.375 if present but not
viable (25-50%), =0.65 if viable but not top 3 (50-80%), =0.9 if top 3 in section (80-98%), =0.99 if
top 3 in class year (98-100%). The independent variable "Section Leader Female Judge" equals to
1 if the female judge is a section leader. "Have Female Judge" equals to 1 if there is at least one
female judge in the section. "Female Team Member% " is the percent of females in the team.
Robust standard error is clustered at year-section level. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels are denoted by ***, **, and *, respectively.



                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)
  VARIABLES                                                Performance   Performance   Performance

  Section Leader Female Judge * %Female Team Member%         0.309***                   0.313***
                                                             (0.0913)                    (0.101)
  Section Leader Female Judge                               -0.153***                  -0.157***
                                                             (0.0433)                   (0.0461)
  Have Female Judge * Female Team Member%                                    0.0820      -0.0209
                                                                            (0.121)      (0.132)
  Have Female Judge                                                         -0.0362       0.0211
                                                                           (0.0549)     (0.0575)
  Female Team Member %                                        0.0185         0.0343       0.0355
                                                             (0.0656)       (0.103)      (0.104)
  Top School Ratio                                            0.103*         0.0976       0.103*
                                                             (0.0562)      (0.0576)     (0.0568)
  Team Mem Count                                            0.0906***     0.0935***    0.0903***
                                                             (0.0277)      (0.0276)     (0.0281)
  Constant                                                     -0.130        -0.159       -0.142
                                                              (0.167)       (0.164)      (0.166)

  Observations                                                 480           480           480
  R-squared                                                   0.064         0.047         0.064
  Class Year FE                                               YES           YES           YES




                                                50
Figure 2. Performance and Race/ethnicity Score (2013, 2014-2016)

The Y axis is the performance of the team, X axis is the race/ethnicity score, ranges from 0 (most
diverse) to 1 (homogenous). The size of the bubble is proportion to observation number.

2013 (Average Race/ethnicity Score=23.7%)

        1
       0.9
       0.8
       0.7
       0.6
       0.5
       0.4
       0.3
       0.2
       0.1
             0     0.2     0.4      0.6      0.8        1     1.2


2014-2016 (Average Race/ethnicity Score=28.1%)

        1


       0.8


       0.6


       0.4


       0.2


        0
             0     0.2     0.4      0.6      0.8        1     1.2




                                                   51
Figure 3. Performance and Gender Score (2013, 2014-2016)

The Y axis is the performance of the team, X axis is the gender score, ranges from 0 (most diverse)
to 1 (homogenous). The size of the bubble is proportion to observation number.

2013 (Average Gender Score=44.4%)

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      0       0.2         0.4        0.6        0.8         1          1.2



2013 (Average Gender Score=57.4%)



0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      0       0.2         0.4        0.6        0.8         1          1.2




                                                52
           Figure 4. Team Performance Conditional on Judge's Gender (2014-2016)

These two figures plot the team performance conditional on judge's gender and female percent in
the team. Team performance is measured by section top 3, viable and ipo day. Teams are sorted into
four quantiles by percent female in the team.




                                                53
