                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               RISK-TAKING AND MONETARY POLICY TRANSMISSION:
                EVIDENCE FROM LOANS TO SMES AND LARGE FIRMS

                                       Cecilia R. Caglio
                                      R. Matthew Darst
                                     ebnem Kalemli-Özcan

                                      Working Paper 28685
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28685


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 2021, Revised July 2021




We would like to thank our discussant Luc Laeven at the 2019 AEA Meetings at San Diego and
Boragan Aruoba, Thomas Dreschel, Sasha Indarte, Peter Karadi, Yueran Ma, Pablo Ottonello,
Pascal Paul, Jose-Luis Peydro, Adriano Rampini, and John Shea for useful suggestions. We thank
Jacob Faber, Jacob Fahringer, Alvaro Silva, and Adam Tucker for their invaluable research
assistance. Kalemli-Özcan thanks NSF Grant 2018623 for support. All views are our own and do
not represent the views of the Federal Reserve or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Cecilia R. Caglio, R. Matthew Darst, and ebnem Kalemli-Özcan. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy Transmission: Evidence from Loans to SMEs and Large
Firms
Cecilia R. Caglio, R. Matthew Darst, and ebnem Kalemli-Özcan
NBER Working Paper No. 28685
April 2021, Revised July 2021
JEL No. E32,E44,E52,G20,O16

                                           ABSTRACT

Using administrative firm-bank-loan level data from the U.S., we document four new facts about
the credit market. First, private firms' (SMEs') borrowing from banks comprises their entire
balance sheet debt, compared to large publicly listed firms who can switch between bond markets
and drawing from their credit lines. Second, SMEs borrow shorter maturity and pay higher
interest rates relative to large listed firms. Third, SMEs mostly use their enterprise's continuation
value as collateral rather than fixed assets and real estate. Fourth, the relation between collateral
and risk--where risk is measured by the loan spread--is positive for large listed firms but
negative for SMEs. Based on these facts, we show that monetary policy transmission and risk-
taking differ across SMEs and large listed firms. When monetary policy is expansionary, credit
demand of SMEs with high leverage increases more. SMEs' borrowing capacity expands more
given their frequent use of earnings and operations-based collateral. We find no evidence of risk-
taking by banks as they lend less to firms who defaulted before and likely to default in the future.
Our results from the sample of all U.S. firms mimic those of SMEs and imply that the aggregate
effects of monetary policy might depend on the size distribution of firms and the type of
collateral used. Since SMEs cover 99 percent of all firms and over 50 percent of U.S.
employment and output, our results also have important implications for aggregate boom-bust
cycles.

Cecilia R. Caglio                                 ebnem Kalemli-Özcan
cecilia.r.caglio@frb.gov                          Department of Economics
                                                  University of Maryland
R. Matthew Darst                                  Tydings Hall 4118D
1801 K St. NW Suite 6522                          College Park, MD 20742-7211
matt.darst@frb.gov                                and CEPR
                                                  and also NBER
                                                  kalemli@econ.umd.edu
1    Introduction
Many argue that "too low for too long" interest rates might lead to low productivity and
threaten financial stability, because low interest rates not only lead to more borrowing, they
also affect the quality of that borrowing via allocation of credit across firms (e.g Borio and
Zhu, 2012; Adrian and Shin, 2009; Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-
Sanchez, 2017; Acharya and Naqvi, 2012). Banks might extend loans to riskier and/or
low productivity firms especially when monetary policy is accommodating. If risky firms
subsequently default on these loans, then banks will experience a negative shock to their
net worth, increasing systemic risk. Thus, expansionary monetary policy implies not only
higher credit growth, investment, and output today, but also corporate debt overhang and
increased default risk that might trigger a financial crisis and hold back investment in the
future.
    In order to quantify monetary policy transmission in an economy with heterogeneous
agents with "risk-taking," we need a representative sample of lenders and borrowers. In
particular, there can be heterogeneity in taking risk when rates are low that is based on
either lender and borrower size or the type of financial contract. Therefore, results based
on a select sample of large borrowers and/or lenders participating only in certain types of
financial markets can be incomplete. There is an extensive theoretical literature studying
monetary policy transmission in heterogeneous agents macro models focusing on household
heterogeneity for consumption channel (e.g McKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson, 2016; Kaplan,
Moll, and Violante, 2018; Auclert, 2019; Wong, 2019) and firm heterogeneity for investment
channel (e.g Ottonello and Winberry, 2020). To date, it has been proven difficult to bring
firm-side models to the data in the U.S. because only large publicly listed firms are required
to report their financing sources.
    We use a new confidential supervisory data set that includes a much more representative
set of U.S. firms than all other available U.S. firm-level data sets that report firms' financing
sources. The data also contains all large U.S. bank holding companies and covers the universe
of systemically important banks. We combine our quarterly data with the standard measures
of monetary policy surprise shocks, obtained through high frequency identification and ask:
during episodes of expansionary monetary policy, do high leverage banks knowingly take risk
by lending to firms who are more likely to default (high leverage and/or low collateral firms )
or is it simply that low rates cause small firms to increase their demand for credit due to
improved continuation values and higher ability to repay debt?
    Our data comes from the Capital Assessments and Stress Testing Report (FR Y-14Q
report) and is collected by the Federal Reserve as part of the Comprehensive Capital Anal-
ysis and Review (CCAR) process for bank holding companies, U.S. Intermediate Holding
Companies of foreign banking organizations. The stress testing exercise covers all finan-
cial institutions with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets.1 The data covers
approximately 70% of Corporate and Industrial (C&I) loans in the U.S. from Q3:2012 to
Q4:2019. During this period, the federal funds rate was at the effective zero lower bound
from 2012-2015, and remained beneath 1 percent until 2017Q2.
    There are several advantages of our data set. First, this data is at the firm-bank-loan-
quarter level, where we observe firms' and banks' balance sheets. Second, in addition to
the loan quantity, which is generally the only variable available in other advanced country
credit registries, we observe the interest rates (spreads) as well as the type and amount of
collateral posted, both at the loan level.2 This allows us to evaluate whether risk-taking
operates through credit supply (bank) or credit demand (firm), and if other dimensions
of heterogeneity, such as collateral type and financial constraints at the firm and/or loan
level affect monetary policy transmission and/or allocation of credit across firms. Third, as
we show below, our Y-14 data covers a much higher fraction of aggregate U.S. corporate
sector debt and U.S. gross output compared to other available data sources that also contain
information on U.S. on firm financing.
    Figure 1 plots official aggregate data for the non-financial business sector from the Finan-
cial Accounts of the United States in the Flow of Funds (FoF). Panel (b) shows the debt share
for publicly listed and large private firms (C and S corporations), known as "non-financial
corporate businesses" in FoF data. The share of bank finance, shown by the line "Bank Debt"
is small for these companies, around 20 percent on average. In Panel (a), which includes not
only publicly listed firms, large private C and S corporations, but also other smaller private
firms, known as "non-financial businesses," the share goes up to 30 percent. In addition,
market debt declines sharply in Panel (a).3 This difference indicates the importance of bank
financing for small and medium size enterprises (SMEs), as including these firms increases
the share of bank finance and decreases that of market finance. As the data depicted in
   1
     The asset threshold has changed to $100 billion in 2019. The appendix provides a list of the financial
institutions that report information for the CCAR process.
   2
     The only other credit registry with this information, to the best of our knowledge is from an emerging
market, Turkey, see di Giovanni, Kalemli-Ozcan, Ulu, and Baskaya (2019).
   3
     The private firms included in the non-financial business series that are excluded from the non-financial
corporate business series include, among others, partnerships and sole-proprietorships. In the Financial
Accounts of the United States liabilities for private firms both under "non-financial corporate" and "non-
financial businesses" are not built from the bottom up. They are "estimates" apportioned into categories
from sources than can be identified. For example, the loan liabilities in the "non-financial business" category
are derived from tax data from the IRS-SOI year end bulletin, and an estimate of loan shares from FRB
2003 Survey of Small Business Finance, a survey that is discontinued.




                                                      2
 Figure 1: Non-financial Firms' Financing in the Financial Accounts of the United States


   70                                                                                                                 70

   60                                                                                                                 60

   50                                                                                                                 50

   40                                                                                                                 40

   30                                                                                                                 30

   20                                                                                                                 20

   10                                                                                                                 10

     0                                                                                                                  0
         1


                  1


                            1


                                      1


                                                1


                                                          1


                                                                    1


                                                                              1


                                                                                        1


                                                                                                  1


                                                                                                            2




                                                                                                                            1


                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                               1


                                                                                                                                                         1


                                                                                                                                                                   1


                                                                                                                                                                             1


                                                                                                                                                                                       1


                                                                                                                                                                                                 1


                                                                                                                                                                                                           1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2
        q


                   q


                             q


                                       q


                                                 q


                                                           q


                                                                     q


                                                                               q


                                                                                         q


                                                                                                   q


                                                                                                             q




                                                                                                                           q


                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                                q


                                                                                                                                                          q


                                                                                                                                                                    q


                                                                                                                                                                              q


                                                                                                                                                                                        q


                                                                                                                                                                                                  q


                                                                                                                                                                                                            q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
     00


                02


                          04


                                    06


                                              08


                                                        10


                                                                  12


                                                                            14


                                                                                      16


                                                                                                18


                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                        00


                                                                                                                                   02


                                                                                                                                             04


                                                                                                                                                       06


                                                                                                                                                                 08


                                                                                                                                                                           10


                                                                                                                                                                                     12


                                                                                                                                                                                               14


                                                                                                                                                                                                         16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
  20


             20


                       20


                                 20


                                           20


                                                     20


                                                               20


                                                                         20


                                                                                   20


                                                                                             20


                                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                         Market Debt                      Bank Debt                          Non-Bank Debt                                  Market Debt                      Bank Debt                          Non-Bank Debt



                          (a) Non-financial Business                                                                           (b) Non-financial Corporate Businesses

Note: The panel on the left represents the debt share for all "non-financial businesses" in the U.S. The panel on the right
represents the debt share for the "non-financial corporate businesses" in the U.S. The "Bank Debt" include Corporate and
Industrial (C&I) loans and non-residential mortgages held by banks. "Non-bank Debt" includes, among others, syndicated
loans held by non-banks, non-residential mortgages held by non-banks, and finance company loans. "Market Debt" comprises
corporate bonds, commercial paper, and industrial revenue bonds. Source: Financial Accounts of the United States, FOF.




panel (b) is widely used by researchers and dominated by large listed firms, it led to a false
narrative in the literature that bank financing is not important for firms in the U.S.
    Our data from FR Y-14 filings shown in Figure 2 paints a drastically different picture.
We plot only firm financing among private firms to highlight the stark difference from the
aggregate data that is dominated by listed firms. For large private firms, defined as firms
in the upper quartile of the asset distribution, the red dotted line shows that we match the
narrative of the aggregate data of Figure 1 (a) as only 30 percent of their financing is from
bank lending. Interestingly, for the rest of the private firms, financing is almost exclusively
from banks. These private firms that are below the 75th percentile of the asset distribution
are firms with assets less than $43 million, and revenue less than $86 million. The median
firm has $12 million in assets and $28 million in sales. Hence most of our Y-14 private firms,
including the median firm, are SMEs.4 It is important to understand borrowing and lending
patterns of SMEs in the U.S., as SMEs account for 99.8 percent of all firms, 52 percent of
    4
    In U.S., SMEs are defined as firms with less than 500 employees. There is not a well established asset
and/or revenue cut-off to define SMEs. Since Y-14 data does not cover employment, we follow the OECD
definition of SMEs as firms with assets less than $10 million, and/or revenue less than $50 million, and/or
employees less than 250.




                                                                                                                 3
                    Figure 2: Non-financial Private Firms' Financing in FR Y-14


                                  100


                                  80


                                  60
                      Share (%)




                                  40


                                  20


                                   0
                                     q3

                                     q1



                                                q1



                                                        q1



                                                                q1



                                                                        q1



                                                                                 q1



                                                                                         q1



                                                                                                  q1
                                   12

                                   13



                                              14



                                                      15



                                                              16



                                                                      17



                                                                               18



                                                                                       19



                                                                                                20
                                  20

                                        20



                                             20



                                                     20



                                                             20



                                                                     20



                                                                              20



                                                                                      20



                                                                                               20
                                                     Small           Medium            Large



Note: The figures plots the median loan commitment as share of total balance sheet debt for various points in the asset-size
distribution among private borrowers. Source: FR-Y14Q H.1




private sector employment and 48 percent of private sector gross output.5 We argue that
understanding the differences between SME and large firm financing is key to understanding
monetary policy transmission in the aggregate U.S. economy.
    Our identification methodology is via difference-in-differences regressions. We regress
credit volume and price at the firm-bank-loan level on measures of bank and firm "riskiness"
interacted with the monetary policy surprises measured by Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson
(2005) (GSS). In the presence of financial frictions, the response of credit outcomes to mon-
etary policy may in part reflect movements in risk spreads (e.g Gertler and Karadi, 2015).
We investigate how credit outcomes (both spreads and quantities) for risky and non-risky
firms and banks respond from quarter q to q + 1 to a monetary policy surprise in quarter q .
We interact the monetary policy surprises with "ex-ante risk" measures for firms and banks
with the idea that "ex-ante risky" firms and banks will respond differently to monetary policy
surprises. To highlight the importance of heterogeneity, we use all firms first and then show
separate results for private/public firms and SMEs and large firms. We use ex-ante leverage,
measured before the monetary policy surprise, as a proxy for ex-ante firm and bank risk. As
an additional risk measure for banks, we also use ex-ante accumulated "charge-offs" on their
   5
       See www.census.gov


                                                               4
balance sheets for non-performing loans.
     Our results show that risk-taking in the U.S. operates through private firm/SME credit
demand; that is, when interest rates are low, ex-ante risky (high leverage) firms demand
more credit, increasing the loan amount and loan price. This result does not hold for publicly
listed firms. The channel operates through credit demand because we condition on credit
supply with bank×quarter fixed effects and show that both prices and quantities increase in
tandem. Identification in this specification comes from the same bank lending to different
firms and hence captures different firm credit demand among high and low leverage firms.
When we investigate the credit supply side, using firm×quarter fixed effects focusing on firms
borrowing from multiple banks instead, we find no evidence of risk-taking by banks. Highly
levered banks lend less to SMEs during expansionary policy. Banks also lend less in general
to firms who had non-performing loans (NPLs) in the past. Similarly to the results for credit
demand, these credit supply results also hold in the all and SME/private firm samples, but
they do not hold for the sample of publicly listed firms.
     To understand the type of financial friction driving these results and how this friction
relaxes/tightens with monetary policy changes, we undertake a granular investigation of the
credit market in the U.S. and document new important facts. SMEs not only borrow solely
from banks as we show before, they also borrow shorter maturity and pay higher interest
rates relative to large publicly listed firms. Moreover, the value of the collateral they use to
obtain credit is mostly tied to firm operations and enterprise continuation values rather than
the market value of fixed assets and real estate. To dig deeper into the relation between the
collateral pledged and credit outcomes both before and after the monetary policy changes,
we run another difference-in-differences regression where credit outcomes are regressed on
pledged collateral interacted with monetary policy surprises. We find that, in normal times,
SMEs who pledge more collateral borrow more and pay a lower interest rate. For large
publicly listed firms, the result is the exact opposite: large public firms who post more
collateral obtain less credit and pay higher interest rates. Hence, pledging collateral reduces
spreads for SMEs capturing access to finance, but increases them for large listed firms,
capturing "default risk" as argued by an extensive literature (e.g Holmstrom and Tirole,
1997; Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997; Geanakoplos, 1996).
     Why do leveraged SMEs borrow more when monetary policy is accommodating? We show
that the answer to this question depends both on if and what type of collateral is pledged.
SME loans are mostly secured by blanket liens and accounts receivable/inventory (AR&I)
rather than fixed assets and real estate. By contrast, large public firms generally borrow
unsecured and do not pledge any collateral. Blanket liens and AR&I collateral derive their



                                               5
value from firm operations and the enterprise value of the firm through accumulated earnings.
With easy monetary policy, the standard channel operates the collateral constraint on fixed
assets relaxes (e.g Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997). In addition, the earnings and operations based
collateral constraint also relaxes, adding to the borrowing power of SMEs who do not have
a lot of fixed assets to use as collateral to begin with. These results are consistent with the
recent work emphasizing earnings based constraints for "smaller firms" among the publicly
listed firms (e.g Lian and Ma, 2020; Ivashina, Laeven, and Moral-Benito, 2020; Drechsel,
2019).6 Our new finding is that such constraints are even more important for SMEs based
on new granular data on pledged collateral of different types, where "operational collateral"
is most important. We also show that pledging collateral can capture both riskiness and
access to finance, and this difference can only be sorted out via representative variation in
firm size.
    We proceed as follows. Section 2 summarizes the literature. Section 3 describes the
data in detail. Section 4 presents stylized facts on firms' borrowing, banks' lending and loan
types and collateral used highlighting the heterogeneity on several dimensions of financial
contracts. Section 5 presents results on monetary policy transmission. Section 6 concludes.



2       Literature
Our paper contributes to several strands of the literature.
    The first strand studies the impact of monetary policy on financial frictions and their
impact on the aggregate economy. Starting with Bernanke and Gertler (1989) and Bernanke,
Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996, 1999), this literature focuses on the financial accelerator chan-
nel in representative agent new Keynesian models with abundant evidence on the empirical
side showing the importance of heterogeneity. Expansionary monetary policy improves net
work and reduces agency frictions, which allows low net worth (risky) borrowers to increase
borrowing. On the lender side, low interest rates induce "search-for-yield" behavior among
intermediaries that reallocate their portfolio toward risky lending (e.g Rajan, 2005). Alter-
natively, if low interest rates reduce funding costs to entrepreneurs and reduce the incentive
to produce risky projects, then risky borrowers are not risky anymore (e.g Stiglitz and Weiss,
1981).
    6
    This literature relies on data for large listed firms and firms who have access to bond markets and are
not SMEs. Our FR Y-14 data shows that smallest firms among the large listed firms use blanket liens and
AR&I as collateral, consistent with these papers that use different data to capture earnings based constraints
rather than pledged collateral as we do.




                                                      6
    The literature focusing on the lender side highlights the importance of heterogeneity in
risk bearing/taking capacity, where large, well-capitalized banks (e.g Adrian and Shin, 2009)
can take more risk, meaning high leverage banks will extend less credit during monetary
expansions and/or after financial shocks. Consistent with this view, the empirical literature
using bank-level data shows that riskiness of the banks' portfolio increases for the high capital-
low leverage banks (e.g Dell Ariccia, Laeven, and Suarez, 2017) and these banks charge lower
spreads on syndicated loans, during expansionary policy (e.g Paligorova and Santos, 2017).
Using borrower level data, some papers find that banks with low capital-high leverage lend
to "riskier" borrowers who have defaulted more before (e.g Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and
Saurina, 2014; Ioannidou, Ongena, and Peydró, 2014).
    The second strand to which we relate studies heterogeneity in monetary policy trans-
mission across firms by focusing firm size and financial frictions. Our contribution here is
twofold. Since leverage and collateral capture both default risk and access to finance, we
employ granular data on collateral type and loan spreads combined with firm size to sort
this out. Different studies argue that firm-level responses to monetary policy changes depend
on size, age, and leverage (e.g Gertler and Gilchrist, 1994; Jeenas, 2019; Cloyne, Ferreira,
Froemel, and Surico, 2018; Ottonello and Winberry, 2020; Greenwald, Krainer, and Paul,
2020). Our specifications include firm and time fixed effects to control explicitly for age, and
we investigate the role of leverage and size in detail. Consistent with the papers above, we
show that large firms will not respond to monetary policy shocks as a function of their lever-
age as these firms are not financially constrained. By contrast, leveraged SMEs will respond
more due to the relaxation of their earnings and operations based collateral constraints.7
    The third strand of the literature we relate to is the importance of financial contracts
in transmitting shocks to the aggregate economy via the relation between collateral, spreads,
and debt. In the models developed by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and Kiyotaki, Moore, and
Zhang (2021), entrepreneurs borrow against fixed assets and real estate (trees). If a firm
uses these assets as collateral and defaults, the assets will be confiscated by lenders and
sold to other firms to use. Hence, the collateral value of these assets is generally given by
the market value (liquidation value) of the asset when the debts are due. In these models,
entrepreneurs use the collateral to generate output (fruit) but cannot borrow against future
output. However, in our data, SMEs loans are most frequently secured by AR&I collateral
   7
     Our results are fully consistent with Ottonello and Winberry (2020) who investigate the effect of monetary
policy shocks on investment. In our sample of public firms, which is the basis for their work, we show that
high versus low leverage firms do not differ in their responses if leverage is measured with short term debt.
When we measure leverage with total debt, we find their exact result: high leveraged public firms respond
less by borrowing less during expansionary policy.




                                                      7
and blanket liens; that is they pledge the current fruit whose liquidation value depends on
current firm current operations and continuation values. Put differently, the sales that firms
generate combine ideas, intangible capital, marketing of products, etc. and get embedded
into the value of the fruit they produce and become capitalized on the balance sheet and
pledgeable as AR&I.
     It turns out that collateral type is important for monetary policy transmission in our
empirical exercise because monetary policy not only changes the relative price of assets as
in traditional models, it also impacts firms' ability to produce its own assets that are used
as collateral (fruit). Benmelech and Bergman (2012) argue that monetary policy, through
the general equilibrium impact on aggregate demand, increases firm sales (and accounts
receivable), which increases borrowing capacity. By contrast, Kiyotaki, Moore, and Zhang
(2021) argue that, even with some pledgeability of future cash flows, lower interest rates may
lower the borrowing capacity as the horizon of cash flow returns to the lender is shorter than
the maintenance costs of fixed assets, which limits the returns to savers and the value of
the fixed assets as collateral. This mechanism rests on the assumption that the value of the
collateral used by entrepreneurs to borrow (the machine) is derived from its competitive resale
value in the spot market or what savers are willing to pay. This is the right mechanism for
tangible fixed assets and real estate collateral but not for "operational collateral" like AR&I
and blankets lien that are produced by the firm rather than purchased in the spot market.
     Our work is consistent with the new literature that draws a distinction between debt
secured by assets (asset based loans or ABLs) and debt tied to firm cash-flows and earnings
(earnings-based or going concern debt) (e.g Lian and Ma, 2020; Kermani and Ma, 2021).
According to industry and legal language, loans secured by fixed assets, real estate, AR&I,
cash, and marketable securities are considered ABLs whose value is determined by liqui-
dation values; blanket liens and unsecured debt fall under earnings-based debt since their
value derives from the firm cash-flows. We will use a more granular grouping reflecting the
rich heterogeneity in our unique "pledged collateral" data. We draw a further distinction
between tangible-fixed assets and real estate with AR&I as the book value of AR&I collat-
eral only exists because of firm operations and its ability to create sales that generate the
receivables and inventory. The distinction is that the firm itself creates its own collateral
value through production rather than purchasing it as it does with land or machines that
are used for production. Therefore, the very attributes of the firm that are generally taken
to be going-concern value are in fact embedded in value of AR&I collateral despite the fact
it is booked on the balance sheet just like other tangible fixed assets. The inability to sepa-
rate the liquidation value of AR&I from the going-concern value embedded in blanket liens



                                              8
is particularly important for SMEs who do not have large amounts of tangible fixed assets
to pledge. Our results on monetary policy transmission also show that these two types of
collateral, AR&I and blanket liens, work in the same way in the data as their values derive
from firm operations and continuation values.
    In terms of the relation between collateral and spreads, the existing empirical literature
finds mixed results due to using different and select samples of firms and banks. Berger
and Udell (1990) use bank-level data and show that collateralized loans have higher interest
rates, opposite of our SME result.8 Luck and Santos (2019), also using FR Y-14 data, focus
on a small sample of new loan organizations from multiple banks and find that smaller firms
who post collateral pay lower rates, consistent with our result.
    Rauh and Sufi (2010) and Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020), all study the relation-
ship between collateral and risk among large public borrowers. Similarly to Rauh and Sufi
(2010), we show that there is a positive relation between collateral and risk for large listed
firms. Public firms post collateral when they are in distress or if they are low quality firms.
However, Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan (2020) find a different result where collaterized
debt has lower spreads relative to unsecured debt among large listed firms. Rampini and
Vishwanathan (2020) argues that both secured and unsecured debt have some sort of collat-
eral backing. From the lens of their model, more financially constrained firms will switch to
secured debt. Less financially constrained large listed firms decrease use of secured debt over
time. Thus, these composition effects might be driving the Benmelech, Kumar, and Rajan
(2020) results.9
    The fourth strand of the literature that we contribute to argues that monetary policy
can be less effective or less powerful during recessions and/or during a low interest rate
environment, and low rates can threaten financial stability. Tenreyro and Thwaites (2016)
find that monetary policy shocks have a smaller impact on real economic activity in recessions
than in normal times. Kiyotaki, Moore, and Zhang (2021) shows how low rates in a liquidity
trap can reduce borrowing capacity through low returns to savers. Ottonello and Winberry
(2020) shows that the power of monetary policy will depend on the distribution of default
risk in the economy. Our contribution to this literature is to show that the power of monetary
policy will depend on the firm size distribution and the collateral type used to secure loans.
We also show a hidden financial stability risk; leveraged SMEs borrow more with low rates
   8
      Berger, Frame, and Ioannidou (2016) using large firms from Bolivia also finds a positive relation between
collateral and spread, whereas di Giovanni, Kalemli-Ozcan, Ulu, and Baskaya (2019) using universe of firms
from Turkey finds a negative relation between collateral and spread.
    9
      Very small private firms who lack collateral cannot access credit as they are screened out of the market
as in Darst, Refayet, and Vardoulakis (2020). Although we do not observe this extensive margin, as our data
is on firms who borrow, our results show that the same intuition works at the intensive margin.


                                                      9
and are more likely to default in the future.
    Finally, we contribute to a growing literature using the FR Y-14 data. This data are used
to study various other issues including CDS use by banks on borrower credit risk (Caglio,
Darst, and Parolin, 2019), the relationship between U.S. exchange rates and banks credit
supply to foreign firms (Niepmann and Schmidt-Eisenlohr, 2018), how banks re-balance their
portfolios due to losses (Bidder, Krainer, and Shapiro, 2018), how monetary policy transmits
differently through credit lines versus terms loans (Greenwald, Krainer, and Paul, 2020), the
effects of COVID on credit line draw downs stemming from the differences between small and
large firms in terms of their financing (Chodorow-Reich, Darmouni, Luck, and Plosser, 2020),
the effect of corporate taxes on leverage (Ivanov, Pettit, and Whited, 2020), estimating the
value of collateral in new loan originations (Luck and Santos, 2019), and the real effects of
quantitative easing (Luck and Zimmermann, 2020).10



3        Data

3.1      FR Y-14Q Schedule H.1
The FR Y-14Q report collects detailed information on bank holding companies' (BHCs),
savings and loan holding companies' (SLHCs), and U.S. intermediate holding companies'
(IHCs) of foreign bank organizations (FBOs) on a quarterly basis. The data are collected
as part of the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) for
BHCs, SLHCs and IHCs with at least $50 billion ($100 billion starting from 2019) in total
assets.11 The banks that submit FR Y-14Q data since 2012 comprise over 85% of the total
assets in the U.S. banking sector.
    For our study, we use the Wholesale Risk Schedule, or H.1. Schedule, which collects
loan level data on corporate loans and leases together with corporates' balance sheets. The
H.1 Schedule had two sections: (1) Loan and Obligor Description section, which collects
information related to the firm and the loan itself; and (2) Obligor Financial Data section,
which collects data related to the financial health (balance sheet and income statement) of
the firm. Hence we also have time varying information on bank and firm balance sheets.
    Banks report details on corporate loans and leases that are either held-for-investment
(HFI) or held-for-sale (HFS) in the loan book at each quarter end. Loans and leases with HFI
    10
    Note that Chodorow-Reich, Darmouni, Luck, and Plosser (2020) shows similar facts to us in terms of
SMEs borrowing at higher rates and shorter maturities from banks.
 11
    The assessment is conducted annually and consists of two related programs: Comprehensive Capital
Analysis and Review and Dodd-Frank Act stress testing (DFAST).


                                                 10
designation are those that the bank has the "intent and ability to hold until the foreseeable
future or until maturity or payoff." Loans and leases that are HFS are those that the bank
intends or expects to sell at some indefinite date in the future. Both HFI and HFS loans and
leases are categorically distinct from those that are reported as trading assets. Trading assets
of banks are not reported on FR Y-14 Schedule H.1 and are instead reported on Schedule
B (Securities Schedule). The vast majority of loans in the FR Y-14 data (on average 98%
by dollar amount) are designated as HFI. The appendix contains additional information on
how different assets are classified in the FR Y-14 schedules.
    The population of loans is reported at the credit facility level (loan level) and is limited
to commercial and industrial loans with a committed balance greater than or equal to $1
million.12 Each facility is reported separately when borrowers have multiple facilities from
the same bank. The facility level information includes total committed and utilized amounts,
pricing and spread information, origination and maturity dates, and information on the value
and type of underlying collateral. We will call each facility a loan in the remainder of the
paper.
    The total committed value of the loans reported on the H.1 Schedule as of 2019Q4 is
nearly $3.3 trillion.13 To get a sense for what fraction of total U.S. C&I lending our data
comprise, we compare it to what is reported by the universe of BHCs, in the aggregate form,
on the FR Y-9C (schedules HC-C and HC-L). BHCs commitments in the FR Y-9C total
nearly $4.6 trillion. Thus, our data from the FR Y-14Q accounts for nearly 70 percent of all
C&I equivalent lending in the U.S.14
    The FR Y-14Q information on the financial health of the borrowers (firm balance sheet
and income statement variables) is an invaluable source of information for private firms in
the U.S. as this information does not exist anywhere else.15 The data also contains borrower
  12
      A credit facility is defined as a credit extension to a legal entity under a specific credit agreement,
basically a loan contract.
   13
      We keep loans identified on the FR Y-9C as C&I loans domiciled in the U.S. (item 4(a)), loans to finance
agricultural production (item 3), loans secured by owner-occupied real estate domiciled in the U.S. (item
1(e)(1)), and other leases (item 10(b)).
   14
      The comparisons between FR Y-14Q and FR Y-9C are not one-to-one and are complicated by the at
least three factors: 1) HC-C only reports utilized exposures; 2) the committed exposures reported on HC-L
are aggregated differently and include loans that are not necessarily U.S. C&I loans. For example, HC-L
reports total committed exposure for all C&I loans (Y-9C item 4), which includes loans to foreign addresses
(item 4(b) in addition to those those domiciled in the U.S (item 4(a)). In addition, the HC-L reports the total
committed amount of loans secured by real-estate (item 1), which includes various types of loans secured by
real estate in addition to loans secured by owner-occupied real estate domiciled in the U.S. (item 1(e)(1)).
3) FR Y-14Q data only includes loans over $1mn. Therefore, FR Y-14Q comparisons of the total committed
loans amounts to FR Y9-C represent lower bounds of the overall amount of C&I lending done in the U.S.
   15
      Few commercial data providers, such as, Moody's ORBIS and D&B provide some of this data but for a
very select set of private firms that volunteer the information. Other sources such as FED's small business



                                                      11
identifiers such as tax identification numbers, CUSIPS, and company names and addresses.
These firm identifiers allow us to match the data with other data sources to cross-check
information and determine the relative importance of different sets of borrowers e.g. public
versus private companies, SMEs versus large firms, and syndicated versus non-syndicated
loans. Our paper exploits information on a large cross-section of private borrowers, first time,
to convey the importance of including private firms, most of which are SMEs, for aggregate
economic activity and for the transmission of monetary policy.


3.2     Sample Construction
For each quarter, we define private firms in the data as those that cannot be matched to
COMPUSTAT either via 6-digit CUSIP or via tax ID (EIN). Large public firms might re-
port consolidated or unconsolidated accounts to banks. To avoid double counting of financial
variables, we use Bloomberg's Corporate Structure Database and match it to our FR Y-14Q
data through EIN when possible, or name matching. This way we can clean double count-
ing arising from subsidiaries unconsolidated and their corporate headquarters' consolidated
statements. We roll the loans issued to subsidiaries up to the parent company since banks
use parent company financial information for loans made to subsidiaries. Treating these
subsidiaries as separate "firms" will produce erroneous results for size and distributional cuts
of the data.16
    The final data has 3,798,946 loan-level observations for 155,589 U.S. corporations. Im-
portantly, the data contain nearly 153,000 unique private firms of which 66,000 have balance
sheet assets of less than $10 millions. Hence, almost 50 percent of our sample are SMEs. All
data cleaning details are provided in appendix.
finance survey and U.S. Census Bureau's QFR data sets are also for select set of firms and not representative
of the U.S. economy. See Dinlersoz, Kalemli-Ozcan, Hyatt, and Penciakova (2018) that goes details of the
selection problems in the financial data for private firms in the U.S. and how to use U.S. Census Bureau
LBD data to correct for this selection.
   16
      Note that, relying on the tax ID without the full corporate structure to identify unique firms in the
data is problematic because banks frequently report identical tax ids for both parent companies and their
subsidiaries. This means that there will be different balance sheet information for the same tax id because
the balance sheet information is attributed to two distinct firms. For robustness in all of our regressions, we
remove from the sample the loan amounts to identified subsidiaries and find that the results are qualitatively
the same.




                                                      12
3.3       Descriptive Statistics and Unique Features
This section provides statistics that highlight the key advantages of the FR-Y14Q data.
First, the data allows for a broader cross-sectional representation of U.S corporate borrow-
ers. Compared to COMPUSTAT, LCD Dealscan, and QFR, our data represents a major
step forward in terms of firm and sector representation over time and hence will better in-
form us on the heterogeneous transmission of monetary policy, risk taking channel and the
importance of firm level financial constraints. Unlike these datasets, our data not only cap-
tures SMEs, it also covers all sectors of the economy; not just manufacturing as in the QFR
data of U.S. Census. Figure 3 shows the average and total dollar amounts committed to each
two-digit NAICS sector in Panels (a) and (b) respectively. The Figure shows that on average,
the largest loans are committed to firms in the utilities; information; and mining, quarrying,
and oil and gas extraction sectors. By contrast, aggregate commitments are largest for firms
in the manufacturing and wholesale and retail trade sectors, indicating that there are many
small loans to a large number of businesses in these sectors.
    Figure 4 shows the firm size distribution based on assets. Panel (a) shows histograms for
all private firms (red bars), public firms (blue bars). Panel (b) shows the histogram for firms
in our data who also borrow in syndicated loan markets.17 Two important features emerge.
First, most private borrowers in our data have less that $10 million in total assets, that is
they are SMEs. Second, panel (b) identifies the firms who borrow in syndicated loan markets
and shows that these firms almost perfectly match the size distribution of public companies.
LCD Dealscan and the Shared National Credit Registry (SNC) are two popular data sources
for research in loan markets and our data show that the firms who borrow in these markets
are clearly not representative of all corporate borrowers among large U.S. banks, much less
the entire U.S. economy.
    Another advantage of our data is that we observe loan-level details on prices, quantities,
and non-price terms such as collateral and lien position, as well as ex-ante internal bank
risk assessments for each borrower. These characteristics can be tracked over time. The
data also include detailed information on loan losses and delinquencies, which enables us to
assess ex-post loan performance and link this performance to ex-ante risk measures. This is
a significant improvement as compared to LCD Dealscan data that contain loan information
only at origination.
    To highlight the quality of FR Y-14 data and the aggregate importance of private firms
borrowing in the U.S economy, Figure 5, Panel (a) plots our aggregation of total dollar value
of liabilities in the FR Y-14 data (from firms' balance sheets including bonds and loans) as
 17
      The FR Y14 data have a syndicated loan flag that allows one to identified syndicated loans.


                                                     13
                                                                                     Figure 3: Loan Commitments by Sector

                                                                       Panel (a): Mean Committed Exposure by Sector

Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas                                                                                          Information                                                                          Utilities
Extraction
               50                                                                               50                                                                                  50

               40                                                                               40                                                                                  40
US$ Billions




               30                                                                               30                                                                                  30

               20                                                                               20                                                                                  20

               10                                                                               10                                                                                  10

                0                                                                                   0                                                                                   0
                q3


                              q4


                                        q4


                                                  q4


                                                            q4


                                                                      q4


                                                                                q4


                                                                                          q4




                                                                                                    q3



                                                                                                                  q4


                                                                                                                            q4


                                                                                                                                      q4


                                                                                                                                                q4


                                                                                                                                                          q4


                                                                                                                                                                    q4


                                                                                                                                                                              q4




                                                                                                                                                                                        q3



                                                                                                                                                                                                      q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q4
               12


                          13


                                    14


                                              15


                                                        16


                                                                  17


                                                                            18


                                                                                      19




                                                                                                12



                                                                                                              13


                                                                                                                        14


                                                                                                                                  15


                                                                                                                                            16


                                                                                                                                                      17


                                                                                                                                                                18


                                                                                                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                                                                                    12



                                                                                                                                                                                                  13


                                                                                                                                                                                                            14


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19
          20


                         20


                                   20


                                             20


                                                       20


                                                                 20


                                                                           20


                                                                                     20




                                                                                               20



                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                   20



                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                       Panel (b): Total Committed Exposure by Sector

                               Manufacturing                                                                            Retail Trade                                                                  Wholesale Trading

               700                                                                              700                                                                                 700

               600                                                                              600                                                                                 600

               500                                                                              500                                                                                 500
US$ Billions




               400                                                                              400                                                                                 400

               300                                                                              300                                                                                 300

               200                                                                              200                                                                                 200

               100                                                                              100                                                                                 100

                    0                                                                                   0                                                                                   0
                    q3


                              q4


                                        q4


                                                  q4


                                                            q4


                                                                      q4


                                                                                q4


                                                                                          q4




                                                                                                        q3


                                                                                                                  q4


                                                                                                                            q4


                                                                                                                                      q4


                                                                                                                                                q4


                                                                                                                                                          q4


                                                                                                                                                                    q4


                                                                                                                                                                              q4




                                                                                                                                                                                            q3


                                                                                                                                                                                                      q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q4
                12


                          13


                                    14


                                              15


                                                        16


                                                                  17


                                                                            18


                                                                                      19




                                                                                                12


                                                                                                              13


                                                                                                                        14


                                                                                                                                  15


                                                                                                                                            16


                                                                                                                                                      17


                                                                                                                                                                18


                                                                                                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                                                                                    12


                                                                                                                                                                                                  13


                                                                                                                                                                                                            14


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19
               20


                         20


                                   20


                                             20


                                                       20


                                                                 20


                                                                           20


                                                                                     20




                                                                                               20


                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
Note: Panel (a) plots the mean dollar value of loan commitments made by CCAR banks to firms by the borrower's primary
2-digit NAICS industry. Panel (b) plots the total dollar value of committed loans made by CCAR banks to firms by the
borrower's primary 2-digit NAICS industry. Source: FR-Y14Q H.1.



a share of the aggregate dollar value of non-financial business debt liabilities from Flow of
Funds data. In terms of total liabilities, our data cover over 60 percent of all total liabilities
reported in the official Financial Accounts of the U.S. on average during our sample period.18
As shown in this figure, publicly listed firm liabilities only account for merely 30 percent of
total corporate sector debt shown in Flow of Funds data.
    SMEs are also important for measures of aggregate output as shown in Figure 5, Panel
(b). We do the same exercise using total gross output from the Bureau of Economic Analysis
output tables. Our Y-14 firms represent almost 80 percent of the U.S. economy, where
publicly listed firms can account only little over 40 percent of the aggregate output.
    Finally, we want to discuss a few drawbacks of the FR Y-14Q data. First, the time-
           18
    Note that official data on non-corporate sector liabilities in the Flow of Funds data are partly derived
from IRS tax records as a residual category because tax returns do not require liability reporting for private
firms in the U.S.


                                                                                                                                      14
Figure 4: Firm Size Distribution: Private vs. Public Firms and Syndicated Loan Borrowers
                                                  Total Assets                                                                                          Total Assets (Syndicated Loans)
             60




                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                              Private
                                                                                              Public
             50




                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                        Percentage of Firms
                     40
    Percentage of Firms




                                                                                                                              30
             30




                                                                                                                              20
    20




                                                                                                                              10
             10
             0




                                                                                                                              0
                               10   25   100    2000         10000       25000   75000   400000                                              10    25   100     2000        10000       25000   75000   400000
                                               Bin Cutoff ($ Millions)                                                                                        Bin Cutoff ($ Millions)




Note: The figure shows firm size distribution based on assets, for all private firms (red bars) and public firms (blue bars), in
Panel (a), and for firms in our data who also borrow in syndicated loan markets, Panel (b).


                                    Figure 5: Coverage of Y-14 Data: Aggregate U.S. Debt and Output
.
                                         (a) Liabilities                                                                                          (b) Gross Output and Sales

                          .8                                                             Y14                                                 .8                                                              Y14
                                                                                         Public                                                                                                              Public



                          .6                                                                                                                 .6
           Share of FOF




                                                                                                                              Share of BEA




                          .4                                                                                                                 .4



                          .2                                                                                                                 .2



                          0                                                                                                                  0



Note: The figure shows the share of Y-14 data in total non-financial business debt liabilities from the Financial Accounts of
the U.S. in FoF and in total gross output from the BEA.



series only dates back to 2012, which precludes studying issues related to the 2008 financial
crisis. Second, though firm balance sheet data are reported quarterly, banks update balance
sheet information for the larger borrowers on a quarterly frequency, for smaller borrowers
the information is updated only on an annual or bi-annual basis. Finally, the $1 million
loan reporting limit prevents one from studying the smallest establishments in the economy,
which will cover the remaining 30 percent of the all U.S. C&I lending.




                                                                                                   15
4     Stylized Facts on the U.S. Credit Market
In this section, we present novel stylized facts using Y-14 data.


4.1    Leverage growth is driven by investment grade public firms and
       high yield SMEs
Figure 6 breaks down public and private firm leverage ratios by the following credit rating
bins: investment grade firms with AAA-A and BBB ratings, and high yield firms with ratings
BB and below. These ratings are internal ratings of banks. The ratios are normalized
to 1 at the beginning of our sample period. The figure shows that most of the financial
leverage increase in the U.S. post the Global Financial Crisis is due to rapid growth in
public firm leverage. The leverage growth is equally prominent among high investment grade
(rated AAA-A), BBB-rated, and high-yield borrowers. The figure shows that, among private
firms, financial leverage has steadily increased only for high-yield equivalent borrowers and
is otherwise at a similar level or even slightly lower for investment grade private borrowers
over the 6 year period.
    There are two interesting facts here. First, most of the debt growth in the banking system
post financial crisis is due to larger, public borrowers. Second, even-though SMEs have slower
debt growth, this is driven by high yield-more risky SMEs and hence constitutes a challenge
for financial stability as these firms are more likely to default in the future (documented
below).


4.2    SMEs are more financially constrained
Tables 1-3 provide summary statistics for a number of balance sheet and loan-level variables.
Panel A of each table contains bank balance sheet items, panel B firm balance sheet and
income statement items, and panel C contains the loan-level variables. The data are split
into three samples: all firms, private firms, and public firms. All variables expressed in levels
are reported in millions of dollars. In general, means are substantially larger than medians,
indicating there are a large number of relatively small and few very large firms in the data.
Clearly the statistics on all firms in the U.S. are driven by private firms. Of particular
interest are comparisons between public and private borrowers in Tables 2 and 3.
    The summary stats in our data hint at higher level of financial constraints for private
borrowers relative to public corporations. The median private firm has $12.9 million in assets



                                               16
                                     Figure 6: Leverage Growth by Rating (Base 2012Q3)

         (a) Leverage by Rating: Public Firms                                  (b) Leverage by Rating: Private Firms

         1.3                                                                   1.3


         1.2                                                                   1.2
 Ratio




         1.1                                                                   1.1


           1                                                                        1


          .9                                                                    .9
           q2

                    q1


                          q1


                                    q1


                                           q1


                                                   q1


                                                          q1


                                                               20 0q1
                                                                    q3




                                                                                    q2

                                                                                             q1


                                                                                                       q1


                                                                                                                 q1


                                                                                                                           q1


                                                                                                                                     q1


                                                                                                                                               q1


                                                                                                                                                     20 0q1
                                                                                                                                                          q3
         13

                14


                         15


                                16


                                         17


                                                18


                                                        19



                                                                 20




                                                                                13

                                                                                         14


                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                             16


                                                                                                                       17


                                                                                                                                 18


                                                                                                                                           19



                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                                       2
     20

               20


                     20


                               20


                                      20


                                              20


                                                     20


                                                             20




                                                                               20

                                                                                        20


                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                      20


                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                    20
                         BBB             BB and Below             AAA-A                           BBB                 BB and Below                    AAA-A




Note: The figures plot leverage ratio­defined at the sum of short- and long-term debt over total assets­ normalized to 1 the
2012Q3. The left (right) panel are the leverage ratios for public (private) borrowers. Each line is the median leverage ratio for
among borrowers with the specified bank provided risk-rating. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1



compared to $1.8 billion for the median public firm. Similarly, the median private borrower
has $7.3 million in liabilities with a leverage ratio of 0.64 compared to $1.1 billion and 0.56
for the median public firm. In terms of risk, the probability that the median private firm
defaults within 12 month is 74 bps compared to 29 pbs for the median public firm, roughly
2.5 times more likely. Lastly, operating income for the median private (public) firm is $956
thousand ($268 million) with retained earnings of $2.9 million ($182 million).
    Figure 7 shows that short-term leverage is much higher among smaller private borrowers
than public firms, while firms that borrow in the syndicated loan market have similar average
leverage ratios to public companies but are much more dispersed. This suggest that SMEs
can only borrow short term indicating a higher degree of financial constraints. Below we
show that SMEs are also collateral constrained.


4.3            SMEs need collateral to borrow and pledge "operational" col-
               lateral more than fixed assets and real estate
Table 4 shows summary stats for loan pricing, quantity, maturity, collateral value, and net
charge-offs. The median loan for private borrowers is $3 million, at 3.2 percent interest
rate, for 2 years compared to $21.6 million at 1.7 percent for 3 years for the median public
borrower. Figure 8 plots the share of loans with some form of collateral broken out by



                                                                          17
                      Table 1: Summary Statistics - All firms
    Panel A: All Firms, Bank-level Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                               1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                     SD
Bank Liabilities-to-Assets                      0.868       0.884 0.882 0.897 0.024
Bank Short-Term-Debt-to-Assets                  0.69         0.769 0.727 0.808 0.14
Charge-offb                                       0         10.415 22.618 29.295 38.887
Charge-off/Loanb                                  0          2.645 5.857 7.347 10.351

    Panel B: All Firms, Firm-level Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                               1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                     SD
Firm Assets                                      5.102      13.714 420 49.374 5,067
Firm Liabilities-to-Assets                       0.422      0.637 0.626 0.798 0.27
Firm Short-Term-Debt-to-Assets                     0         0.014 0.144 0.206 0.23
Operating Income                                 0.187       1.026  103    4.359 3,303
Net Sales                                       10.869      29.975 617 94.729 17,203
Liabilities                                      2.734       7.817  271 28.862 3,394
Capital Expenditures                               0         0.013  198    1.025 2,874
EBITDA                                           0.323       1.435 60.849 6.006   896
Retained Earnings                                0.502       3.057 89.579 12.238 1,500
Tangible Assets                                  4.801      12.755 336 43.865 4,429
Probability of Default (Weighted)                0.003      0.007 0.026 0.018 0.095
Probability of Default (Percent)                 0.23        0.67  2.567 1.65 9.621
Probability of Future Default                      0           0   0.012     0   0.109
NPL4                                               0           0   0.042     0   0.201
Charge-offf                                        0           0   0.097     0   2.505
Charge-off/Loanf                                   0           0   0.025     0   0.656
Obs.                                          3,798,946
Firms                                          155,598
Banks                                             39
Firm-Bank Pairs                                215,259
Firm-Bank-Time Triples                        2,550,006
Note: This table reports summary statistics of the main variables used in the paper. The sample
includes 155,598 U.S. firms for the period 2013-2019, excluding financial institutions and utilities.
Loans data are from Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. Accounting data for firms are from Compustat
database, when available, and they are supplemented with financial information reported in the
Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. All dollar amounts in the table are expressed in millions. Refer to
Table A.1 in the Appendix for variable definition.




                                                18
                   Table 2: Summary Statistic - Private Firms
      Panel A: Private Firms,Bank­level Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                              1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                    SD
Bank Liabilities-to-Assets                     0.868        0.884    0.882     0.897       0.024
Bank Short-Term-Debt-to-Assets                 0.69         0.769    0.727     0.809      0.139
Charge-offb                                      0          9.712    20.828    27.232     35.107
Charge-off/Loanb                                 0          2.564    5.469      7.011     9.233

     Panel B: Private Firms, Firm­Level Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                              1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                    SD
Firm Assets                                     4.946      12.967      137     42.411      499
Firm Liabilities-to-Assets                      0.423      0.639     0.627       0.8      0.271
Firm Short-Term-Debt-to-Assets                    0         0.018    0.148      0.214     0.232
Operating Income                                0.176       0.965    12.304      3.87     47.823
Net Sales                                      10.574      28.681      169     86.325      513
Liabilities                                     2.642       7.359    89.183    24.883      341
Capital Expenditures                              0         0.004     6.189     0.746     28.567
EBITDA                                           0.31       1.351    17.771     5.285     67.915
Retained Earnings                               0.516       2.984    30.181    11.324      109
Tangible Assets                                 4.652      12.075      108     38.073      379
Probability of Default (Weighted)               0.003      0.007     0.026     0.018      0.095
Probability of Default (Percent)                0.27        0.74     2.697      1.78      9.884
Probability of Future Default                     0           0       0.009       0       0.094
NPL4                                              0           0      0.013        0       0.115
Charge-offf                                       0           0      0.099        0       2.494
Charge-off/Loanf                                  0           0      0.026        0        0.62
Obs.                                         3,125,154
Firms                                         152,409
Banks                                            38
Firm-Bank Pairs                               193,976
Firm-Bank-Time Triples                       2,224,680
Note: This table reports summary statistics of the main variables used in the paper for private
firms. The sample includes 152,409 U.S. private firms for the period 2013-2019, excluding financial
institutions and utilities. Loans data are from Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. Accounting data
for firms are from Compustat database, when available, and they are supplemented with financial
information reported in the Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. All dollar amounts in the table are
expressed in millions. Refer to Table A.1 in the Appendix for variable definition.




                                               19
                   Table 3: Summary Statistic - Public Firms
Panel A: Public Firms, Firm-Bank Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                            1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                  SD
Bank Liabilities-to-Assets                   0.868      0.885     0.883     0.897      0.023
Bank Short-Term-Debt-to-Assets               0.692      0.77      0.728     0.809      0.139
Charge-offb                                    0          0       1.936       0        7.372
Charge-off/Loanb                               0          0       0.426       0        2.321

Panel B: Public Firms, Firm­level Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                            1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                  SD
Firm Assets                         557                 1,864     10,010    6,317 28,169
Firm Liabilities-to-Assets         0.404                0.569      0.582    0.714 0.234
Firm Short-Term-Debt-to-Assets        0                   0        0.014      0    0.061
Operating Income                   68.581                268       3,540     930   20,281
Net Sales                           587                 1,740     20,105    5,462 113,045
Liabilities                         253                 1,076      6,457    3,969 18,946
Capital Expenditures                362                 1,243      5,716    3,999 14,655
EBITDA                             50.959                235       1,518     872    5,060
Retained Earnings                 -58.801                182       2,164    1,115 8,720
Tangible Assets                     380                 1,347      8,106    4,706 24,950
Probability of Default (Weighted) 0.002                 0.004      0.022    0.013 0.077
Probability of Default (Percent)    0.12                 0.29       1.69     0.88  7.557
NPL4                                  0                   0        0.177       0   0.382
Charge-offf                           0                   0        0.084       0   2.604
Charge-off/Loanf                      0                   0        0.018       0   0.923
Obs.                                        673,792
Firms                                        3,189
Banks                                         39
Firm-Bank Pairs                             21,283
Firm-Bank-Time Triples                      325,326
Note: This table reports summary statistics of the main variables used in the paper for public
firms. The sample includes 3,189 U.S. public firms for the period 2013-2019, excluding financial
institutions and utilities. Loans data are from Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. Accounting data
for firms are from Compustat database, when available, and they are supplemented with financial
information reported in the Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. All dollar amounts in the table are
expressed in millions. Refer to Table A.1 in the Appendix for variable definition.




                                              20
       Table 4: Loan-level Variables (levels reported in $millions)
                                    Panel A: All Firms
                                                1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                SD
Loans                                            1.654      3.65     14.913 12.534 43.705
Interest Rate                                    0.011      0.03      0.028 0.041 0.022
Charge-offl                                        0          0      0.006    0    0.255
Charge-off/Loanl                                   0          0      0.001    0    0.076
Collateral: Fixed assets and real estate           0          0       0.243    0    0.429
Collateral: Cash and marketable sec                0          0      0.024     0   0.152
Collateral: Act. receiv. and inventory             0          0       0.284    1    0.451
Collateral: Blanket lien and other                 0          0      0.304     1    0.46
Collateralized                                     1          1       0.854    1    0.353
Maturity                                           0          2       3.079    4    3.977
Collateral (restricted)                          2.885      8.424    26.732 26.803 85.667
Collateral/Loan (restricted)                     0.92       1.375    4.413 2.908 22.165

                                  Panel B: Private Firms
                                                1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                SD
Loans                                             1.5         3        8.91       8   20.195
Interest Rate                                    0.018      0.032      0.03     0.043 0.021
Charge-offl                                        0          0       0.006       0   0.261
Charge-off/Loanl                                   0          0       0.002       0   0.075
Collateral: Fixed assets and real estate           0           0      0.266       1   0.442
Collateral: Cash and marketable sec                0          0       0.022       0   0.145
Collateral: Act. receiv. and inventory             0          0       0.308       1   0.462
Collateral: Blanket lien and other                 0          0       0.322       1    0.467
Collateralized                                     1          1       0.916       1   0.277
Maturity                                           0          2         3.1       4   4.296
Collateral (restricted)                          2.835       7.53     11.76    24.922 10.11
Collateral/Loan (restricted)                     0.948      1.402     2.765    2.805 3.848

                                   Panel C: Public Firms
                                                1st Qu. Median Mean 3rd Qu                SD
Loans                                            5.688      21.6 42.723         50      89.049
Interest Rate                                      0       0.017 0.019         0.032    0.022
Charge-offl                                        0         0    0.003          0      0.226
Charge-off/Loanl                                   0         0    0.001          0      0.083
Collateral: Fixed assets and real estate           0          0    0.14          0      0.347
Collateral: Cash and marketable sec                0         0    0.034          0      0.181
Collateral: Act. receiv. and inventory             0         0    0.172          0      0.377
Collateral: Blanket lien and other                 0         0    0.224          0       0.417
Collateralized                                     0         1    0.567          1      0.495
Maturity                                           2          3   2.994          4      2.243
Collateral (restricted)                          3.829     27.989 123           113       207
Collateral/Loan (restricted)                     0.728     1.112 14.957        3.98     58.41
Note: This table reports summary statistics of loan level variables used in the paper. The
sample includes 155,598 U.S. firms for the period 2013-2019, excluding financial institutions and
utilities. Loans data are from Schedule H1 in FR Y-14 report. All dollar amounts in the table
are expressed in millions. Refer to Table A.1 in the Appendix for variable definition.




                                              21
                         Figure 7: Distribution of Leverage: Private vs. Public
                                                               Short-Term Debt to Assets (Log)




                                            0.14
                                            0.1
                                  Density
                                            0.07
                                            0.03
                                            0




                                                   -30   -20         -10             0          10    20
                                                                Public     Private       Syndicated




Note: The figure plots the density of short-term debt-to-assets ratios (in logs) for all public (in blue) and private (in red)
borrowers in the FR Y14Q data. The green density plots are the the same leverage ratios for borrowers in FR-Y14Q that are
identified as borrowers in the syndicated loan market used a the syndicated loan flag available in the FR-14Q data. Source:
FR Y-14Q H.1



private and public borrowers. Around 85% of all private loans are collateralized (red line),
compared to roughly 33% for public borrowers (blue line). This breakdown is consistent with
the literature showing that only a small fraction of large public firm loans are collateralized.
Our data with its much broader coverage also shows that for smaller private firms without
access to public capital markets, collateral remains an extremely prominent and important
feature of borrowing arrangements. In fact, for small private firms (red dashed line)--firms
in the bottom 25th percentile of the revenue distribution, almost all loans are collateralized,
where for the same group in public firms (blue dashed line) only 48 percent are collateralized.
    Banks also report the dollar value of collateral that require ongoing or periodic valuation.
These loans represent 11.5 percent of all loans in the data. Among these loans whose collat-
eral needs periodic valuation, the collateral-to-loan ratio for the median private borrower is
1.4 compared to 1.2 for the median public borrower, which means that private firms/SMEs
have to post much more collateral than public firms for the same size loan (see Figure 9).
Taken together, banks generally require private firms put down collateral to access credit,
but the firms do not have access to large amounts of collateral to obtain larger loans com-
pared to larger public borrowers. Hence, private borrowers are also collateral constrained
relative to public borrowers.
    The FR-Y14Q data contain detailed information about the type of collateral used to
secure a loan. The different types of collateral in the data are the following: real estate
and fixed assets; cash and marketable securities; accounts receivable and inventory (AR&I);
blanket liens, and other. Blanket liens are loans secured by "substantially all assets of the


                                                                           22
   Figure 8: Share of Loans that are Collateralized­Extensive Margin: Public vs. Private


                                    .95

                                    .85

                                    .75

                                    .65

                                    .55

                                    .45

                                    .35

                                    .25
                                          3

                                                1



                                                          1



                                                                   1



                                                                                  1



                                                                                            1



                                                                                                      1



                                                                                                                  1


                                                                                                                           4
                                        q

                                                 q



                                                         q



                                                                    q



                                                                                q



                                                                                             q



                                                                                                      q



                                                                                                                 q


                                                                                                                          q
                                     12

                                              13



                                                      14



                                                                 15



                                                                             16



                                                                                          17



                                                                                                   18



                                                                                                              19


                                                                                                                       19
                                    20

                                          20



                                                     20



                                                              20



                                                                           20



                                                                                      20



                                                                                                 20



                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                      20
                                                                        Private              Small Private
                                                                        Public               Small Public



Note: The figure reports the share of total loans that are collateralized, for private (red) and public (blue) borrowers. The
dashed line represents the share of total loans that are collateralized for firms in the 25th percentile of the net income distribution
(small), for both the private and public firm sample. The solid line is the share of loans collateralized at the median of firm
net-income distribution. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1




              Figure 9: Collateral to Loan Ratio­Intensive Margin: Private vs. Public


                               1.8
                               1.7
                               1.6
                               1.5
                               1.4
                       Ratio




                               1.3
                               1.2
                               1.1
                                 1
                                .9
                                    3




                                                             3




                                                                                      3




                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                3
                                   q




                                                         q




                                                                                 q




                                                                                                       q




                                                                                                                                 q
                                15




                                                      16




                                                                              17




                                                                                                    18




                                                                                                                              19
                               20




                                                     20




                                                                           20




                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                        20




                                                                         Private                      Public


Note: The figure plots median collateral-to-loan ratio for private borrowers (in red) and public borrowers (in blue). The dollar
value of collateral is reported by banks at the loan level. The collateral-to-loan ratios are computed for loans in which the dollar
value of collateral is non-zero. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1




                                                                             23
firm". For example, a lender will put a lien on the entire firm and all of its assets that are not
already encumbered in other lending arrangements. This means that if a firm has a blanket
lien against it, it will not be able to pledge specific assets as collateral for future borrowing.
A firm may however pledge an asset as collateral to a lender, and then have a blanket lien
placed on the firm for future borrowing which will entail all assets and operations of the firm
aside from the assets it has already pledged.
    Figure 10 shows the loan shares secured by fully dis-aggregated pledged collateral types.
There are several remarkable features about collateral use in the data. First, real estate
collateral (in red) is important only for the smallest borrowers and virtually absent among
public borrowers. Second, fixed assets (light green) as a fraction of all collateralized loans are
only important sources for the largest private and public firms, largely reflecting capitalized
loans and leases (Eisfeldt and Rampini, 2008). Third, AR&I (dark green) and blanket
liens (light blue) are equally important collateral sources across the firm size and ownership
distribution except for the largest public companies, especially important for SMEs. Finally,
unsecured borrowing (dark blue) increases monotonically across firm size.
    Lian and Ma (2020) and Kermani and Ma (2021) draw an important distinction between
debt secured by assets (asset based loans or ABLs) and debt tied to firm cash-flows and
earnings (earnings-based or going concern debt). In our data, loans secured by fixed assets,
real estate, AR&I, and cash and marketable securities are considered ABLs by their industry
and law based convention; blanket liens and unsecured debt fall under earnings-based debt.
Thus as in our data and in Lian and Ma (2020) largest listed companies debt is mostly
going-concern and cash-flow based owing mostly to unsecured debt.
    Figure 11 shows that collateral break down for SME's in our data. The figure clearly
shows that real estate, fixed assets, cash/securities, and AR&I collateral is used for about
55 percent of all borrowing and the remaining 45 percent is blanket-lien, which is based on
firms' continuation value/going-concern. As we argued before, AR&I collateral and blanket
liens should be thought as similar forms of collateral for measuring borrowing constraints and
monetary policy transmission despite the fact that AR&I collateral is based on liquidation
value and blanket liens may be more closely aligned with cash-flows. Our reasoning is based
on the fact that both of these are "operational" collateral and drive their value from firms'
ongoing operations and not from the resale value as in the case of fixed assets.19
  19
    Lenders generally lend against a fraction of the book value of receivables (called the advance rate) rather
than the future value of receipts, which technically places AR&I in the asset-based/liquidation value category
rather than the going concern/cash-flow based category according to the standard industry dichotomy. See
the documentation in the OCC Comptroller's Handbook on Asset-Based Lending.




                                                      24
                                   Figure 10: Collateral Types: Public vs. Private


               Small Private                                 Medium Private                                        Large Private

     1                                                 1                                                 1

     .9                                                .9                                                .9

     .8                                                .8                                                .8

     .7                                                .7                                                .7

     .6                                                .6                                                .6

     .5                                                .5                                                .5

     .4                                                .4                                                .4

     .3                                                .3                                                .3

     .2                                                .2                                                .2

     .1                                                .1                                                .1

     0                                                 0                                                 0
     q1



               q1



                         q1



                                   q1


                                             q4



                                                       q1



                                                                 q1



                                                                           q1



                                                                                     q1


                                                                                               q4



                                                                                                         q1



                                                                                                                   q1



                                                                                                                             q1



                                                                                                                                       q1


                                                                                                                                                 q4
 16



           17



                     18



                               19


                                         19



                                                   16



                                                             17



                                                                       18



                                                                                 19


                                                                                           19



                                                                                                     16



                                                                                                               17



                                                                                                                         18



                                                                                                                                   19


                                                                                                                                             19
20



          20



                    20



                              20


                                        20



                                                  20



                                                            20



                                                                      20



                                                                                20


                                                                                          20



                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                              20



                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                            20
                Small Public                                     Medium Public                                      Large Public

     1                                                 1                                                 1

     .9                                                .9                                                .9

     .8                                                .8                                                .8

     .7                                                .7                                                .7

     .6                                                .6                                                .6

     .5                                                .5                                                .5

     .4                                                .4                                                .4

     .3                                                .3                                                .3

     .2                                                .2                                                .2

     .1                                                .1                                                .1

     0                                                 0                                                 0
     q1



               q1



                         q1



                                   q1


                                             q4



                                                       q1



                                                                 q1



                                                                           q1



                                                                                     q1


                                                                                               q4



                                                                                                         q1



                                                                                                                   q1



                                                                                                                             q1



                                                                                                                                       q1


                                                                                                                                                 q4
 16



           17



                     18



                               19


                                         19



                                                   16



                                                             17



                                                                       18



                                                                                 19


                                                                                           19



                                                                                                     16



                                                                                                               17



                                                                                                                         18



                                                                                                                                   19


                                                                                                                                             19
20



          20



                    20



                              20


                                        20



                                                  20



                                                            20



                                                                      20



                                                                                20


                                                                                          20



                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                              20



                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                            20




Note: The figure plots the proportion of loans secured by different collateral types over time. The different types of collateral
are cash and marketable securities (in yellow); accounts receivable, inventory (in dark green); blanket liens (in light blue); fixed
assets (in light green); real estate (in orange); and unsecured loans (in dark blue). The top three panels from left to right show
the proportion of loans secured by the different collateral types and unsecured for private borrowers in the bottom quartile
of assets (small), below the median of assets (median), and below the top quartile of assets (large). The bottom three panels
present the same information for public borrowers. Source: FR Y14-Q H.1.




                                                                      25
                                   Figure 11: Collateral Types among SMEs


                                                                                                                                   Percent
                                                                                                                              Q1             1.00




                                                                                                                                             0.90




                                                                                                                                             0.80




                                                                                                                                             0.70




                                                                                                                                             0.60




                                                                                                                                             0.50




                                                                                                                                             0.40




                                                                                                                                             0.30




                                                                                                                                             0.20




                                                                                                                                             0.10




                                                                                                                                             0.00
                                      2016                 2017                    2018                2019            2020




                                             Real Estate                       Accounts Receivable and Inventory   Blanket Lien and Other
                                             Cash and Marketable Securities    Fixed Assets                        Unsecured




Note: The figure plots the proportion of loans secured by different collateral types over time for SME borrowers. SMEs are
defined as firms with annual sales less than 50mn.The different types of collateral are real estate collateral (salmon); cash and
marketable securities (yellow); accounts receivable, inventory (green); fixed assets (mint); blanket liens and other (light blue);
and unsecured (dark blue). Source: FR Y14-Q H.1.




    We combine AR&I with blanket liens in Figure 12 and call them earnings and operation
based constraints for three reasons. First, our empirical analysis that follows shows that these
two distinct collateral categories based on industry and law definition turn out to impact
firm borrowing­both prices and quantities­in similar ways during expansionary monetary
policy. Second, the value of AR&I and blanket liens collateral is inherently tied to firm
operations in an important way that other fixed assets are not. In the one-period debt
case (Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997), the relationship between collateral value and borrowing
can be seen by the standard borrowing constraint Rbt  qt+1 kt+1 , where Rbt is the gross
repayment amount on borrowing at time t and kt+1 and qt+1 are the holdings and price of
capital in following period. The distinction between these tangible assets k and AR&I is
that the book value of AR&I collateral only exists because of firm operations and its ability
to create sales that generate the receivables and inventory. The firm's intellectual property,


                                                                              26
                                    Figure 12: Collateral Type: Public vs. Private


                    Small private                                     Medium private                                     Large private
                                              Percent                                            Percent                                              Percent
                                                  Q4    1.00                                         Q4    1.00                                           Q4    1.00

                                                        0.90                                               0.90                                                 0.90

                                                        0.80                                               0.80                                                 0.80

                                                        0.70                                               0.70                                                 0.70

                                                        0.60                                               0.60                                                 0.60

                                                        0.50                                               0.50                                                 0.50

                                                        0.40                                               0.40                                                 0.40

                                                        0.30                                               0.30                                                 0.30

                                                        0.20                                               0.20                                                 0.20

                                                        0.10                                               0.10                                                 0.10

                                                        0.00                                               0.00                                                 0.00
                      2016   2017   2018   2019                         2016   2017    2018   2019                          2016   2017    2018    2019




                    Small public                                      Medium public                                      Large public
                                              Percent                                            Percent                                              Percent
                                                  Q4    1.00                                         Q4    1.00                                           Q4    1.00

                                                        0.90                                               0.90                                                 0.90

                                                        0.80                                               0.80                                                 0.80

                                                        0.70                                               0.70                                                 0.70

                                                        0.60                                               0.60                                                 0.60

                                                        0.50                                               0.50                                                 0.50

                                                        0.40                                               0.40                                                 0.40

                                                        0.30                                               0.30                                                 0.30

                                                        0.20                                               0.20                                                 0.20

                                                        0.10                                               0.10                                                 0.10

                                                        0.00                                               0.00                                                 0.00
                      2016   2017   2018   2019                         2016   2017    2018   2019                          2016   2017    2018    2019




                                     Real Estate and Fixed Assets                                    Accounts Receivable and Inventory, Blanket Liens, and Other
                                     Cash and Marketable Securities                                  Unsecured




Note: The figure plots the proportion of loans secured by different collateral types over time. The different types of collateral
are real estate and fixed assets (in red); cash and marketable securities (in yellow); accounts receivable, inventory, and blanket
liens (in light blue); and unsecured loans (in dark blue). The top three panels from left to right show the proportion of loans
secured by the different collateral types and unsecured for private borrowers in the bottom quartile of assets (small), below the
median of assets (median), and below the top quartile of assets (large). The broom three panels present the same information
for public borrowers. Source: FR Y14-Q H.1.




managerial talent, marketing, etc. thus combine to create the sales and the receipts that
the firm uses as collateral. In this sense, the firm itself creates its own collateral value
through production rather than purchasing it as it would land or machines that is uses for
production. Third, because blanket liens are secured by substantially all firm assets, AR&I
are generally encompassed in blanket liens unless explicitly perfected to separate creditors
in other lending arrangements. The inability to separate the liquidation value of AR&I from
the going-concern value embedded in blanket liens is particularly important for small private


                                                                                  27
borrowers who do not have large amounts of other tangible fixed assets to pledge in addition
to AR&I. In these cases, blanket liens are close substitutes for AR&I that also give the lender
additional security.20
    In the language of metaphors of trees/machines and fruit/engineers used by Kiyotaki and
Moore (1997) and Kiyotaki, Moore, and Zhang (2021), fixed assets and real estate are the
trees or the machines that firms purchase from one another in the spot market and against
for production. The managerial know how and engineers ability to use tools combines with
the machines to generate output or fruit. What makes AR&I collateral and blanket liens
different, especially when the latter also capture aspects of the former, is that they represent
the fruit produced by the trees, which can be and frequently is used as collateral, just not
its future value. Hence, the trees and the fruit combine to form the value of the firm, all
of which can be used as collateral. The reason is that the sales that firms generate, which
combine ideas, intangible capital, marketing of products, etc. get embedded into the value
of the fruit they produce and become capitalized on the balance sheet as AR&I. In terms
of the metaphor, the fruit that is not consumed becomes compost for the tree providing
it more nutrients to continue growing and producing more fruit in the future. Thus, the
view that AR&I is a balance sheet item against which lenders advance loans based on their
ability to collect in default or liquidation misses the important fact that the true liquidation
value of those receivables is actually produced by the firm, which contrasts the spot market
liquidation value of the tree or machines that firms purchase from one another.


4.4     SMEs pay higher interest rates, and borrow short-term
Turing to the rest of the stylized facts, Figure 13 shows fraction of loans commitments that
are short-term, less than one in maturity. The chart clearly shows that a larger fraction of
private firm loans are short-term (less than 1 year) compared to public firms (40 percent
versus 18 percent. This suggests that public borrowers obtain the bulk of their funds long-
term compared to private firms; SMEs are not only collateral constrained, they are maturity
constrained as well in terms of limited access to long-term financing.
    Figure 14 plots the median interest rate for public and private borrowers. In general,
public firms borrow at lower interest rates shown by the blue line in the first chart on the left.
The middle and right charts show median interest rates by loan and rate type (fixed versus
  20
    This intuition that blanket liens and AR&I collateral are substitutes is confirmed in an interview with
the CFO of a medium-sized private company, with annual sales of nearly $70mn. They note that in their
multiple loan facilities with a large bank, their working capital loans (a standard term for AR&I loans) are
secured by a blanket lien on the firm assets, and not just the AR&I.



                                                    28
floating rate loans and credit lines and term loans) for private and public firms. Naturally,
floating rate loans (dashed lines) follow closely with monetary policy rates for both borrower
types. By contrast, average borrowing rates on fixed rate loans declined for private firms
(solid gold line) for most of the sample period, and hovered mostly around 3 percent for
public borrowers (solid purple line) before increasing in 2017.
    Recent work by Ivashina, Laeven, and Moral-Benito (2020), Chodorow-Reich, Darmouni,
Luck, and Plosser (2020), and Greenwald, Krainer, and Paul (2020) highlight the importance
of pre-commited credit lines versus term loans as liquidity backstops when shocks hit the
economy, especially among large public companies. Figures 14 and 15 suggest that focusing
exclusively on credit lines does not tell the whole story for smaller private borrowers. In
particular, credit line prices rise significantly more than term loan prices as the Federal
Reserve began lift-off. Moreover, among private firms who are more likely to be constrained
with less spare borrowing capacity, new loans or extensions of existing loans are particularly
important and their pricing in Figure 15 drives the aggregate pricing in Figure 14, which
is not the case for public borrowers. Finally, Figure 16 shows that, for private firms, the
share of term loans among all loans has increased nearly 7% while the share of floating rate
loans has fallen nearly 10%. And as before aggregate dynamics in terms of shares of credit
lines, term loans and floating rate loans are driven by private SMEs as oppose to large public
firms.

                            Figure 13: Loan shares Maturity Less than 1 Year


                                .5

                                .4

                                .3

                                .2

                                .1

                                  0
                               20 2q3
                                    q1


                                              q1


                                                        q1


                                                                  q1


                                                                            q1


                                                                                      q1


                                                                                                q1

                                                                                                      q4
                                 13


                                           14


                                                    15


                                                              16


                                                                        17


                                                                                  18


                                                                                            19

                                                                                                     19
                                 1
                             20



                                         20


                                                   20


                                                             20


                                                                       20


                                                                                 20


                                                                                           20

                                                                                                 20




                                                             Private             Public


Note: The figure plots the share of loan commitments (in dollars) less than one year old. The blue (red) line are the maturities
shares for public (private) borrowers: Source FR Y-14Q H.1.




                                                                  29
                                                              Figure 14: Interest rates: Fixed versus Floating


                                      All Loans                                                     Private Firms                                                          Public Firms

                  5.5                                                               5.5                                                                5.5
                                 Private                                                                                                                          Fixed (Credit Line)                    Fixed (Term Loans)
                       5         Public                                               5                                                                  5        Float (Credit Line)                    Float (Term Loans)
                  4.5                                                               4.5                                                                4.5
                       4                                                              4                                                                  4
 Interest Rate




                  3.5                                                               3.5                                                                3.5
                       3                                                              3                                                                  3
                  2.5                                                               2.5                                                                2.5
                       2                                                              2                                                                  2
                  1.5                                                               1.5        Fixed (Credit Line)         Fixed (Term Loans)          1.5
                                                                                               Float (Credit Line)         Float (Term Loans)
                       1                                                              1                                                                  1
                  20 2q3
                        q1


                        q1


                        q1


                        q1


                        q1


                        q1


                  20 1
                        q4




                                                                                    20 2q3
                                                                                          q1


                                                                                          q1


                                                                                          q1


                                                                                          q1


                                                                                          q1


                                                                                          q1



                                                                                    20 1
                                                                                          q4




                                                                                                                                                       20 2q3
                                                                                                                                                            q1


                                                                                                                                                                      q1


                                                                                                                                                                                q1


                                                                                                                                                                                          q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                    q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                              q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q4
                        q




                                                                                          q
                     13


                     14


                     15


                     16


                     17


                     18


                     19

                     19




                                                                                       13


                                                                                       14


                                                                                       15


                                                                                       16


                                                                                       17


                                                                                       18


                                                                                       19

                                                                                       19




                                                                                                                                                         13


                                                                                                                                                                  14


                                                                                                                                                                            15


                                                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                                                                17


                                                                                                                                                                                                          18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19
                     1




                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                         1
                 20



                  20


                  20


                  20


                  20


                  20


                  20




                                                                                 20



                                                                                    20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                    20


                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
Note: The figure plots the median interest rates (in percent). The first chart plots interest rates for all loans for private
borrowers in red and public borrowers in blue. The middle chart plots median interest rate for private borrowers for different
loan types and rates. Solid lines plot rate on fixed rate loans (credit lines in red and term loans in gold). The dashed lines are
rate on floating rate loans (credit lines in red and term loans in gold). The right chart plots median interest rate for public
borrowers for different loan types and rates. Solid lines plot rate on fixed rate loans (credit lines in blue and term loans in
purple). The dashed lines are rate on floating rate loans (credit lines in blue and term loans in purple). Source: FR Y-14Q H.1.




                                                                  Figure 15: Interest rates on New Originations


                                                   Private Firms                                                                                        Public Firms


                 5.5                                                                                                 5.5
                  5                                                                                                   5
                 4.5                                                                                                 4.5
                  4                                                                                                   4
                 3.5                                                                                                 3.5
                  3                                                                                                   3
                 2.5                                                                                                 2.5
                  2                                                                                                   2
                 1.5                                                                                                 1.5
                  1                                                                                                   1
                   q3

                            q1



                                       q1



                                                   q1



                                                              q1



                                                                         q1



                                                                                    q1



                                                                                               q1


                                                                                                         q4




                                                                                                                          q3

                                                                                                                                q1



                                                                                                                                           q1



                                                                                                                                                       q1



                                                                                                                                                                  q1



                                                                                                                                                                                 q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                q1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                q1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q4
                 12

                           13



                                    14



                                                15



                                                           16



                                                                     17



                                                                                 18



                                                                                           19


                                                                                                     19




                                                                                                                      12

                                                                                                                               13



                                                                                                                                       14



                                                                                                                                                    15



                                                                                                                                                                 16



                                                                                                                                                                                17



                                                                                                                                                                                               18



                                                                                                                                                                                                              19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19
         20

                       20



                                  20



                                              20



                                                         20



                                                                    20



                                                                               20



                                                                                          20


                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                           20



                                                                                                                                      20



                                                                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                                                                             20



                                                                                                                                                                            20



                                                                                                                                                                                           20



                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                            Fixed (Credit Line)               Fixed (Term Loans)                                                Fixed (Credit Line)                       Fixed (Term Loans)
                                            Float (Credit Line)               Float (Term Loans)                                                Float (Credit Line)                       Float (Term Loans)




Note: The figure plots the median interest rate (in percent) for new loan origination broken out by credit lines, term loans
with fixed versus floating rates. The chart on the left plots the various loan rates for for private borrowers on the left and public
borrowers on the right. The solid lines are fixed rate loans and the dashed lines are floating rate loans. Credit lines are plotted
in red lines and term loan rates plotted in blue. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1.




                                                                                                              30
          Figure 16: Loan shares: Credit Lines/Term loans and Floating/Fixed Rates


             Credit Line                                       Term Loans                                                    Float Rate

 .75                                      .25                                                                          .8



    .7                                                                                                                .75

                                           .2

 .65                                                                                                                   .7



    .6                                    .15                                                                         .65
 20 2q3
       q1


       q1


       q1


       q1


       q1


       q1



 20 1
       q4




                                          20 2q3
                                               q1


                                                         q1


                                                                   q1


                                                                             q1


                                                                                       q1


                                                                                                 q1


                                                                                                           q1

                                                                                                                 q4




                                                                                                                       20 2q3
                                                                                                                             q1


                                                                                                                             q1


                                                                                                                             q1


                                                                                                                             q1


                                                                                                                             q1


                                                                                                                             q1



                                                                                                                       20 1
                                                                                                                             q4
       q




                                                                                                                             q
    13


    14


    15


    16


    17


    18


    19

    19




                                            13


                                                     14


                                                               15


                                                                         16


                                                                                   17


                                                                                             18


                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                19




                                                                                                                          13


                                                                                                                          14


                                                                                                                          15


                                                                                                                          16


                                                                                                                          17


                                                                                                                          18


                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                          19
    1




                                            1




                                                                                                                          1
20



 20


 20


 20


 20


 20


 20




                                         20



                                                    20


                                                              20


                                                                        20


                                                                                  20


                                                                                            20


                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                            20




                                                                                                                      20



                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                       20
            All     Public   Private                          All             Public              Private                   All   Public   Private




Note: The share of credit lines among all loan types in the left panel. The middle panel plots the term loans shares. The
right panel plots the share of loans with floating interest rates. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1. Source: FR Y-14Q H.1.




5        Monetary Policy Transmission with Heterogeneous Firms
         and Banks
Having shown a great deal of heterogeneity among SMEs and large firms, private and public
borrowers in terms of collateral posted, loan rate, maturity and amount of loans, we now
turn to the transmission of monetary policy.


5.1      Measuring Monetary Policy Surprises
We measure of monetary policy surprises, MP, estimated from the high frequency methodol-
ogy following Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). In particular, we compute the surprise
component of a policy announcement as:

                                         M Ptm = t × ffrm      m
                                                        t - ffrt-t                                                                                   (1)

where m denotes the month, ffrt is the implied Fed Funds Rate from a current-month Federal
                                                                 n
Funds future contract at time t, and the adjustment factor, t   n- d , controls for the timing
of the announcement within the month. To extract the surprise component, we measure price
changes 15 minutes before and 45 minutes after the FOMC as in Ottonello and Winberry
(2020) and Wong (2019).  n is the number of days in the month of the FOMC meeting, and



                                                                         31
 d is the day of the FOMC meeting.21
    We follow Ottonello and Winberry (2020) and convert the monthly surprise series to a
quarterly variable using a weighted moving average of the surprises based on the number
of days in the quarter after the surprise has occurred. This ensures that the surprises are
weighted according to the amount of time banks and firms have to react to the changes.
In addition, because our data begin in 2012Q4 at the zero-lower bound (ZLB), the size of
the raw surprises are small­the average surprise less than 1bps with a max (min) of 6bps
(-6bps). Such small surprises are insufficient to identify the impact of monetary surprises on
credit and investment decisions. To address this issue, we construct 4 and 8-quarter moving
averages of the quarterly surprises. The moving average representation has the benefit that
it allows for monetary policy to have delayed and persistent effects. For example Romer and
Romer (2004) find that monetary policy transmits to real variables and prices with a several
quarter delay and has persistent effects over twenty quarters in the future. Hence, a moving
average representation of the quarterly surprises help us to link the surprises to the stance
of the monetary policy. Finally, because short rates are effectively bound at the ZLB during
most of our sample, we use the future contract that corresponds to the 4th FOMC meeting
from time t, which is usually the 6-month contract.22


5.2     The Role of Firm and Bank Leverage
We begin by disentangling the effect of monetary policy surprises on the demand for credit
from the supply of credit. We regress the outstanding committed loan amount, Log (Loan),
and the nominal loan interest rate, Log (1 + i), on measures of bank and firm risk interacted
with monetary policy surprises. This strategy allows us to investigate the response of credit
quantities and prices to a monetary policy surprise within the same period, differentially for
leveraged firms and banks where we measure the leverage ex-ante before the policy surprise.
Hence, we run:
  21
      Note that the multiplier becomes quite large for FOMC events at the end of the month. This could
magnify measurement errors. When the adjustment factor is greater than 4, we follow Gürkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson (2005) and replace the adjustment factor with the rate change in the following month federal
futures contract without a multiplier.
   22
      For similar reasons, Greenwald, Krainer, and Paul (2020) use the high frequency methodology on prices
changes of two-year U.S. Treasury securities to identify the impact of contractionary surprises on credit
line utilization. Our baseline results hold using the 9-month ahead Fed futures and the 2yr Treasuries, see
Appendix.




                                                    32
                                                                      N
                                                           1
          log Yf,b,q   = f,b + f,q + (Bank Leverageb,q-1 ×                 MPq-k ) + f,b,q      (2)
                                                           N         k=0
                                                                     N
                                                                 1
          log Yf,b,q = f,b + b,q + (Firm Leveragef,q-1 ×                   MPq-k ) + f,b,q      (3)
                                                                 N   k=0


where log Yf,b,q , is either the total loan amount or one plus the loan interest rate, (1 + if,b,q )
for a given bank-firm pair, (b, f ) and quarter (q ), and N captures 4 or 8-quarter moving
average, indexed by k . The coefficient f,b is the bank×firm fixed effect, which controls
for unobserved firm- and bank-level time-invariant heterogeneity. Therefore, identification
comes from within bank-firm variation for each pair over time. The loan interest rates are
value-weighted interest rates as there might be several loans between a given bank-firm pair
with different interest rates. The interest rate contains a risk-free rate, which is typically
LIBOR, plus an idiosyncratic credit spread. Thus, the time fixed effects will absorb the
common risk-free rate and all variation will come through the idiosyncratic risk spread.
    The firm and bank leverage ratios are lagged and de-meaned, hence the interpretation
of  is the effect of a monetary policy surprise driven by more risky firms' credit demand
conditional on banks' credit supply (in specification (3)) or by more risky banks' credit
supply conditional on firms' credit demand (in specification (2)) relative to the average firm
or bank. Notice that we show the same specifications with time invariant leverage of firms
and banks, where the leverage variables does not need de-meaning, in robustness section.
    The first regression controls for firm×time fixed effects, (f,q ), which means this regres-
sion will identify  from firms that borrow from multiple banks in a given quarter. This
methodology was popularized by Khwaja and Mian (2008), so that the researcher can solely
focus on the credit supply provided by banks controlling all that varies at firm-time level
including firm credit demand and firm credit risk. Hence, we interact our monetary policy
surprises with a measure of bank risk that is bank leverage. The second regression, does the
opposite and controls for bank×time fixed effects, (b,q ), identifying from banks lending to
multiple firms. This means that now we condition on bank-time varying variables including
bank credit supply and bank riskiness and interact our monetary policy surprises with a
measure of firm riskiness, that is firm leverage.
    Table 5 shows the baseline results. Columns (1) and (3) show the credit demand regres-
sions for quantities and prices respectively, and columns (2) and (4) present credit supply
regressions. For the demand regressions, the interaction-term coefficient on loan quantity is



                                                33
-1.08 and statistically significant at 0.1 percent. The interpretation is that an unexpected
decrease in the federal funds rate, or monetary policy easing, increases borrowing among
highly-levered firms relative to the average firm. In terms of magnitude, a monetary surprise
easing from the 75th to 25th percentile of the distribution represents an 8 percentage point
change. Multiplying this by our estimated coefficient (and adding the normal time effect
of leverage) gives us a 7 percentage point change in loan amount. Interestingly, column
(3) shows that loan pricing is moving in the opposite direction of the standard credit chan-
nel story, where i general increase borrowing and lower prices go together. The coefficient
of -0.0725 implies that highly levered firms borrow at higher rates (half percentage point
higher), when monetary policy eases. Our DID regression has a "relative" interpretation.
Even though, there can be a reduction in the external finance premium with easy monetary
policy, implying lower borrowing costs for everyone, these "riskier" levered firms still pay
higher rates than "less -risky" firms. Given the fact that bank credit supply is controlled
in these regressions, if lower rates induce overall more demand for credit, then loan prices
should be higher in equilibrium, meaning "risky firms" end up paying relatively more. In
sum, having data both on loan amounts and prices allows us to pin down the risk-taking
channel: even though "risky" firms borrow more, they also pay more, and hence even though
there is risk-taking, firm-specific interest rates reflect that.
    Columns (2) and (4) shows that banks with higher leverage than average do not provide
different loan amounts nor do they charge different prices when policy rates ease. In column
(2) we have a positive coefficient on the interaction term suggesting high levered banks lower
their credit supply during easy monetary policy conditional on firm credit demand but this
effect is significant only at 10 percent. Interestingly, we find a strong effect of bank leverage
during normal times. The coefficients of 0.3833 on loan amounts and -0.0085 on interest
rates show that, during normal times, levered banks supply more credit and offer lower prices
in general.
    Table 6 shows the results for the same regressions for two separate firm samples: private
versus publicly listed firms. All of the aggregate effects in Table 5 in the firm demand
regressions operate through private firms, who are SMEs as shown before. The magnitude
of the effect is slightly stronger for private borrowers than the overall sample average (-1.81
vs. -1.08); a monetary surprise easing from the 75th to 25th percentile of the distribution
leads to a 13 percentage point increase in loan demand among highly levered private firms
relative to the average private firm.
    Turning to the regressions that investigate the role of banks' leverage on private firm
borrowing in columns (2) and (4), we find that highly levered banks supply fewer loans at



                                               34
    Table 5: Monetary Policy and Credit Outcomes: Firm-Bank Level--All Firms


                                                                Quantity                           Prices
                                                   Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
Firm Leverageq-1                                      0.0219                              -0.0012
                                                     (0.0256)                            (0.0014)
Firm Leverageq-1 × MP Surpriseq                     -1.0868                             -0.0725
                                                     (0.2592)                            (0.0142)
Bank Leverageq-1                                                       0.3833                            -0.0085
                                                                       (0.0866)                           (0.0019)
Bank Leverageq-1 × MP Surpriseq                                         0.8553                             0.0057
                                                                       (0.3737)                           (0.0093)
Observations                                          2199353           633771           2210232           639054
Adjusted R2                                            0.946             0.911            0.772             0.854
Bank×Firm F.E.                                          Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
Bank×Time F.E.                                          Yes               No               Yes               No
Firm×Time F.E.                                          No                Yes              No                Yes
+                                           
    p < 0.1      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions for bank-firm level at a quarterly frequency. Interest rates
are weighted by the loan shares for a given firm-bank. Log Collateral is the log of the market value of the collateral as
of the reporting date, lagged and demeaned. Firm Leverage and Bank Leverage are lagged and demeaned. They are
both based on short-term debt. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




                                                           35
Table 6: Monetary Policy and Credit Outcomes: Firm-Bank Level--Private vs. Public Firms

                                                                    Private Firms                                    Public Firms
                                                         Quantity                   Prices                Quantity                  Prices
                                                 Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i) Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
 Firm Leverageq-1                                   -0.0231                 -0.0025+                   0.0619                 0.0002
                                                   (0.0263)                 (0.0012)                 (0.0674)               (0.0014)
 Firm Leverageq-1 × MP Surpriseq                  -1.8097                  -0.0951                    -0.0484                -0.0082
                                                   (0.2410)                 (0.0097)                (0.0.7931)              (0.0209)
 Bank Leverageq-1                                              0.3486                     -0.0041                0.3957                 -0.0106
                                                               (0.1077)                  (0.0026)                (0.1127)                (0.0020)
 Bank Leverageq-1 × MP Surpriseq                               1.7704                    0.0293                   0.4098                  0.0110
                                                               (0.5686)                  (0.0138)                (0.5292)                (0.0088)
 Observations                                      1935430     337330       1944550      340486      263915      296120      265674      298156
 Adjusted R2                                         0.94       0.93         0.774        0.86        0.839       0.864       0.674       0.820
 Bank×Firm F.E                                       Yes        Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Bank×Time F.E                                       Yes         No           Yes          No          Yes         No          Yes         No
 Firm×Time F.E                                        No        Yes           No          Yes          No          Yes         No          Yes
 +                                            
     p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions for bank-firm pairs at a quarterly frequency, for private (columns
1 to 4) and public firms (columns 5 to 8). The dependent variable in columns (1)-(2) and (5)-(6) is the natural logarithm of
the total committed loan amount for a bank-firm pair; the dependent variable in columns (3)-(4) and (7)-(8) is the natural
logarithm of one plus the nominal interest rate weighted for loan shares for a given bank-firm pair. Firm Leverage and Bank
Leverage are lagged and demeaned. They are both based on short-term debt. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and
time are reported in parentheses.




lower prices to private borrowers, but price effect is significant only at 10 percent. These
results are the opposite of a supply-side risk taking channel by banks among smaller and
less transparent private borrowers. During normal times, levered banks supply more loans
in general to private firms, as found in the all firms sample. When we investigate public
firms behavior reported in the last 4 columns, we see that there is nothing going on with firm
leverage. High levered banks also do not alter their supply patterns to public firms during
easy policy. During normal times though, high levered banks supply more at lower prices to
public firms. Thus, the effect of levered banks on credit supply in normal times that we saw
in the all firms sample is driven by public firms, whereas the effect of firm leverage during
expansionary policy in the all firms sample is driven by private firms/SMEs.
    To determine whether our baseline result is driven by risky firms proxied through leverage
or specifically by risky SMEs, we use the sample for all firms, public and private, and we
cut the sample on size and leverage to show the importance of both for our main result. To
have a clear interpretation, we define a time-invariant dummy for high leverage firms being
1 if leverage is above sample median, and also define a time-invariant dummy of being an
SME if firms revenue is less than $50 million on average over the sample.
    Table 7 shows the results based on a triple difference-in-differences regression. Our main
result that high leveraged firms increase their demand for credit when monetary policy is


                                                                              36
expansionary and receive higher rates is robust to using time invariant treatment groups
in all firms sample and now we see that this result is driven by leveraged SMEs. The last
line of the table shows that being a leveraged SME during a monetary expansion drives
the result, whereas the significance of the double interaction for leverage and the monetary
policy disappears and the magnitude of the coefficient crashes. Levered SMEs borrow more
at higher rates as our main result. Levered firms also pay higher interest rates as shown
in last column. Interestingly, as shown in the second line of the table, SMEs, relative to
large firms in the sample borrow less, even they pay less, indicating the fact that they are
financially constrained relative to large firms even though expansionary policy lower their
rates overall. Overall these results confirm our key result on the risk taking channel of
monetary policy leading to credit growth being driven by leveraged SMEs increasing their
credit demand when rates are lower as they are financially constrained during normal times.
        Table 7: Monetary Policy and Credit Outcomes: The Role of Leverage and Size


                                                               Quantity                                  Prices
                                                   Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(1+i) Log(1+i) Log(1+i)
High leveragei × MP Surpriseq                      -0.4212                    -0.1503+ -0.0262             -0.0189
                                                    (0.0772)                  (0.0856)  (0.0027)            (0.0026)
SMEi × MP Surpriseq                                            0.5530        1.0737              0.0140 0.0288
                                                                (0.1012)      (0.1984)            (0.0014) (0.0028)
High leveragei × SMEi × MP Surpriseq                                         -0.7368                       -0.0199
                                                                              (0.1633)                      (0.0032)
Observations                                        2460475     2460475       2460475      2472261      2472261      2472261
Adjusted R2                                          0.945       0.945         0.945        0.768        0.767        0.768
Bank× Firm F.E                                        Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Bank× Time F.E                                        Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
+                                            
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents results for the OLS regressions for bank-firm pairs using quarterly data for the all sample. The
dependent variable in columns (1)-(3) is the natural logarithm of the total committed loan amount for a bank-firm pair; the
dependent variable in columns (4)-(6) is the natural logarithm of one plus the nominal interest rate weighted for loan shares for
a given bank-firm pair. SMEi is a dummy indicating whether a firm is a SME (less than 50 millions in net sales) or non-SME.
High Leveragei is a dummy indicating whether whether a firm is in the "low" (= 0) or "high" ( = 1) bin of firms defined by their
average leverage ratio over the sample period. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




5.3      Risk-Taking by Banks
So far we have shown that banks with low capital/high leverage do the right thing when
monetary policy is easy and not take risk. Recall that our period is after the 2008 crisis
when banks are heavily regulated in capital requirements. Thus, leverage may not be the
right variable to capture risk-taking.


                                                               37
    We explore risk-taking further through an alternative risky bank measure, actual loan-
losses. In FR Y-14 form, each bank reports the cumulative net charge-off amount on each
loan that it makes. Net charge-offs are the dollar value of the loans banks determine they will
not recover in default, that is non performing loans that are expected to be written down.
The advantage of net charge-off relative to default probability or simple delinquency that is
commonly used in the literature is that charge-offs take into account the fact that recovery
rates are on average 80 percent of the face value. Moreover, the losses associated with
defaulted loans that are highly collateralized are generally much smaller than uncollateralized
loans and net charge-off amounts capture this difference.
    We aggregate the cumulative net charge-offs to the bank-firm level and normalize by the
total committed loan amount for each borrower. The charge-off ratio varies by bank-firm-
quarter, hence these regressions identify risk-taking from same set of bank-firm pairs where
we test whether banks lend more in the future to the same firms that they have written off
in the past. The charge-off ratio is then demeaned to aid in interpretation.
    The charge-off results are reported in Table 8 and show a clear difference in the way
that monetary policy easing impacts lending to private SMEs versus large public firms. The
first column shows that private borrowers with higher charge-off rates on outstanding loans
receive less credit when policy rates fall (2.8959 and significant at 1 percent). This implies
that a surprise fall in the policy rate from the 75th to the 25th percentile of the distribution
lowers the amount of credit extended to more risky private borrowers by 24 percentage points
relative to the average-risk private borrower. By contrast, column (3) shows that there is
not impact of credit received by public firms. In sum, we do not find evidence of supply-side
risk taking due to lower interest rates because high risk banks cut lending to risky private
firms for whom they booked past losses.


5.4    The Role of Collateral: Loan Level Analysis
In this section we explore how financial constraints impact credit growth focusing on collat-
eral constraints. A large number of studies have proposed models in which agents borrow in
order to finance projects and they are subject to collateral constraints. Following the work
by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), many papers show that financial frictions have substantial
ability to amplify business cycle fluctuations and can affect monetary policy transmission.
In most of these models, agents borrowing is limited by a certain fraction of their capital,
that is collateral is required to obtain credit and the amount of credit is determined by the
value of this collateral.



                                              38
   Table 8: Monetary Policy and Bank Risk-Taking via Loan Losses: Firm­Bank Level

                                                            Private Firms                Public Firms
                                                        Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i)
           (CCO/Loan)q-1                                  -0.0612       -0.0001      -0.2491        -0.0058
                                                         (0.0553)      (0.0022)     (0.2025)       (0.0052)
           (CCO/Loan)q-1 × MP Surpriseq                  2.8959          0.0327      -1.4709        -0.0450
                                                         (0.8349)      (0.0268)     (1.6931)       (0.0446)
           Observations                                   310023       297044        285175         277986
           Adjusted R2                                     0.933        0.874         0.868          0.835
           Bank×Firm F.E                                    Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
           Firm×Time F.E                                    Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes
           +                                            
               p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
          Note: This table reports OLS estimates of alternative risk measures for banks at the bank-firm level
          for the private firm sample (Panel A) and the public firm sample (Panel B) using quarterly data. The
          dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is the natural logarithm of the total committed loan amount
          for a bank-firm pair; the dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) is the natural logarithm of one plus
          the nominal interest rate weighted for loan shares for a given bank-firm pair. The measure of bank
          risk is the ratio of a bank-firm`s total net charge off amount divided its committed loan amount for
          each firm, lagged one quarter. Each column sequentially adds different fixed effects. Standard errors
          are double clustered at the firm and quarter levels, and *** indicates significance at the 0.1% level,
          ** at the 1% level, and * at the 5% level.




    Our data allows us to test for the existence of such constraints and whether monetary
policy transmission has different effects on credit growth and pricing via relaxation/tightening
of these constraints. We run similar difference-in-differences regressions as in the previous
section, but we exploit the loan level granularity of our data combined with our observation of
pledged collateral. Specifically, we regress the outstanding committed loan amount, (Loan ),
and the nominal loan interest rate, (i), on the monetary policy surprise measure and a
collateral variable that takes different forms. Collateral is loan specific and can vary by type
for a given firm-bank pair.
    We first consider an indicator variable equal to 1 if the loan is collateralized and 0
otherwise. The indicator captures the extensive margin of pledging collateral in a loan
contract. As before, we include bank×firm fixed effects to control for unobserved average
differences between firms and banks. We also control firm×time fixed effects and bank×
fixed effects to control for unobserved time-varying firm and bank differences. Note that
since these regressions are computed at the loan-level we can also include firm×bank×time
fixed effects as denoted by f,b,q . This most strict specification captures within-loan variation,
where a firm takes out two or more loans at the same time from the same bank, with different
collateral requirements. All regressions have double-clustered standard errors by firm and
time as before. Formally, we estimate the following equation:



                                                             39
                                                                              N
                                                                          1
    log Yf,b,l,q   = f,b,q + 1 Collateralf,b,l,q + 2 (Collateralf,b,l,q ×           MPq-k +   f,b,l,q   (4)
                                                                          N   k=0


    The first set of collateral results highlight a stark difference in the way that pledging
collateral interacts with access to and pricing of credit across firm types as shown in Table 9.
This table shows that for private borrowers, collateralizing a loan is associated with improved
access to credit and lower prices. For example, column (2) reports the results on the log of
loan quantity and column (5) on the interest rate­log(1 + i)­and both specifications include
bank×firm and firm×time fixed effects, identifying a credit supply effect. The coefficient on
the collateralized dummy is 0.3467 for loan amount and -0.0045 on the rate, both of which
are significant at 0.1 percent. Interestingly columns (1) and (4) tells the same story on the
credit demand side. By contrast, the corresponding columns (1), (2) and (4), (5) in Table
10 show the exact opposite effect for public borrowers; pledging collateral is associated with
restricted access to credit and higher prices. The results suggest that small private borrowers
with no access to alternative funding sources besides bank loans must post collateral to access
funding. Large public borrowers have access to unsecured funding from commercial paper
and bond markets and generally obtain unsecured bank loans. Therefore, posting collateral
to obtain bank financing is a sign of distress for which access to capital is restricted and
interest rates are higher.
    Columns (3) and (6) in Tables 9 and 10 report the most restrictive specification that
includes bank×firm×time fixed effects. The variation in collateral is therefore coming from
the loan-level for a fixed bank-firm pair controlling for relationship matching, bank, and firm
unobserved variables. This specification helps address the common critique of the Khwaja
and Mian (2008) regression that requires firms borrowing from different banks to identify
supply effects in an environment where firm and bank matching may not be random. The
results for both sets of firms are similar and suggest that in normal times, access to collateral
improves financing conditions for private firms and that public firms post collateral only when
in distress, which is associated with less credit and higher prices.
    To assess whether the relation between collateral and credit growth changes with mone-
tary policy surprise, we interact the collateral dummy variable with the surprise. The credit
supply regressions for private firms in columns (2) and (5) of Table 9 show that private
firms receive more credit, -2.1818, at higher prices, -0.0190, when posting collateral amid
lower policy rates (the coefficient on loan quantity (price) is significant at 0.1 (5) percent).
When we calculate the total effect of pledge collateral during a monetary policy expansion,


                                                    40
we have higher loans and lower rates both in columns (1) and (4) and (2) and (5). This sug-
gests that risk taking does not operate through increased credit access via relaxed collateral
constraints. Only when private firms have collateral, even when rates ease, do they obtain
credit, both on the credit demand side and credit supply side. Risk taking would imply
the opposite at least on the supply side; risky firms without collateral would receive more
loans when rates falls. The total effect of collateral is the sum of the collateralized dummy
and interaction term coefficients. For private borrowers, collateral always improves access
to credit, especially when interest rates are low, compared to unsecured borrowing. These
results hold within-loan level in the most restrictive specifications of columns (3) and (6).
    The results in column (2) of Table 10 show that public firms also obtain more credit when
posting collateral when rates fall. However, the estimate is not precise and different from
zero in column (2) and in column (1), demand side, it is weakly significant. Furthermore,
columns (4) and (5) suggests that for public borrowers, posting collateral when rates ease
results in even higher interest rates, further supporting the sorting effect of collateral where
risky public borrowers post collateral to obtain credit. In the most restrictive within-loan
specifications of columns (3) and (6), public firms still do worse by posting collateral. In
sum, risk-taking does not appear to manifest through reduced collateral requirements for
riskier borrowers as a result of lower policy rates.

                  Table 9: Monetary Policy and Loan Level Outcomes: Private Firms

                                                          Quantity                                        Prices
                                         Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
Collateralizedq                           0.2888         0.3467          0.4181         -0.0023        -0.0045         -0.0058
                                           (0.0353)       (0.0523)        (0.0606)       (0.0005)       (0.0009)        (0.0012)
Collateralizedq × MP Surpriseq            -0.9698        -2.1818         -2.3107        -0.0130         -0.0190         -0.0264
                                           (0.1719)       (0.3730)        (0.4394)       (0.0033)       (0.0073)        (0.0105)
Observations                                 2984365       1563912        1371794         3128248        1564644        1377795
Adjusted R2                                   0.724         0.454          0.282           0.634          0.428          0.357
Bank×Firm F.E                                  Yes           Yes            No              Yes            Yes            No
Bank×Time F.E                                  Yes           No             No              Yes            No             No
Firm×Time F.E                                  No            Yes            No              No             Yes            No
Bank×Firm×Time F.E                             No            No             Yes             No             No             Yes
+                                            
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions for the effect of collateral using loan level data at a quarterly frequency,
for private firm sample. The dependent variable in columns (1) through (3) is the natural logarithm of the total committed
loan amount; the dependent variable in columns (4) through (6) is the natural logarithm of the nominal real interest rates.
Collateralizedq is a dummy variable equal to one if the loan is collateralized, and zero otherwise. Double-clustered standard
errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




                                                                41
                  Table 10: Monetary Policy and Loan Level Outcomes: Public Firms

                                                          Quantity                                       Prices
                                         Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
Collateralizedq                          -0.6190         -0.6384        -0.8910         0.0074         0.0081         0.0108
                                          (0.0481)        (0.0490)       (0.0770)        (0.0006)       (0.0006)       (0.0009)
Collateralizedq × MP Surpriseq            -0.6125          -0.4756       -2.0066        -0.0233        -0.0157          -0.0092
                                          (0.2575)        (0.3938)       (0.7709)        (0.0050)       (0.0069)       (0.0100)
Observations                                 644446         634710        485440          639445         629677         481327
Adjusted R2                                   0.506          0.490         0.284           0.479          0.513          0.378
Bank×Firm F.E                                  Yes            Yes           No              Yes            Yes            No
Bank×Time F.E                                  Yes            No            No              Yes            No             No
Firm×Time F.E                                  No             Yes           No              No             Yes            No
Bank×Firm×Time F.E                             No             No            Yes             No             No             Yes
+                                            
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions of the effect of collateral using loan level data at a quarterly frequency,
for the public firm sample. The dependent variable in columns (1) through (3) is the natural logarithm of the total committed
loan amount ; the dependent variable in columns (4) through (6) is the natural logarithm of the nominal real interest rates.
Collateralizedq is a dummy variable equal to one if the loan is collateralized, and zero otherwise. Double-clustered standard
errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




5.5       The Importance of "Operational" Collateral, Earnings, and Op-
          erations Based Constraints
The FR Y-14Q data contains rich collateral detail that allows us to explore the relationship
between different types of collateral and access to and price of credit, as well as whether
risk taking operates through collateral heterogeneity. To study these issues, we replace the
binary collateral indicator with indicators specifying the type of collateral pledged.
    Recall from Figure 10 that, in the raw data we have 6 collateral categories. The categories
that group loans secured with fixed assets and real estate based on the notion that the market
value of these assets determines their collateral value; the tress in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997).
Another category are loans secured by cash and marketable securities. The value of cash,
marketable securities, fixed assets, and real estate loans can be mostly divorced from the
risks associated with firm operations. The other category is loans secured by AR&I, and
the final group is loans secured by blanket liens and other collateral. Unsecured loans is the
omitted category.
    To show that the impact of AR&I and blanket liens is similar, what we call "operational"
collateral, we first show all results with separate collateral categories separate (only adding
fixed assets and real estate together) and leaving unsecured as the omitted category. The
results are reported in Tables 11 and 12 show a collateral-sorting affect, highlighting the



                                                                42
importance of constraints tied to the operations of the firm for SMEs compared to other forms
of tangible asset-based collateral. In particular, for private borrowers, collateral improves
access to credit and pricing (in the top four rows, the coefficients in the quantity (price)
regressions are positive (negative) and significant at 0.1 percent except for fixed assets and
real estate). Interestingly, a "collateral pecking order" emerges: the most useful form of
collateral to obtain larger loans at lower prices is accounts receivable and inventory, followed
by blanket liens and cash and marketable securities. The association between fixed assets and
real estate and access to credit is not statistically significant. These results suggest that,
for private borrowers, collateral that is closely tied to the operation of the firm­accounts
receivable and inventory­and earnings­blanket liens­are most advantageous. This result
should not be surprising given Figure 11: fixed assets and real estate are most frequently
used by the SMEs. Thus, real estate and fixed assets appear to be in limited supply for
SMEs and other forms of collateral must be used. By contrast, for public firms, as shown
in Table 12, access to credit is restricted when posting any type of collateral and interest
rates are higher. However, the same collateral pecking order is present for public firms to a
certain extent: credit is less restricted and prices are lower when using collateral tied to the
operations of the firm such as accounts receivable, inventory, and blanket liens, followed by
cash and marketable securities, and lastly fixed assets and real estate. The big difference is
that fixed assets and real estate have a significant role for public firm borrowing but not for
private firms in normal times.
    The bottom four rows in Tables 11 and 12 present the results on the role of collateral
during monetary policy expansions. These columns provide further evidence that risk taking
does not operate through a reduction in collateral requirements of different types. The results
for private borrowers are consistent with our previous extensive margin results and shows
that those results are driven by "operational collateral". Column (1) shows that posting
AR&I and blanket line improves access to credit, where column (4) shows that only AR&I
improves pricing. On the credit supply side of columns, all type of collateral has a role in
expanding credit but weak effect on pricing. The most restrictive within-loan regressions,
show a role for ARI, blanket lien and fixed assets to increase loan amounts but strong
price effect in terms of obtaining lower prices comes from AR&I during monetary policy
expansions. Similarly for public borrowers, in Table 12, accounts receivable and inventory
remain the best collateral source during expansions. Hence, collateral whose value derives
mostly from operations and ability to generate revenue is superior for both types of firms.
    Based on the fact that AR&I and blanket lien collateral appear to impact access to and
pricing of credit for all borrowers in a similar way, we report the results of aggregating



                                              43
                              Table 11: The Role of Collateral Type I: Private Firms

                                                                       Quantity                             Prices
                                                        Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
Fixed assets and real estateq                             0.0362         -0.0298     0.0332     0.0015        0.0009      -0.0000
                                                         (0.0324)       (0.0433)    (0.0494)    (0.0005)    (0.0009)     (0.0012)
Cash and marketable sec.q                               0.2225         0.3331      0.3270      -0.0049     -0.0070     -0.0093
                                                         (0.0361)       (0.0536)    (0.0713)    (0.0006)    (0.0010)     (0.0013)
Act. receiv. and inventoryq                             0.5424         0.7790      0.8924      -0.0046     -0.0082     -0.0102
                                                         (0.0406)       (0.0509)    (0.0535)    (0.0006)    (0.0010)     (0.0013)
Blanket lien and otherq                                 0.3668         0.4817      0.5787      -0.0024     -0.0046     -0.0053
                                                         (0.0332)       (0.0431)    (0.0514)    (0.0005)    (0.0008)     (0.0010)
Fixed assets and real estateq × MP Surpriseq              -0.0606     -1.0468      -1.1313       -0.0008    -0.0107      -0.0178
                                                         (0.0811)       (0.2082)    (0.2485)    (0.0017)    (0.0051)     (0.0072)
Cash and marketable sec.q × MP Surpriseq                  -0.1948      -0.9140      -0.7354+     0.0009      -0.0040      -0.0054
                                                         (0.1258)       (0.2931)    (0.4310)    (0.0026)    (0.0062)     (0.0093)
Act. receiv. and inventoryq × MP Surpriseq              -1.0223       -2.1088      -2.3031     -0.0118      -0.0135     -0.0227
                                                         (0.1391)       (0.3011)    (0.3342)    (0.0026)    (0.0052)     (0.0077)
Blanket lien and otherq × MP Surpriseq                  -0.5070       -0.9747       -0.6990      -0.0018    -0.0105     -0.0120+
                                                         (0.1064)       (0.2348)    (0.3015)    (0.0018)    (0.0045)     (0.0065)
Observations                                                2650313    1362500     1192230     2781417     1365280      1199252
Adjusted R2                                                  0.734      0.472       0.307       0.647       0.442        0.376
Bank×Firm F.E                                                 Yes        Yes         No          Yes         Yes          No
Bank×Time F.E                                                 Yes        No          No          Yes         No           No
Firm×Time F.E                                                 No         Yes         No          No          Yes          No
Bank×Firm×Time F.E                                            No         No          Yes         No          No           Yes
+                                            
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions of the effect of collateral type using loan level data at a quarterly
frequency, for the private firm sample. The dependent variable in columns (1) through (3) is the natural logarithm of the
total committed loan amount ; the dependent variable in columns (4) through (6) is the natural logarithm of the nominal
real interest rates. The dependent variables are dummy variables equal to one if the loan is collateralized by specific type of
collateral, zero otherwise; we drop the category "Unsecured". The coefficients for the collateral types are calculated but not
displayed. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




                                                                      44
                              Table 12: The Role of Collateral Type I: Public Firms

                                                                      Quantity                             Prices
                                                        Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
Fixed assets and real estateq                           -1.4410      -1.4400      -1.8022     0.0178      0.0174       0.0219
                                                          (0.0609)     (0.0703)    (0.0757)    (0.0009)     (0.0009)    (0.0011)
Cash and marketable sec.q                               -0.5642      -0.5283      -0.7002      0.0034     0.0048       0.0060
                                                          (0.0633)     (0.0697)    (0.1222)    (0.0011)     (0.0011)    (0.0020)
Act. receiv. and inventoryq                               -0.1679     -0.2192      -0.2921    0.0032      0.0036        0.0028
                                                          (0.0690)     (0.0756)    (0.1187)    (0.0007)     (0.0008)    (0.0013)
Blanket lien and otherq                                 -0.3759      -0.3934      -0.5355     0.0045      0.0052       0.0073
                                                          (0.0483)     (0.0505)    (0.0913)    (0.0005)     (0.0005)    (0.0009)
Fixed assets and real estateq × MP Surpriseq              1.0635       0.9617+      -0.3164     0.0139       0.0060     0.0275
                                                          (0.4006)     (0.5166)    (0.8001)    (0.0097)     (0.0105)    (0.0127)
Cash and marketable sec.q × MP Surpriseq                 -1.7177       -1.6142     -2.5546+     0.0041      0.0216+    0.0760
                                                          (0.5340)     (0.6360)    (1.4276)    (0.0102)     (0.0116)    (0.0246)
Act. receiv. and inventoryq × MP Surpriseq              -1.7494      -2.8136      -5.5757     -0.0399     -0.0287      -0.0465
                                                          (0.3921)     (0.5887)    (1.1364)    (0.0055)     (0.0072)    (0.0134)
Blanket lien and otherq × MP Surpriseq                    -0.7591      -1.1205     -2.2961    -0.0333      -0.0226     -0.0203+
                                                          (0.3102)     (0.4592)    (0.9398)    (0.0047)     (0.0065)    (0.0116)
Observations                                                644446    634710       485440      639445      629677       481327
Adjusted R2                                                  0.538     0.523        0.339       0.491       0.525        0.398
Bank×Firm F.E                                                 Yes       Yes          No          Yes         Yes          No
Bank×Time F.E                                                 Yes       No           No          Yes         No           No
Firm×Time F.E                                                 No        Yes          No          No          Yes          No
Bank×Firm×Time F.E                                            No        No           Yes         No          No           Yes
+                                            
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions of the effect of collateral type using loan level data at a quarterly
frequency, for the public firm sample. The dependent variable in columns (1) through (3) is the natural logarithm of the
total committed loan amount ; the dependent variable in columns (4) through (6) is the natural logarithm of the nominal
real interest rates. The dependent variables are dummy variables equal to one if the loan is collateralized by specific type of
collateral, zero otherwise; we drop the category "Unsecured". The coefficients for the collateral types are calculated but not
displayed. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




                                                                     45
collateral types according to source of collateral value. In particular, we combine fixed
assets and real estate and cash and securities in asset-based collateral where the market
based liquidation values are important for borrowing capacity. AR&I and blanket liens are
combined into earnings and operations based collateral where the value of the collateral is
based on firm operations and earnings. This is the grouping shown in Figure 12.
     The results shown in Tables 13 and 14 confirm the previous findings. Earnings and
operations based collateral constraints are very important for SMEs, in terms of higher
borrowing and lower rates during normal times regardless of demand or supply side, or
when we use within-loan variation for the same pair. In contrast, both asset based and
earnings/operations based collateral are important for public firms but they both signal
riskiness; posting either type is associated with less borrowing and higher spreads in normal
times.
     During expansionary monetary policy, both types of constraints help SMEs to borrow
even more with overall lower spreads based on total effects. Note that this result holds on
the supply side and within-loan variation of columns (2), (3), (5), (6) and not in columns
(1) and (4), suggesting that on the demand side, private firms do not prefer to pledge asset
based constraints, most likely because they do not have much. Interestingly, for public firms,
only earnings and operations based constraints improve access to credit and prices during
monetary policy expansions. In fact, total effects suggest that their constraints relax when
posting more earnings and operations based collateral. They borrow at higher prices, which
still reflects their risk.


5.6    Future Delinquency and Financial Stability
Overall, our results suggest that monetary policy transmission during the low interest rate
environment works mostly through firm demand for credit rather than credit supplied in the
banking system. In particular, lower policy rates lead to increased demand for loans among
smaller and more leveraged private companies, but no change in the supply of funds among
banks necessarily as a function of their leverage or in terms of banks lending to firms who
defaulted before. In this sense we do not find any evidence of risk-taking by banks. This
does not mean there are no risks to financial stability. Thus, this section assesses whether
the increase in firm leverage due to low rates is any evidence of risk-taking, that is, is it the
case that these firms are most likely to default in the future.
   We address this issue using the same specification of Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and
Saurina (2014). In particular, we use non-performing loans of more than 30 days and regress



                                               46
                         Table 13: The Role of Collateral Type II: Private Firms

                                                              Quantity                                   Prices
                                                Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(1+i) Log(1+i) Log(1+i)
Asset-based                         0.0544+    -0.0204  0.0278  0.0009+   -0.0001  -0.0010
                                    (0.0301)  (0.0458) (0.0546) (0.0005) (0.0009) (0.0012)
Earnings & Operations-based        0.4106 0.5765 0.6912 -0.0038 -0.0067 -0.0085
                                    (0.0402)  (0.0545) (0.0608) (0.0005) (0.0009) (0.0012)
Asset-based × MPq                    -0.1172 -1.5071 -1.5839 -0.0021     -0.0165 -0.0260
                                    (0.1277)  (0.3319) (0.4050) (0.0031) (0.0077) (0.0107)
Earnings & Operations-based × MPq -1.4829 -2.5766 -2.5402 -0.0173 -0.0203 -0.0293
                                    (0.2144)  (0.4032) (0.4689) (0.0035) (0.0074) (0.0107)
Observations                                     2984365       1563912       1371794       3128248      1564644       1377795
Adjusted R2                                       0.731         0.474         0.310         0.635        0.435         0.366
Bank × Firm F.E.                                   Yes           Yes           No            Yes          Yes           No
Bank × Time F.E.                                   Yes           No            No            Yes          No            No
Firm × Time F.E.                                   No            Yes           No            No           Yes           No
Bank × Firm × Time F.E.                            No            No            Yes           No           No            Yes
+                                            
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,      p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions of the effect of collateral type using loan level data at a quarterly
frequency, for the private firm sample. The dependent variable in columns (1) through (3) is the natural logarithm of the total
committed loan amount ; the dependent variable in columns (4) through (6) is the natural logarithm of the nominal real interest
rates. The dependent variables are dummy variables equal to one if the loan is collateralized by specific type of collateral, zero
otherwise. "Asset Based" is a dummy variable equal to one if the collateral pledge is either Real Estate, Fixed Assets or Cash
and marketable securities; "Earning and Operation Based" is equal to one if the collateral pledged is either blanket lien, account
receivable and inventory or other; we drop the category "Unsecured". The coefficients for the collateral types are calculated but
not displayed. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.




                                                               47
                               Table 14: The Role of Collateral Type II: Public Firms

                                                                        Quantity                                Prices
                                                           Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(1+i) Log(1+i) Log(1+i)
Asset-based                                                -1.2454 -1.2489 -1.6386 0.0146                      0.0148       0.0195
                                                            (0.0543) (0.0607) (0.0719) (0.0008)                 (0.0008)    (0.0010)
Earnings & Operations-based                                -0.3105 -0.3421 -0.4388 0.0041                      0.0048       0.0054
                                                            (0.0516) (0.0538) (0.0949) (0.0005)                 (0.0006)    (0.0009)
Asset-based × MPq                                            0.5611   0.5472   -0.3345  0.0116                   0.0088      0.0305
                                                            (0.3421) (0.4600) (0.7612) (0.0086)                 (0.0094)    (0.0120)
Earnings & Operations-based ×MPq                           -1.3400 -1.7572 -4.0888 -0.0364                     -0.0260      -0.0300
                                                            (0.2895) (0.4475) (0.9127) (0.0046)                 (0.0064)    (0.0106)
Observations                                                644446         634710        485440     639445      629677       481327
Adjusted R2                                                  0.530          0.516         0.330      0.486       0.521        0.390
Bank × Firm F.E.                                              Yes            Yes           No         Yes         Yes          No
Bank × Time F.E.                                              Yes            No            No         Yes         No           No
Firm × Time F.E.                                              No             Yes           No         No          Yes          No
Bank × Firm × Time F.E.                                       No             No            Yes        No          No           Yes
+                                             
    p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01,        p < 0.001
Note: This table presents the results of OLS regressions of the effect of collateral type using loan level data at a quarterly
frequency, for the public firm sample. The dependent variable in columns (1) through (3) is the natural logarithm of the total
committed loan amount ; the dependent variable in columns (4) through (6) is the natural logarithm of the nominal real interest
rates. The dependent variables are dummy variables equal to one if the loan is collateralized by specific type of collateral, zero
otherwise. "Asset Based" is a dummy variable equal to one if the collateral pledge is either Real Estate, Fixed Assets or Cash
and marketable securities; "Earning and Operation Based" is equal to one if the collateral pledged is either blanket lien, account
receivable and inventory or other; we drop the category "Unsecured". The coefficients for the collateral types are calculated but
not displayed. Double-clustered standard errors by firm and time are reported in parentheses.



                   Table 15: Monetary Policy and Future Delinquency, Bank-Firm Level

                                                   Panel A: All Firms           Panel B: Private Firms        Panel C: Public Firms
                                             Non-performing Non-performing Non-performing Non-performing Non-performing Non-performing
 High leverage bankk × MP Surpriseq             0.1302                         0.1218                        0.2420
                                                (0.0275)                       (0.0366)                      (0.0417)
 High leverage firmi × MP Surpriseq                             -0.0498                       -0.0594                       -0.0705+
                                                                (0.0153)                      (0.0164)                      (0.0377)
 Observations                                     647889        2469016         342990         2150032       304899          318976
 Adjusted R2                                       0.699         0.647           0.710          0.636         0.699           0.700
 Bank×Firm f.e                                      Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
 Bank×Time f.e                                      No            Yes             No             Yes           No              Yes
 Firm×Time f.e                                      Yes           No              Yes            No            Yes             No
 +
   p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,   
                              p < 0.01,   
                                             p < 0.001
Note: This table reports OLS estimates of the effect of MP shocks on the probability that loans become delinquent at any point
in the future at the bank-firm level using quarterly data. Panel A uses all firms, panel B uses the private firm sample, and panel
C uses the public firm sample. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that equals 1 if a firm has any loan outstanding
that becomes delinquent for more than 30 days at any point in the future. High leverage firmi is a dummy variable equal to
one if the first quarter leverage of firm i is higher than the median leverage of the firms in the sample, and zero otherwise. High
leverage bankk is a dummy variable equal to one if the first quarter leverage of bank k is higher than the median leverage of
the banks in the sample, and zero otherwise. Each column sequentially adds different fixed effects. Standard errors are double
clustered at the firm and quarter levels, and *** indicates significance at the 0.1% level, ** at the 1% level, and * at the 5%
level.




                                                                          48
it on our measures of firm and bank leverage, separately, and interacted with the monetary
policy surprise variable. Banks report whether or not a loan is non-performing past 30 days
meaning that the borrower is delinquent. We compute a dummy variable equal to one if
a firm has a non-performing loan at any point in the future with a given bank. Thus, the
variable captures whether or not loans to risky firms or loans by risky banks (risk captured
by ex-ante time invariant leverage) are more likely to become non-performing at any point
in the future.
    Table 15 contains the results for the different firm samples. Panel A is the full sample,
panel B are only privately-owned firms and panel C are only publicly-owned firms. As before,
we do not find any risk-taking by U.S. banks, unlike what Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and
Saurina (2014) find for Spanish banks. If fact, our results suggest that banks with less capital
make more prudent loan decisions in response to surprise monetary policy rate easing. The
first row in all three panels shows that the coefficients on the bank leverage and monetary
surprise interaction term are positive and statistically significant at 1 percent. Row two
presents the demand regressions that include bank-time fixed effects to control for supply
factors. The coefficient on the interaction term of firm leverage and the monetary policy
surprise is negative and statistically significant at 1 percent for private firms and 10 percent
for public firms. Hence, we find that highly leveraged firms are more likely to be delinquent
when monetary policy is expansionary. This result suggests that low rates pose a hidden
financial stability risk. The increase in leverage for public and private firms documented
in Figure 6 suggests that future delinquencies are likely to rise not only for public firms,
but also the riskiest private borrowers. These results are consistent with Coimbra and Rey
(2017), suggesting a trade-off between stimulating the economy and increasing the financial
stability risks.


5.7    Robustness
The first set of robustness results replace the continuous leverage ratio with a time-invariant
leverage dummy. We define high leverage firms to be firms with average leverage ratios above
the sample median. A time invariant leverage ratio helps ensure that the baseline effects of
our interaction terms are being driven by the time variation in the monetary policy surprise
variable rather than time varying leverage, even though we always lagged and demeaned this
variable.
    Table 16 shows that the baseline results are robust to this change. In particular, columns
(1) and (3) show that high-risk private firms increase their demand for credit in response



                                              49
to lower policy rates, and pay higher equilibrium prices. There is no significant response to
policy rates for public firm condition on their leverage (columns (5) and (7)). Finally, high
risk banks lend less to private firms, as before, in response to lower rates (column (2)).
    Next set of robustness test study the asymmetric effects of monetary policy. We interpret
our results through expansions, but the existing results can also be driven by contractions.
This robustness check separates expansionary and contractionary monetary policy. We will
also do local projections to evaluate the dynamic effects of monetary policy surprises. Fi-
nally we will decompose the monetary surprise measures into the information effect and
the signalling effect following the work by Jarociski and Karadi (2020) and Nakamura and
Steinsson (2018). This robustness work is still in progress.

                               Table 16: Robustness: Time-Invariant Leverage

                                                         Private Firms                                   Public Firms
                                              Quantity                   Prices               Quantity                  Prices
                                      Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i) Log (Loan) Log (Loan) Log (1 + i) Log (1 + i)
High Leverage Firm × MP Surpriseq -0.8478***                    -0.0395***                -0.1679                -0.0045
                                   (0.1221)                      (0.0035)                (0.2162)               (0.0051)
High Leverage Bank × MP Surpriseq                   0.5429***                 0.0066*                0.1605                  0.0059*
                                                     (0.1319)                 (0.0027)              (0.1559)                 (0.0022)
Observations                            2140482      349527      2150197      352806     319985     307355       322056      309448
Adjusted R2                              0.939        0.929       0.768        0.858      0.837      0.862        0.675       0.818
Bank×Firm F.E                             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes
Bank×Time F.E                             Yes          No          Yes          No         Yes        No           Yes         No
Firm×Time F.E                             No           Yes         No           Yes        No         Yes          No          Yes
+ p < 0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001




                                                                  50
6    Conclusion
We use new confidential supervisory firm-bank-loan level data from the U.S. to understand
monetary policy transmission and risk-taking in an economy with heterogeneous agents and
contracts. Our headline results for the period 2012-2019 are as follows. First, during normal
times, SMEs are financially constrained and bank dependent but large public firms are
not. Second, low interest rates do not lead to risk-taking by banks. Instead, SMEs simply
increase their borrowing since credit demand increases when rates are low. Since SMEs
pledge collateral based on their continuation value, low interest rates increase the value of
this collateral by increasing SMEs ability to pay back the loan. As the SMEs who increase
their borrowing are more leveraged SMEs, there is a hidden financial stability risk that
policy-makers may over look. Leveraged SMEs drive the results in a sample of all U.S. firms
including publicly listed firms. Thus, there is a trade-off between stimulating the economy
and financial stability.
    Our results build on new facts about the credit markets in the U.S. It is not only the case
that, SMEs borrow shorter maturity and pay higher interest rates relative to large publicly
listed firms, they also use frequently "operational" collateral tied to their operations and
enterprise value rather than fixed assets and real estate. The relation between collateral
and risk, at the loan level, is positive for large listed firms but negative for SMEs, where we
measure risk by the loan risk premium. That is, SMEs post collateral to borrow, whereas
large listed firms use collateral when their default risk is higher.
    Understanding the relation between collateral and risk is important for our monetary
policy transmission results. During expansionary monetary policy, risk-taking does not op-
erate through increased credit access via higher valued fixed assets. We show that the best
type of collateral, especially for SMEs, to obtain more credit at a lower price is "operational"
collateral. SMEs largely secure loans using earnings and operations based collateral (blanket
lien and accounts receivable and inventory) and this collateral becomes more valuable when
policy rates fall because it stimulated demand and increase the value of SME operations,
allowing credit growth. Our results show that the effectiveness and power of monetary pol-
icy may depend on the size distribution of firms and type of collateral used. SMEs cover
more than 50 percent of the real economy, which means that our results have important
implications for aggregate boom-bust cycles in a low interest rate environment.




                                              51
References
Acharya, Viral, and Hassan Naqvi. 2012. "The Seeds of a Crisis: A Theory of Bank Liquidity
  and Risk Taking over the Business Cycle." Journal of Financial Economics 106 (2): 349
  ­ 366. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2012.05.014.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2009. "Money, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy." Amer-
  ican Economic Review 99 (2): 600­605. 10.1257/aer.99.2.600.

Auclert, Adrien. 2019. "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel." American Eco-
 nomic Review 109 (6): 2333­67.

Benmelech, Efraim, and Nittai K. Bergman. 2012. "Credit Traps." American Economic Re-
  view 102 (6): 3004­32. 10.1257/aer.102.6.3004.

Benmelech, Efraim, Nitish Kumar, and Raghuram Rajan. 2020. "Secured Credit Spreads
  and the Issuance of Secured Debt." Working Paper 26799, National Bureau of Economic
  Research. 10.3386/w26799.

Berger, Allen N., W. Scott Frame, and Vasso Ioannidou. 2016. "Reexamining the empirical
  relation between loan risk and collateral: The roles of collateral liquidity and types."
  Journal of Financial Intermediation 26 28 ­ 46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2015.11.002.

Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell. 1990. "Collateral, loan quality and bank risk." Journal
  of Monetary Economics 25 (1): 21­42. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3932(90)90042-3.

Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler. 1989. "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctua-
  tions." The American Economic Review 79 (1): 14­31, http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  1804770.

Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1996. "The Financial Accelerator and
  the Flight to Quality." The Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (1): 1­15, http://
  www.jstor.org/stable/2109844.

Bernanke, Ben S., Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. 1999. "Chapter 21 The financial ac-
  celerator in a quantitative business cycle framework." Volume 1. of Handbook of Macroe-
  conomics 1341 ­ 1393, Elsevier, . https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0048(99)10034-X.

Bidder, Rhys, John Krainer, and Adam Shapiro. 2018. "How Do Banks Cope with Loss?"
  frbsf economic letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.


                                              52
Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu. 2012. "Capital Regulation, Risk-taking and Monetary Policy:
  A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?" Journal of Financial Stability 8 (4):
  236 ­ 251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2011.12.003.

Caglio, Cecilia, R. Matthew Darst, and Eric Parolin. 2019. "Half-full or Half-empty? Finan-
  cial Institutions, CDS Use, and Corporate Credit Risk." Journal of Financial Intermedi-
  ation 40 100812. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2019.03.001.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Olivier Darmouni, Stephan Luck, and Matthew Plosser. 2020.
  "Bank Liquidity Provision Across the Firm Size Distribution."

Cloyne, James, Clodomiro Ferreira, Maren Froemel, and Paolo Surico. 2018. "Monetary
  Policy, Corporate Finance and Investment."Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Coimbra, Nuno, and Hélène Rey. 2017. "Financial Cycles with Heterogeneous Intermedi-
  aries." Working Paper 23245, National Bureau of Economic Research. 10.3386/w23245.

Darst, Matthew, Ehraz Refayet, and Alexandros Vardoulakis. 2020. "Banks, Non-Banks, and
 Lending Standards." Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-086: Washington:
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2020.
 086.

Dell Ariccia, Giovanni, Luc Laeven, and Gustavo A. Suarez. 2017. "Bank Leverage and Mon-
  etary Policy's Risk-Taking Channel: Evidence from the United States." The Journal of
  Finance 72 (2): 613­654. 10.1111/jofi.12467.

di Giovanni, Julian, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Mehmet Fatih Ulu, and Yusuf Soner Baskaya.
  2019. "International Spillovers and Local Credit Cycles." forthcoming Review of Economic
  Studies.

Dinlersoz, Emin, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Henry Hyatt, and Veronika Penciakova. 2018.
  "Leverage over the Life Cycle and Implications for Firm Growth and Shock Responsive-
  ness." nber working paper no. 25226.

Drechsel, Thomas. 2019. "Earnings-Based Borrowing Constraints and Macroeconomic Fluc-
  tuations."

Eisfeldt, Andrea L., and Adriano A. Rampini. 2008. "Leasing, Ability to Repossess, and Debt
  Capacity." The Review of Financial Studies 22 (4): 1621­1657. 10.1093/rfs/hhn026.


                                            53
Geanakoplos, John. 1996. "Promises Promises." Cowles Foundation Discussion Papers 1143,
 Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University, https://ideas.repec.
 org/p/cwl/cwldpp/1143.html.

Gertler, Mark, and Simon Gilchrist. 1994. "Monetary Policy, Business Cycles, and the Behav-
 ior of Small Manufacturing Firms." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (2): 309­340.

Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi. 2015. "Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and
 Economic Activity." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7 (1): 44­76.
 10.1257/mac.20130329.

Gopinath, Gita, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, Loukas Karabarbounis, and Carolina Villegas-
 Sanchez. 2017. "Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe." The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 132 (4): 1915­1967. 10.1093/qje/qjx024.

Greenwald, Daniel, John Krainer, and Pascal Paul. 2020. "The Credit Line Channel."

Gürkaynak, Refet S, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson. 2005. "Do Actions Speak Louder Than
 Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements."
 International Journal of Central Banking 1 (1): , https://ideas.repec.org/a/ijc/
 ijcjou/y2005q2a2.html.

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Jean Tirole. 1997. "Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
  the Real Sector." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 663­691, http://www.
  jstor.org/stable/2951252.

Ioannidou, Vasso, Steven Ongena, and José-Luis Peydró. 2014. "Monetary Policy, Risk-
  Taking, and Pricing: Evidence from a Quasi-Natural Experiment." Review of Finance 19
  (1): 95­144. 10.1093/rof/rfu035.

Ivanov, Ivan, Luke Pettit, and Toni Whited. 2020. "Taxes Depress Corporate Borrow-
  ing: Evidence from Private Firms." SSRN, https://ideas.repec.org/a/ijc/ijcjou/
  y2005q2a2.html.

Ivashina, Victoria, Luc Laeven, and Enrique Moral-Benito. 2020. "Loan Types and the Bank
  Lending Channel." NBER Working Papers 27056, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc, https://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/27056.html.

Jarociski, Marek, and Peter Karadi. 2020. "Deconstructing monetary policy surprises--the
  role of information shocks." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12 (2): 1­43.


                                            54
Jeenas, Priit. 2019. "Firm Balance Sheet Liquidity, Monetary Policy Shocks, and Investment
  Dynamics." Working Paper.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina. 2014. "Hazardous
  Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say about the
  Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-taking?" Econometrica 82 (2): 463­505, http:
  //www.jstor.org/stable/24029266.

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2018. "Monetary Policy According
 to HANK." American Economic Review 108 (3): 697­743. 10.1257/aer.20160042.

Kermani, Amir, and Yueran Ma. 2021. "Two Tales of Debt." working paper,
  https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.com/voices.uchicago.edu/dist/7/1291/files/2017/
  01/TwoTalesOfDebt-v7.pdf.

Khwaja, Asim Ijaz, and Atif Mian. 2008. "Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks:
 Evidence from an Emerging Market." American Economic Review 98 (4): 1413­42. 10.
 1257/aer.98.4.1413.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. "Credit Cycles." Journal of Political Economy
  105 (2): 211­248, http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/262072.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, John Moore, and Shengxing Zhang. 2021. "Credit Horizons." Working
  Paper 28742, National Bureau of Economic Research. 10.3386/w28742.

Lian, Chen, and Yueran Ma. 2020. "Anatomy of Corporate Borrowing Constraints*." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 136 (1): 229­291. 10.1093/qje/qjaa030.

Luck, Stephan, and Joao Santos. 2019. "The Value of Collateral in Loan Contracts." ssrn
  working paper, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3467316.

Luck, Stephan, and Tom Zimmermann. 2020. "Employment effects of unconventional mon-
  etary policy: Evidence from QE." Journal of Financial Economics 135 (3): 678­703.
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.07.004.

McKay, Alisdair, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2016. "The Power of Forward Guidance
 Revisited." American Economic Review 106 (10): 3133­58.

Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2018. "High-frequency Identification of Monetary Non-
  Neutrality: The Information Effect." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3): 1283­
  1330.


                                           55
Niepmann, F., and T. Schmidt-Eisenlohr. 2018. "Global Investors, the Dollar, and U.S. Credit
  Conditions." cepr discussion paper no. 13237.

Ottonello, Pablo, and Thomas Winberry. 2020. "Financial Heterogeneity and the Investment
  Channel of Monetary Policy." Econometrica 88 (6): 2473­2502. https://doi.org/10.3982/
  ECTA15949.

Paligorova, Teodora, and Joao A.C. Santos. 2017. "Monetary Policy and Bank Risk-taking:
  Evidence from the Corporate Loan Market." Journal of Financial Intermediation 30 35 ­
  49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfi.2016.11.003.

Rajan, Raghuram G. 2005. "Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?" Working
 Paper 11728, National Bureau of Economic Research. 10.3386/w11728.

Rampini, Adriano, and Vish Vishwanathan. 2020. "Collateral and Secured Debt." working
  paper.

Rauh, Joshua D., and Amir Sufi. 2010. "Capital Structure and Debt Structure." The Review
  of Financial Studies 23 (12): 4242­4280. 10.1093/rfs/hhq095.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2004. "A New Measure of Monetary Shocks:
  Derivation and Implications." American Economic Review 94 (4): 1055­1084. 10.1257/
  0002828042002651.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss. 1981. "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
  Information." The American Economic Review 71 (3): 393­410, http://www.jstor.org/
  stable/1802787.

Tenreyro, Silvana, and Gregory Thwaites. 2016. "Pushing on a String: US Monetary Policy is
  Less Powerful in Recessions." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (4): 43­74.

Wong, Arnele. 2019. "Refinancing and The Transmission of Monetary Pol-
 icy to Consumption." Working Paper.          https://static1.squarespace.com/static/
 576576adbe659449f97e0d35/t/5ce1f9f23fdc1e00014f3d22/1558313459256/Paper_
 AERrevision_0519.pdf.




                                            56
Appendices
A        Variable Definitions
Variable                          Definition
Bank leverage                     It is calculated both as short-term debt as a fraction of total assets and as total liabilities as a fraction of total assets.

Firm leverage                     It is calculated both as short-term debt as a fraction of total assets and as total liabilities as a fraction of total assets.

Collateral amount                 Market value of the collateral backing the loan.
Collateral type                   Fixed assets and real estate
                                  Cash and marketable securities
                                  Accounts receivable and inventory
                                  Blanket lien and others
                                  Unsecured
Collateral to loan ratio          It is calculated as collateral value as a fraction of the committed amount by loan.
Probability of default (Percent) The firm's estimated probability of default by quarter.
Probability of default (Weighted) It is computed as average firm's probability of default, weighted by the committed loan amount for each firm-bank.

Probability of future default     It is dummy equal to one if the firm defaults at any point in time in the future.


Charge-offsb                      It is calculated as the maximum cumulative net charge-offs by bank weighted by the bank's commitments.

Charge-offsf                      It is calculated as the total cumulative net charge-offs by firm.

Charge-offsl                      It is calculated as the average cumulative net charge-offs by loan.

NPL4                              It is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a firm had a non-performing loan in the past 4 years.

Charge-off ratiob                 It is calculated as bank`s total net charge off amount divided by the bank's total commitments.

Charge-off ratiof                 It is calculated as bank-firm`s total net charge off amount divided its committed loan amount for each firm.

Charge-off ratiob                 It is calculated as net charge off amount divided its committed loan amount for each loan.

Collateralizedt-1                 It is a dummy variable equal to one if the loan is collateralized, and zero otherwise.




B        Supplemental Material
Bank Holding Companies subject to CCAR­The bank holding companies included in
the sample are: beginning in Q3:2011 Ally Financial, Bank of America Corporation, BB&T
Corporation, Bank of New York Mellon Corporation, Citigroup Incorporated, Capital One
Financial Corporation, Fifth Third Bancorp, Goldman Sachs Group Incorporated, JPMor-
gan Chase & Co., Keycorp, Morgan Stanley, PNC Financial Services Group Incorporate, Re-
gions Financial Corporation, Suntrust Banks Incorporated, State Street Corporation, U.S.
Bancorp, Wells Fargo & Company. Beginning in Q3:2012 Comerica Incorporated, Hunt-
ington Bancshares Incorporated, HSBC North America Holdings Incorporated, M&T Bank
Corporation, Northern Trust Corporation, RBC USA Holdco Corporation, Santander Hold-
ings USA Incorporated, UnionBanCal Corporation (renamed to MUFG Americas Holding


                                                                            57
Corporation in Q3:2014), Zions Bancorporation. Beginning in Q2:2014 Discover Financial
Services. Beginning in Q4:2014 BNP Parisbas.
    HFI, HFS, and Trading Assets­HFS loans and leases are also distinct from loans
held on the trading book for market making purposes and subject to different different reg-
ulatory capital requirements. Specifically, loans and leases in the trading book are reported
on a separate schedule (other than Schedule H1) and typically meet the following trading
activities: a) regularly under-writing or dealing in securities; interest rate, foreign exchange
rate, commodity, equity, and credit derivative contracts; other financial instruments; and
other assets for resale, (b) acquiring or taking positions in such items principally for the
purpose of selling in the near term or otherwise with the intent to resell in order to profit
from short-term price movements, and (c) acquiring or taking positions in such items as an
accommodation to customers or for other trading purposes.
    Data Cleaning and Sample Construction
This section describes the intensive data cleaning process needed to use the FR Y14 data
for our purposes.

  1. Remove from the raw loan-level data loans issued to "Individuals" and loans to foreign
     addresses.

  2. Remove any loans to financial firms (NAICS 52); real estate REITS (NAICS 513);
     educational servies (NAICS 611); religious, grantmaking, and civil and professional
     organizations (NAICS 813); and private household (NAICS 814).

  3. Drop all observations for which there is no financial data reported and when total firm
     assets are missing or equal to 0.

  4. Drop all facilities where the total value of commitments is less than $1 million due to
     reporting threshold.

  5. To consistently identify firms across banks with missing or different tax ids, we first
     apply a name cleaning algorithm to make a consistent names for firms that are the
     same based on string matches, zipcode, and city. For example Firm A LLC, 20002
     Washington D.C, Firm A Limited Liability Corporation 20002 Washington D.C., and
     Firm a LLC, 20002 Washington D.C. are all treated as the same firm, etc.

  6. Once we have a clean and uniform set of firm names, we can fill in missing tax ids.
     For observations loans where firm tax id is missing, we fill in missing observations if
     the bank reports a consistent tax id through any portion of the loan; for multi-bank


                                              58
     borrowers for which one bank does not report the tax id, we use a consistent tax id
     reported by other banks.

  7. To ensure that firm income statement and balance sheet variables are reasonable and
     reported in consistent units, we apply a cleaning algorithm that searches for large
     reporting discrepancies within and across banks over time for the same firm. We set
     threshold for potential misreported to be a difference in a variable either by the same
     bank or across different banks of either 103 , 106 , 109 since these are most common unit
     differences reported in the data. We also note that when there is miss reporting, all
     variables appear to be consistently miss reported in the same way, so financial ratios
     e.g. leverage are generally reasonable.

  8. After re-scaling miss reporting issues, we take the max value when banks inconsistently
     report information for the same firm.

   Internal Consistency of Balance Sheet Information
We follow Gopinath, Kalemli-Ozcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez (2017) to check
the sensibility of our cleaning procedure by comparing the sum of variables belonging to
some aggregate of their respective category:

  1. The sum of tangible fixed assets, intangible fixed assets, and other fixed assets as a
     ratio of total fixed assets.

  2. The sum of fixed assets and current assets as a ratio of total assets

  3. The sum of long-term debt and other non-current liabilities as a ratio of total non-
     current liabilities

  4. The sum of cash and securities, inventory, and accounts receivable as a ratio or current
     assets

  5. The sum of current assets and tangible assets as a ratio or total assets

  6. The sum of accounts payable, short-term debt, and current maturity long-term debt
     as a ratio of current liabilities

  7. The sum of current liabilities, long-term debt and minority interest as a ratio of total
     liabilities

  8. The sum of total liabilities, retained earnings, and capital expenditure as a ratio of
     total assets.


                                             59
The table below presents the results of the data quality comparison.
    Information on credit facilities and reporting thresholds in FR Y-14­A credit
facility is defined as any legally binding credit extension to a legal entity under a specific
credit agreement. A credit facility may be secured or unsecured, term or revolving, drawn or
undrawn (excluding informal advised lines). There is no materiality threshold for securities
reporting at the individual obligor level. BHCs must report their securities holdings if the
entire portfolio is greater than either $5 billion or five percent of Tier 1 capital on average
for the four quarters preceding the reporting quarter.
   Note on Total Liabilities: Flow of funds­ Total non financial corporate liabilities
reported by the Flow of Funds in the National Accounts of the U.S. (Table B.3, Series i.d.
FL104190005.Q) is computed as

         Liabilitiestotal = taxes + debtsecurities + loans + miscellaneous + F DI.

The following source the total liability components:

   · Tax data come from Internal Revenue Service, Statement Of Income ­ This item is
     smallest line item in the total;

   · Debt securities are bond data is from Mergent Fixed Income Securities Database;

   · Loan data are pulled from bank call reports ­ These data are all U.S. chartered bank
     depository institutions plus foreign bank offices in the U.S. These data also include
     credit unions;

   · Miscellaneous is a catchall category and is the largest single component. This data is
     the sum of private pension fund contributions from the Department of Labor, and an
     unidentified category, which is the largest component of miscellaneous. The unidenti-
     fied category is computed as a residual category from the IRS SOI and flow of founds:

                         unidentif ied = totalassets - equity - liabilities,

     where liabilities are the individual liability sub-components in the Flow of Funds;

   · FDI comes from BEA




                                              60
C   Appendix Tables

                    Table 17: Longer Term Rates: Private Firms

                                         Quantity                Prices
                                   Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(1 + i) Log(1 + i)
    Firm Leverage                    0.0114                -0.0019
                                    (0.0198)               (0.0008)
    Firm Leverage × MP Surpriseq   -0.6175                -0.0416
                                    (0.0632)               (0.0030)
    Bank Leverage                              0.3024                  -0.0038
                                               (0.1056)               (0.0025)
    Bank Leverage × MP Surpriseq               0.4438                 0.0169
                                               (0.2075)               (0.0049)
    Observations                    1935430    337330     1944550     340486
    Adjusted R2                      0.940      0.930      0.774       0.860
    Bank × Firm F.E.                  Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
    Bank × Time F.E.                  Yes        No         Yes         No
    Firm × Time F.E.                  No         Yes        No          Yes




                                       61
                            Table 18: Longer Term Rates: Public Firms

                                                          Quantity                       Prices
                                                  Log(Loan) Log(Loan) Log(1 + i) Log(1 + i)
       Firm Leverage                                0.0831                        -0.0007
                                                   (0.0571)                      (0.0013)
       Firm Leverage × MP Surpriseq                0.19835                        -0.0108
                                                   (0.2792)                      (0.8099)
       Bank Leverage                                               0.3776                    -0.0102
                                                                   (0.1048)                   (0.0019)
       Bank Leverage × MP Surpriseq                                 0.0897                    0.0092
                                                                   (0.1929)                   (0.0027)
       Observations                                 263915         296120         265674         298156
       Adjusted R2                                   0.839          0.864          0.674          0.820
       Bank × Firm F.E.                               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
       Bank × Time F.E.                               Yes            No             Yes            No
       Firm × Time F.E.                               No             Yes            No             Yes




                         Table 19: Leverage, NPL, and Default Probabilities

                                                                   Sample
                                    All Firms                  Private Firms                 Public Firms
Firm Leverageq-1         0.0448                 0.0496   0.0412               0.0367    0.1044    0.1266
                          (0.0028)          (0.0074) (0.0027)          (0.0063) (0.0214)          (0.0327)
Non-Performing Loanq-1             0.0181 0.0175              0.0525 0.0519               0.0002 -0.0007
                                   (0.0049) (0.0048)          (0.0115) (0.0114)          (0.0038) (0.0038)
Observations              1656049    535836     535836   1454694    415830     415830   201355    120006    120006
Adjusted R2                0.601      0.810      0.811    0.601      0.822      0.822    0.576     0.663     0.673
Firm F.E.                   Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes
Time F.E.                   Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes        Yes        Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes




                                                         62
