                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHAT TRIGGERS STOCK MARKET JUMPS?

                                      Scott R. Baker
                                      Nicholas Bloom
                                      Steven J. Davis
                                     Marco C. Sammon

                                     Working Paper 28687
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28687


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We gratefully acknowledge the National Science Foundation (SES 20180940), the Sloan
Foundation, and Chicago Booth for financial support. We thank Tasaneeya Viratyosin and Jana
Obradovic for extensive research support and our team of newspaper coders: Sophie Wang,
Alexandra Lee, Naoko Takeda, Abdulla Al-Kuwari, Lucy Duan, Maranna Yoder, TJ Ram, Riley
Burton, May Hliang, Jimmy Apffel, Zach Argo, Alex Liang, Kenar Vyas, Meera Desai, Tyler
Staggs, Kyle Kost, Ethan Bernheim, Florentin Zander, Alexandra Farmer, Jason Jiang, Robin
Gong, Lindsay Roston, Federico Clerici, AJ Qian, Melina Kompella, Heejin Hahn, Devon Shiff,
Edina Lee, Sara Holston, Andrea Clerici, Kristina Kolpkova, Alex Zafran, Nikhil Bhatia, Gabe
Alon, Garrett Matsuda, Tammy Qiu, Jack Jaffe, Eddie Dinh, Adam Jorring, and Fernanda
Kramer. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, and Marco C. Sammon. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Triggers Stock Market Jumps?
Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, and Marco C. Sammon
NBER Working Paper No. 28687
April 2021
JEL No. E44,E58,E62,G12,G17

                                          ABSTRACT

We examine next-day newspaper accounts of large daily jumps in 16 national stock markets to
assess their proximate cause, clarity as to cause, and the geographic source of the market-moving
news. Our sample of 6,200 market jumps yields several findings. First, policy news ­ mainly
associated with monetary policy and government spending ­ triggers a greater share of upward
than downward jumps in all countries. Second, the policy share of upward jumps is inversely
related to stock market performance in the preceding three months. This pattern strengthens in the
postwar period. Third, market volatility is much lower after jumps triggered by monetary policy
news than after other jumps, unconditionally and conditional on past volatility and other controls.
Fourth, greater clarity as to jump reason also foreshadows lower volatility. Clarity in this sense
has trended upwards over the past century. Finally, and excluding U.S. jumps, leading
newspapers attribute one-third of jumps in their own national stock markets to developments that
originate in or relate to the United States. The U.S. role in this regard dwarfs that of Europe and
China.

Scott R. Baker                                   Steven J. Davis
Kellogg School of Management                     Booth School of Business
Northwestern University                          The University of Chicago
2211 Campus Drive                                5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Evanston, IL 60208                               Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                         and NBER
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu                 Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu

Nicholas Bloom                                   Marco C. Sammon
Stanford University                              Department of Financce
Department of Economics                          Kellog School
579 Serra Mall                                   Northwestern University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                          2001 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                         mcsammon@gmail.com
nbloom@stanford.edu
1. Introduction
       What drives big moves in national stock markets? The benchmark view in economics and
finance holds that stock price changes reflect rational responses to news about discount rates and
corporate earnings. Under this view, we expect big daily moves to be accompanied by readily
identifiable developments that affect discount rates and anticipated profitability. Moreover,
contemporaneous news accounts should contain information about the proximate drivers of these
moves. Of course, stock price behavior may not conform to the benchmark view. Keynes (1936), for
example, famously argued that investors price stocks based not on their opinions about fundamental
values but on their opinions about what others think about stock values. Even when speculative or
irrational forces are in play, however, we expect contemporaneous news accounts to discuss the
(perceived) drivers of big market moves. Thus, we turn to newspapers to distill information about
what triggers big moves in national stock markets.
       Specifically, we examine next-day newspaper accounts of big daily moves ("jumps") since
1900 in the United States, since 1930 in the United Kingdom, and since the 1980s in 14 other national
markets. A threshold of 2.5 percent, up or down, for the U.S. stock market yields 1,150 jumps from
1900 to 2020. These jumps account for only 3.5 percent of trading days but nearly 20 percent of total
daily variation (sum of absolute returns) and half of daily quadratic variation (sum of squared
returns). Our jump thresholds for other countries range from 2 to 4 percent, with larger thresholds
for markets with greater volatility. All told, we examine 6,200 daily stock market jumps across 16
national markets plus another 450 jumps in U.S. bond markets from 1970 to 2020.
       Jumps of the size we consider typically attract coverage in leading national newspapers. We
locate and read next-day articles about each jump to assess its proximate cause(s), clarity as to cause,
and the geographic source of the market-moving news. Our objective is to accurately characterize
and code the journalist's explanation and interpretation of the jump. Trained human readers classify
the proximate reason for each jump into 17 categories, one of which is "Unknown & No
Explanation." Readers also code the confidence with which the journalist advances an explanation
for the jump and the ease or difficulty of coding the article. For the United States, we examine next-
day articles in the Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Washington Post, Chicago Tribune, Los
Angeles Times and other papers. We deploy multiple readers to each paper for each jump so as to




                                                                                                      1
obtain many "reads" per jump.1 To quantify clarity about the reason for each jump, we combine our
data on journalist confidence, ease of coding, pairwise agreement across reads, and whether the
journalist advances an explanation for the jump.
        Previous studies have also examined news reports to evaluate the drivers of stock market
moves. Classic studies by Niederhoffer (1971) and Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989) examined
major jumps to assess whether they could be explained by identifiable news events, reaching mixed
conclusions. Our study advances on earlier work in several respects: scale, encompassing more than
6,000 jumps; scope, spanning 16 national markets and more than 90 years for the U.S. and U.K.
markets; detail as to jump reason and geographic origin of market-moving news; and the relationship
of jump reason and jump clarity to future market volatility. We also develop a novel approach to
quantifying clarity about the forces that drive stock market jumps.
        For journalists observing the market in real time, attribution to a clear causal trigger is easy
for many jumps and hard for others. To illustrate this point, Figure 1 plots intraday market values at
1-minute intervals on four U.S. jump days. The top panels exhibit large, abrupt intraday moves
associated with important pieces of news. In the top left, the market jumped over 3% after the Fed
announced a surprise interest rate cut. In the top right, the market plunged 2.5% at the open after an
unexpectedly bad employment report. In contrast, the lower panels illustrate two instances that
involve large intraday and full-day moves without a clear cause, and for which journalists advanced
no explanation. In our U.S. sample, 17 percent of jumps occur for no apparent reason, according to
next-day journalistic accounts.
        Leveraging our jump-day characterizations, we develop several novel findings. First, upward
jumps attributed to policy-related news are more common than downward policy-driven jumps. This
pattern holds in every country, and it has strengthened since 1980 in the United States and the United
Kingdom, the two countries with pre-1980 coverage. From 1980 to 2020, upward policy jumps are
twice as common as downward policy jumps in the United States. Over the same period, downward
jumps attributed to non-policy factors are nearly twice as common as upward non-policy jumps. To
put the point another way, policy-related developments trigger 43 percent of upward U.S. jumps
since 1980 but only 20 percent of the downward jumps.


1
  Given the scale of our data collection efforts, we deploy more than 45 trained human readers comprised of
the authors, graduate students, and undergraduate students. Baker et al. (2021) set forth our coding guide and
reference manual. Our codings for the Wall Street Journal are at https://stockmarketjumps.com/research/.


                                                                                                            2
       Drilling down, we find that news about monetary policy and government spending is
responsible for this pattern. One potential explanation is that positive (negative) monetary policy
and government spending surprises are more (less) likely in the wake of bad economic news. Indeed,
the share of upward jumps attributed to policy news rises as stock market performance worsens over
the preceding three months. And, the share of downward jumps attributed to policy falls as recent
stock market performance worsens. This pattern of countercyclicality in jump-inducing policy
surprises is much stronger after World War II than before.
       A skeptic might interpret these patterns as artifacts of how journalists perceive the world and
cover the news. Perhaps journalists are prone to credit government policy for upward jumps and to
overlook policy mistakes that trigger downward jumps, and perhaps this type of bias manifests itself
more powerfully after a period of falling stock prices. While we cannot rule out the possibility of
biased coverage, we validate our newspaper-based classifications with reference to FOMC
announcements, macroeconomic statistical releases, national election dates, and the industry
distribution of jump-day returns. All of our validation exercises support the conclusion that our
newspaper-based classifications are informative about the forces that trigger stock market jumps. In
addition, our jump classifications have predictive value for future market volatility.
       That brings us to our second set of findings: Jumps attributed to monetary policy
developments foreshadow considerably less volatility than other jumps. This result holds
unconditionally and conditional on controls for the size and direction of jump-day returns and market
volatility over the day, week, and month preceding the jump. For example, our conditional forecast
of stock market volatility over the next two weeks is two percentage points lower after a jump
attributed to Monetary Policy than after other jumps. This gap is three-quarters as large as the time-
series standard deviation of average two-week volatility in our sample. We note that monetary policy
surprises trigger about 10 percent of all postwar U.S. jumps since 1900 and a similar share of jumps
across the other 15 national markets covered by our study.
       Our third set of findings pertains to clarity about the reasons for stock market jumps. Our
clarity measure fluctuates over time in a positively autocorrelated manner, and it shows a clear
upward trend. Over the past 90 years, the share of jumps due to unknown forces fell from about 35
percent to 10 percent in both the United States and the United Kingdom. The other components of
our clarity index ­ journalist confidence, pairwise agreement rates, ease of coding ­ tell a similar
story. As we discuss, there are sound reasons to think the trend toward greater clarity about stock



                                                                                                    3
market behavior reflects a combination of more transparency about corporate performance, better
statistical information about the economy, falling communication costs, and the professionalization
of news reporting.
       We also provide evidence that clarity matters for stock market volatility. In particular, greater
clarity about the reasons for a jump today foreshadows lower market volatility over the next week.
This result holds in an unconditional sense and conditional on the size and direction of the current
jump and market volatility over the preceding day, week and month. Since clarity itself is
autocorrelated, this result says that clarity partly accounts for the well-known positive serial
correlation of stock market volatility.
       Finally, we find that news about U.S. economic and policy developments exerts an
extraordinary influence on equity markets around the world. Excluding the United States and
focusing on the other 15 national markets covered by our study, news about U.S.-related
developments triggers 32 percent of all equity market jumps from 1980 to 2020 (38 percent when
dropping jumps due to unknown forces and those for which we find no next-day article.) The U.S.
role in this regard dwarfs that of Europe as a whole, even though Europe accounts for a greater share
of global output. News about economic and policy developments related to European countries and
supranational European institutions seldom drives jumps in non-European the countries, with the
clear sustained exception of the European sovereign debt crises in the early 2010s. China-related
news plays almost no role as a source of jumps in other countries before the mid 1990s, but China-
related news has since emerged as an important source of market jumps in other countries.
       Our work builds on and contributes to several literatures. There is a wide-ranging literature
on how media coverage affects financial markets ­ contributions include Tetlock (2007), Engelberg
and Parsons (2011), and Carlin et al. (2014). Rather than the effects of media coverage on financial
markets, we focus on how newspapers interpret stock market jumps. In this respect, we are closer to
the classic studies of Niederhoffer (1979), Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989) and to more recent
work by Manela and Moriera (2017) and Baker et al. (2019), who use newspapers to parse the
sources of overall stock market volatility. Relative to these works, we show that different types of
news events differ in their implications for future volatility, that the informativeness and clarity of
newspaper accounts has improved over time, that clarity matters for future market volatility, and
that U.S.-related news plays an outsized role in equity markets around the world.




                                                                                                      4
       Another literature considers how the clarity of financial writing affects stock returns ­
prominent works include Li (2008) and Shiller (2017). We contribute to this literature by developing
a new approach to measuring clarity about the forces that drive market jumps. Our method is simple
and transparent, which facilitates its application to other countries, time periods, and asset markets.
We also show that low-clarity jumps are associated with greater post-jump volatility. While we do
not pursue it here, our measurement approach opens the door to quantitative studies of how corporate
disclosure rules and the accuracy, depth, and timeliness of economic statistics affect clarity about
national stock market behavior and thereby influence overall market volatility.
       An enormous literature in asset pricing investigates whether, and to what extent, stock market
moves can be attributed to news about future cash flows and discount rates. In addition to already-
mentioned studies, leading contributions include Shiller (1981) for market-level moves and Roll
(1988) for firm-level changes. Many papers study the impact of news releases on market outcomes.
Examples include Birz and Lott (2011), Boudoukh et al. (2013), Goldberg and Grisse (2013),
Fernandez-Perez et al. (2017), and Fisher et al. (2017)). We proceed in the other direction, starting
from large market moves and asking what triggers them according to newspaper accounts.
       Finally, much has been written about the outsized role of the U.S. Dollar and Fed monetary
policy in the international monetary and financial system. Recent contributions include Obstfeld
(2015), Boz et al. (2017), Gopinath and Stein (2018), and Maggiori et al. (2019). These works
highlight the role of the U.S. as a global supplier of safe, liquid debt securities, the Dollar's favored
status in foreign exchange reserves, the Dollar's prevalence as the currency of denomination in trade
invoicing, offshore bank lending and portfolio holdings, and the spillover effects of U.S. monetary
policy. We contribute to this literature by showing that news about U.S.-related economic and policy
developments plays a uniquely large role as a source of stock market jumps in countries around the
world. In this respect, our results reinforce and deepen the results in Ehrmann et al. (2011), who find
that spillovers from U.S. bond, equity and money markets to European financial markets are much
larger than the other way around.
       Section 2 explains how we use newspapers to characterize stock market jumps, describes our
jump classification scheme, and undertakes several investigations to assess the quality of our
classifications. Section 3 presents several of our main findings about stock market jumps and their
relationship to post-jump volatility. Section 4 explains how we measure clarity about the forces that
drive particular stock market jumps, documents several empirical properties of our clarity measure,



                                                                                                       5
 and provides evidence that greater clarity foreshadows lower stock market volatility. Section 5
 applies natural language processing and machine-learning tools to the classification of stock market
 jumps. The resulting algorithmic approach yields classifications of lower quality and less granularity
 than the ones produced by our structured human readings. We explain why human readings work
 better for our classification problem, and we identify circumstances in which the algorithmic
 approach gets closer to the human-reading approach. Section 6 concludes.


2. Data Creation Process
        Before describing our data creation process in detail, we return to the examples in Figure 1.
The top left panel of Figure 2 displays an excerpt from an article about the upward jump on 18 April
2001. We classify the reason for this jump as "Monetary Policy and Central Banking," because the
article title and first sentence attribute the jump to a "surprise rate cut" by the Federal Reserve. Since
the Fed is a U.S. policy institution, the geographic source is the United States. Journalist confidence
is "high," because the article forcefully and unambiguously attributes the jump to the Fed's decision.
Ease of coding is "easy," because the article is easy to comprehend, the jump reason is easy to discern,
and the mapping to our classification of jumps by reason is also easy. The lower right panel of Figure
2 displays an excerpt from an article about the downward jump on 2 July 2009. This article makes
clear in the title and first sentence that an "unexpectedly gloomy jobs report" triggered the downward
jump, which we classify under "Macroeconomic News & Outlook." The United States is the
geographic origin, journalist confidence is "high," and coding is "easy."
        Figure 3 displays excerpts from two articles about a 5 percent upward jump on 26 December
 2018. We classify the jump reason as "Unknown" for the Wall Street Journal article, because the
 reporter writes, "investors and traders were left scratching their heads to explain the wild swings."
 This passage appears in the third paragraph, reflecting a common practice of placing less-assured
 explanations further down the article. Since the article says the jump is due to unknown forces, we
 leave the geographic origin blank. For the New York Times article, we classify the primary jump
 reason as "Macroeconomic News & Outlook" based on "early reports of a strong holiday-shopping
 season helped lift the S&P 500 by nearly 5 percent." Other papers offer various explanations for
 this jump. For example, the Los Angeles Times offers three explanations over nine paragraphs,
 including "a late report that a U.S. government delegation will travel to China." Overall, the jump
 on 26 December 2018 is a low-clarity event in that some papers explicitly attribute it to unknown



                                                                                                        6
forces, and others offer a variety of reasons. Journalists present their explanations for this jump with
less assurance and more qualifications. Section 4 below explains how we integrate these aspects of
newspaper coverage to quantify clarity about the reason for this jump and others.


2.1 U.S. Stock Market Jumps
        To assemble our sample of U.S. jumps, we first identify all days on which the CRSP S&P
500 Value-Weighted Index rose or fell by at least 2.5 percent (close to close). Before 1926, we use
the Global Financial Data (GFD) extension of the Dow Jones index. Next, for each jump and
newspaper,2 we search for next-day articles about the jump, which often post online the prior evening
in the internet era. Coders search for articles that mention phrases like `stock market,' `wall street,'
`S&P,' or `Dow Jones' in the title, synopsis, or index of descriptive terms. They avoid summaries,
abstracts, digests, and the like (articles <300 words). If the search query yields multiple articles for
a particular jump and paper, the coder selects the first one unless it proves uninformative. This
process yields at least one article for all U.S. jumps since 1926 and almost all before 1926.
        Having selected an article, the coder reviews it carefully and ­ based on the journalist's
characterization ­ classifies the jump reason into one or more of the following categories (ordered
by frequency of U.S. jumps): Macroeconomic News & Outlook, Unknown & No Explanation,
Corporate Earnings & Outlook, Sovereign Military & Security Actions, Monetary Policy & Central
Banking, Government Spending, Commodities, Regulation, Other Non-Policy reasons, Elections &
Political Transitions, Other Policy reasons, Foreign Stock Markets, Taxes, Exchange Rate Policy &
Capital Controls, International Trade Policy, Foreign Stock Markets, and Terrorist Attacks and Non-
State Violence. We also have a category for No Article Found. The coding guide in Baker et al.
(2021) defines each category, includes many examples, explains how to handle jumps attributed to
multiple causes, and discusses boundary cases and other challenging cases.
        As an example, here is what the coding guide says about how to distinguish `Monetary Policy
& Central Banking' from `Macroeconomic News & Outlook':
        Some news articles that discuss market reactions to macro developments also discuss
        the Fed's normal response to the macro development. Generally, we code an article
        as Macro News & Outlook if it attributes the market move to news about the macro
        economy. We code it as Monetary Policy & Central Banking if the article attributes

2
 For certain exercises, we limit our analysis to results from the Wall Street Journal. This newspaper has the
most thorough coverage of financial news and has the most complete archive back to 1900.


                                                                                                           7
       the market move to (a) shifts in how the Fed responds to a given macro development
       or (b) news about unexpected consequences of Fed actions. Take the following two
       examples:
       1. Macroeconomic News & Outlook example: The market moves because it
           anticipates or speculates (or sees) that the Fed will respond in its usual manner to
           news about the macro economy. That is, the market anticipates or speculates that
           the Fed will respond to macro developments according to a Taylor Rule or other
           well-defined, well-understood description of the Fed's interest-rate setting
           behavior.
       2. Monetary Policy & Central Banking example: The market moves because of a
           surprise change in the policy interest rate -- i.e., a surprise conditional on the state
           of the macro economy. From a Taylor Rule perspective, we can think of this
           change as a new value for the innovation term in the Taylor rule.
       We classify the primary reason for each jump into one of our categories and, when warranted
by the article's discussion, a secondary reason as well. If an article mentions multiple reasons for a
given jump but does not clearly identify the most important one, we treat the order of appearance in
the article as a tie breaker. Coders can also designate additional reasons beyond the primary and
secondary reasons. Table 1 reports the frequency distribution of primary jump reasons for the United
States, the United Kingdom and the "ROTW" (countries other than the United States). We also
report the frequency distribution for jumps in the U.S. Treasury bond market. Relative to equity
markets, bond market jumps are much more dominated by Macro News & Outlook and news about
Monetary Policy & Central Banking.
       We also record the geographic source(s) of each jump's primary reason, again based on the
explanation offered by the journalist. For instance, we code the United States as the geographic
source for a U.S. jump attributed to a Fed policy announcement, while we code the United Kingdom
as the geographic source for a U.S. jump attributed to Britain's decision to exit the gold standard.
The geographic source can consist of multiple countries or a large region of the world for various
reasons that include the outbreak of war between two or more countries, economic developments
that simultaneously affect several countries, and policy decisions taken by supranational institutions
like the European Central Bank.
       We record four additional pieces of information for each article: First, `Journalist
Confidence' is the assurance or certitude with which the article advances an explanation for the
jump, which we score on a three-point scale of 1 for low confidence, 2 for medium confidence, and
3 for high confidence. For example, if an article asserts without qualification that bad news about


                                                                                                      8
corporate earnings drove a downward jump, Journalist Confidence is high. Second, `Ease of Coding'
reflects the ease or difficulty of discerning and classifying the primary jump reason, also scored on
a three-point scale. While Ease of Coding correlates with Journalist Confidence, they are distinct
concepts. For example, a journalist may confidently assert an explanation that involves multiple
causes that touch on several of our categories. In this case, the primary jump reason may be hard to
discern and classify, even though Journalist Confidence is high.3 Third and fourth, the coder
paraphrases the journalist's explanation records the key passage that is the basis for the classification
of the primary jump reason.4 For example, when the primary jump reason is Taxes, the key passage
might say, "The completion of a tax deal between the White House and Congress sent stocks soaring
Wednesday."5
        For the United States, we conducted a thorough cross-validation with an average of 9.1
coders across multiple newspapers for each day.6 Each coder followed the coding procedure outlined
above, as detailed in "Coding Large Daily Financial Market Moves - Data Construction Guide".
After all articles were read, we re-examined days where coders disagreed about the primary and
secondary cause of the market movement. This happened more often on days that were also coded
as having a lower ease of coding and less confidence by the article's author regarding the driver of
the market movement.
        To resolve each disagreement, coders re-read the original article and referred to the Data
Construction Guide to make sure that the guidelines were being carefully followed. Most
disagreements were easily resolved as a coder may have misread an article or misapplied the
guidelines from the Data Construction Guide. For articles which still produce disagreement,
additional articles in the same newspaper were obtained through the same method as outlined above
to seek clarity regarding the primary cause. After these steps were taken, coders still sometimes
disagreed. For such days, coders could `agree to disagree' regarding the causes of the stock move
and our final dataset reflects such persistent disagreement.

3
  The guide contains many examples that illustrate how to score Journalist Confidence and Ease of Coding.
4
  The third and fourth pieces of recorded information are especially useful for ex post evaluation and
refinement of our classification of jump reasons. For example, long after we began our work to classify stock
market jumps, we used these fields in Baker et al. (2020) to quickly search for U.S. jumps triggered by
pandemics and infectious diseases from 1900 to 2020.
5
  The third and fourth fields are especially useful for ex post refinements of our jump classifications. For
example, long after we began this project, we decided to distinguish
6
  Appendix Figure A9 summarizes the number of newspapers consulted and codings per jump. Both quantities
increase after 1980 when are able to add the US edition of the Financial Times and the Houston Chronicle.


                                                                                                           9
          Finally, before coders started their first coding assignments, they carefully read the coding
guide, underwent a half-day training session and then coded 50 WSJ training articles over the next
three days. These WSJ training articles had already been coded by us, enabling us to ensure our
coders were accurately coding (and to address any issues) before they coded the research sample.


2.2 Foreign Stock Jumps Data
          For the US we choose a threshold of a 2.5% daily change in the stock market to define our
large jump days to code. This threshold, which covers about 3.5% of trading days from 1900-2020,
was chosen to be large enough to ensure the next day newspaper always contained articles discussing
the prior days jump. When we extended to other countries, we usually maintained a 2.5% daily return
threshold to classify stock market moves as a significant event. For a subset of countries with more
volatile stock-markets we increased the threshold, choosing it to cover approximately 2-3% of
trading days.7
          Most foreign countries in our sample only utilized a single paper and about 30-40 years of
data. For the UK, however, we conducted a more extensive analysis, with coders searching the
Financial Times, The Times of London, The Telegraph and The Guardian the day after any move in
the UK stock market larger than 2.5% back to 1930. For the UK, our definition of the aggregate
market changed over time: (1) From 1930-1983 we use GFD's "UK Industrials" index (2) From
1984-1993 we use the percent change in the FTSE 100 index level (3) From 1994-2020 we use the
FTSE 100 total return index. Coders searched for the following terms: `FTSE', `London stock
exchange', `stock market', `equity market', `share prices'. `FTSE' was the most useful keyword in
recent years. We mostly use articles longer than 300 words, but for FT articles early in the sample
period, shorter articles were more common.
          Outside the US and UK coders searched the archive of the newspaper of record for a given
country (e.g. the Globe and Mail for Canada). This may take the form of English-language or non-
English-language newspaper (e.g. Handelsblatt in Germany or South China Morning Post in Hong
Kong). If a non-English-language paper was used, a native speaker of that language was used as a
coder. As with the coders for the United States, foreign country coders searched for articles on the
day following each jump that mention the stock index in question or the stock market more generally.
If the date is a Friday or Saturday, Monday's paper would be searched, as well.

7
    Appendix Table A1 lays out the threshold, start date, and primary newspaper utilized for each country.


                                                                                                             10
2.3 Validation of Jump Classifications
       A potential concern with our data is the reliability and consistency of our classifications by
jump reason. We test for consistency across coders who are investigating a given day's large stock
movement by (a) reading articles in the same newspapers and (b) reading articles in different
newspapers. Table 2 examines various dimensions of cross-coder `agreement' in categorization.
First, we examine the average annual pairwise agreement in primary categorization across all pairs
of coders (both within/across newspapers). We find that in the pre-World War II sample, 75% of
coders agree on the policy vs. non-policy split, and 43% agree on the 17 granular categories. While
this may not seem high, if we randomly assign coders to categories from the unconditional
distribution in Table 1, agreement would be only 13%. Based on simulation results, our human
coders' agreement rate is statistically significantly higher than agreement from this random
categorization. Further, agreement increased over time, consistent with an increase in the quality of
financial journalism. In the post-World War II sample, 80% of coders agree on the policy vs. non-
policy split, and there is a 54% agreement rate on the granular categories.
        Agreement also increases when considering only pairs of coders reading the same
newspaper.8 This increase is likely driven by the fact that, for a fraction of the days we study, the
cause is ambiguous, leading to be significant differences in how different reporters write about the
previous day's market movements. Suggestive evidence for this is that days in which the articles
have lower reported levels of journalist `confidence' also have lower rates of cross newspaper coder
agreement. For example, an increase in average reporter confidence of 1 point (on a three-point
scale) increases the rate of coder agreement by almost 40%. An increase in the reported ease of
coding has an even larger magnitude.
        Among papers, agreement is highest for coders of the Wall Street Journal, which we feel has
the highest quality financial reporting of all newspapers in our sample. For the WSJ, there is an
agreement rate on the policy vs. non-policy split of over 90%, and an agreement rate on the granular
categories of almost 80%.
        For a subset of categories, we expect that regular information releases drive large stock
movements and can use this to test our coding. For instance, we would expect days to be categorized


8
  The cause can disagree between coders within the same paper if the paper has more than one article on the
jump, which may happen in leading financial newspapers (e.g. the Wall Street Journal or Financial Times)
on days after major stock-market jumps.


                                                                                                        11
as `Elections & Political Transitions' more often following elections than for the average jump day.
Similarly, we would expect a relationship between Federal Reserve announcements and `Monetary
Policy & Central Banking' categorizations and high-profile macroeconomic releases (e.g.
unemployment numbers and inflation reports) and `Macroeconomic News & Outlook'
categorizations.
        In Table 3, we demonstrate that these relationships hold statistically, despite coders not
directly observing the dates of information releases (i.e. they read only the newspaper article in
question and did not separately look up whether the Federal Reserve had made a statement during
the previous day). In all cases, the expected categorization is substantially more likely to occur
following the public information release. In Appendix A, we extend this validation by examining
relative industry returns on jump days, finding results that again support the view that our
newspaper-based explanations are informative.
        Finally, we compare our classifications of the 50 largest daily U.S. stock market jumps from
1946 to 1987 to those of Cutler, Poterba and Summers (1988), who attribute a "cause" to each one
based on New York Times coverage. For each of these 50 jumps, we map their "cause" to a primary
and, sometimes, secondary category, using our classification scheme. As reported in Appendix Table
A3, the resulting CPS primary reason matches our primary reason in 62 percent of cases ­ 75 percent,
when we focus on the subset of 32 jumps with positive values of our clarity measure. For these 32
jumps, there is at least partial overlap between their reasons and ours in 81 percent of cases.


3. Characterizing Stock Market Jumps
3.1 Stock Market Jumps Over Time
        Using our human coders, we find a significant amount of variation in the categorical drivers
of jumps during the past 120 years. Figure 4 displays the evolution of large daily stock market jumps
over time in the United States from 1900 to 2020. Also noted are the fraction of daily jumps that are
driven by government policy rather than non-policy causes like news about the economy or corporate
earnings, as categorized by coders reading the Wall Street Journal. For a relatively small fraction of
articles, the cause of the market's movement for a given day cannot be determined by coders reading
newspaper articles and a categorization of `unknown' is utilized (shaded black).9


9
  For 5 days early in the sample (all pre-1926), we cannot find an article in the Wall Street Journal related to
the previous day's large market movement. This may be due to poor newspaper reporting or could be possibly


                                                                                                             12
       In the figure, we see three notable epochs with high jump frequency: the first running from
1929 to the late 1930s, encompassing the Great Depression; the second during and after the Great
Recession from 2008-2012; and the third during the COVID-19 pandemic. While the years after the
Great Recession (2010-2019) saw only 5.8 jumps per year on average in the United States, there
were 36 jumps in 2020. In fact, the month from 24 February to 24 March 2020 includes 18 jumps
over 22 trading days, more than any other one-month period in our sample back to 1900. The Panic
of 1907, World War I, and the early 1990s are also periods of unusually high jump frequency.
Perhaps surprisingly, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War did not produce many large daily stock
market jumps in the stock market. During the post-war period, there are long periods with few daily
moves large enough to cross our jump threshold.
       Figure A10 mirrors Figure 4 using data for stock market jumps in the United Kingdom back
to 1930. Here, we find striking differences relative to the United States: The United Kingdom has
few jumps in the 1930s but a huge number in the mid 1970s around a severe recession and crisis.
The Great Recession and coronavirus pandemic also stand out as periods of high jump frequency.


3.2 Categorical Drivers of Stock Market Jumps
       Table 1 displays summary statistics regarding the distribution of the categorical causes of
these large stock market movements in the United States in the pre-war and post-war period, the UK
from 1930-2020 and from the 1980s onwards in 14 other national markets.10 This shows that not
only has the frequency of large stock market movements fluctuated substantially over time, but the
causes of these jumps have changed, as well. For instance, in the pre-1945 period in the United
States, agriculture made up a much larger portion of US GDP, so commodities drove a larger share
of big stock movements. World Wars I and II contributed to the large number of sovereign military
jumps. Finally, the New Deal was responsible for the high share of regulation jumps in the pre-war
period. In the postwar period, we see that Monetary Policy was relatively more important, which is
consistent with the start of regularly scheduled FOMC meetings in 1981.



driven by measurement error in daily market moves on the part of the DOW-extension pre-1926 when the
market was composed of many fewer stocks than today.
10
   Australia, Canada, China (mainland), China (Hong Kong), Germany, Greece, Ireland, Japan, New Zealand,
Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea and Spain. We have two sets of observations from China,
one based on the Hong Kong stock exchange (as covered by the South China Morning Post) and one based
on the Shanghai stock exchange (as covered by Shanghai Securities News and China Securities Journal).


                                                                                                       13
       We take away two important stylized facts from this table. First, policy news drives a large
portion of large daily stock market movements. Over 36% of US jumps are attributed to policy: more
than macroeconomic news (23%) and corporate earnings (11%) combined. Globally, 28.6% of
jumps are attributed to policy. Second, the distribution of jump causes in the US, the UK and the
Rest of the World (ROTW) is relatively similar ­ in both countries macro news is the largest driver,
with corporate earnings and monetary policy also playing a major role. In the ROTW foreign stock
markets are the third largest overall mover, reflecting in particular the role of US stock markets in
driving global market movements. Third, newspapers fail to advance any explanation for a sizable
share of jumps, sometimes explicitly stating that the reasons for the jump are uknown.
       The last column of Table 1 provides the categorical attribution for large jumps in US bond
markets. These jumps are defined as daily changes in the 10-year constant maturity rate Treasury
Bills of more than 15 basis points, although we read and code only a 25% random sample of bond
market jumps in 1980-1982. Yields were very high during this period, so there were a huge number
of 15 basis-point daily moves. In bonds, we find a significantly different distribution of categories
than with equity jumps. Jumps in bond markets are largely driven by macroeconomic news and news
about monetary policy, which collectively account for 72 percent of bond market jumps.


3.3 The Geography of News that Triggers National Stock Market Jumps
       Looking beyond our categorical classification of jump reasons, we now consider the
geography of the news that triggers national stock market jumps. Figure 5 plots timelines of the
geographic source of large stock market jumps in the US, showing the predominance of US-related
news for US jumps. Sixty-nine percent of US jumps reflect US-related developments, according to
next-day accounts in leading U.S. newspapers. The only periods in which the US share persistently
falls below 50% are during the First and Second World Wars (when news related to Europe and Asia
was especially important), and during the European debt crises in the early 2010s. We present an
analogous plot for the UK in Appendix Figure A11. Consistent with the growing global dominance
of US financial markets, the UK's share of UK-sourced jumps fell from 76% between the 1930s and
the 1960s to around 38% from 2010 onwards. We also see on the top right of Figure 5 that Europe's
role in US jumps appears to be falling, while Asia's has recently risen due to the growing influence
of China. In the "Other" category, the most common region is the Middle East due to the impact of
Gulf wars and OPEC oil shocks on US stock markets.



                                                                                                  14
       Figure 6 plots the share of jumps attributed to US-related and Europe-related news back in
Australia, Canada, China (HK), China (Shanghai), Japan, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Singapore,
South Africa, and South Korea. Remarkably, leading newspapers in these countries attribute, on
average, 35.3 percent of daily jumps in their own national stock markets to U.S.-related
developments. In contrast, they attribute only 5.5 percent of their jumps to Europe-related
developments, even though European countries as a whole account for a larger share of global output
than the United States. The outsized role of U.S.-related news as a source of daily stock market
jumps continues to hold when we include the European countries, as show in Figure A19.


3.4 Differences between Positive and Negative Stock Market Jumps
       Figure 7 reveals the striking fact that policy-driven stock market jumps are disproportionately
more likely to be associated with positive stock returns. In the US since 1900, and particularly since
1980, a higher share of positive jumps were due to policy categories than negative jumps. Figure 7
is a binned scatter plot of our policy variable against the daily stock market return. While the slope
is positive between 1900 and 1979, the slope becomes much steeper between 1980 and 2020. This
suggests that positive jumps are even more likely to be attributed to policy in recent years than in
the past. These findings ­ that policy jumps are more likely to be positive and that this relationship
is becoming steeper over time - also hold in the UK (see Figure A12) and for non-US, non-UK
countries in our sample (see Figure A13). These patterns are also true looking across jump sizes ­
since 1980 every size of jump from 2.5% to 3.0%, 3.0% to 4.0%, and above 4% shows a higher
share of positive policy jumps than negative jumps (Appendix Table A4).
       Examining the individual categories (Appendix Table A5) we see that monetary policy and
government spending jumps are the most likely to be positive. In contrast, sovereign military policy
tends to be associated with negative stock-market jumps. Since none of these major policy categories
has become significantly more positive over time, the rise in the positivity of policy is mostly driven
by a changing mix of policy categories. In particular, the two policy categories with the most
negative stock market responses ­ sovereign military action and regulation ­ decreased in frequency
substantially after 1980. And the two most positive major policy categories ­ monetary and




                                                                                                    15
government spending ­ have increased in frequency since 1980.11 So, policy has become
increasingly positive in the US since 1980 due to rising importance of monetary and fiscal policy
and the declining importance of military and regulatory policies as drivers of stock market jumps.
        This raises the question as to why monetary and spending shocks are so positively skewed.
One explanation is that large monetary and government spending surprises tend to be expansionary
in reaction to negative economic news. In particular, major monetary and spending policies are often
in response to negative macroeconomic events like the Global Financial Crisis of 2008/09 or the
COVID crisis of 2020.
        We present evidence for this in Figure 8. The x-axis represents the cumulative return in the
CRSP Value-Weighted index over the past quarter (i.e., the 66 trading days before each jump). For
the y-axis, we construct a `net' policy score, which is equal to the share of codings on a given day
attributed to policy categories if the jump is positive minus the share of codings attributed to policy
categories if the jump is negative. Here, the slope is negative and strongly statistically significant (t-
statistic over 4), providing evidence that policy tends to act countercyclically against the stock
market ­ positive policy jumps are more likely after a quarter of negative returns and negative policy
jumps after a quarter of positive returns.
        We refine this result in Table 4: in Columns 1-3, we run a regression of positive policy jumps
on cumulative returns over the past 66 trading days, and a set of Heterogeneous Autoregressive
(HAR) controls (i.e., sum of squared returns over the past day, week, month and quarter). The
coefficient on the past quarter returns is negative, but not statistically significant. When we split this
regression into two periods, however, it is clear that policy has become more countercyclical: in the
post-World War II period, the coefficient becomes negative and statistically significant. This implies
that after 1945, there were relatively more positive policy jumps after a series of negative stock
returns than in the pre-World War II period.
        This increased countercyclicality is also true for contractionary policy. In columns 4-6, we
run a regression of negative policy jumps on cumulative returns over the last 66 trading days. We
see that in the post-war period the coefficient on past stock market returns has become more positive.
This suggests that negative policy is more likely after a series of good returns now than it used to


11
  In Table A6, we examine policy jumps by category and by whether the jumps are positive or negative.
Notably, in every country in our sample, policy jumps tend to be more positive than negative and this is
weakly true for both the Government Spending and Monetary Policy categories.


                                                                                                       16
be. In Appendix Table A7, we show this pattern holds individual for both for monetary and fiscal
policy.
          One possible explanation for this result is that all jumps (policy and non-policy) have become
more countercyclical in nature. To investigate this in columns 7 and 8 we examine non-policy jumps
finding that positive non-policy jumps are more likely after past positive returns (the opposite of
positive policy jumps), and negative non-policy jumps have no relationship to past returns.12


3.5 Differences in Post-Jump Volatility by Jump Reason
          The distribution of perceived reasons for stock market jumps differs across countries and
varies over time, as we have shown. We now ask whether the contemporaneously perceived reason
for a given jump has predictive content for post-jump market volatility. We find that it does. This
result continues to hold when we condition on the size and direction of current-day market returns
and on market volatility in the days and weeks leading up to the current day.
          The main pattern in this regard is that jumps triggered by monetary policy news foreshadow
much less volatility than other jumps. To show this pattern, we run regressions of the form,
                    
               (
                    $
                        =  + / ×  1 3 + /| | × 6 3 + /         
                                                      8 3 + /( 8 3
                     
                           

                     + <= 8 > + ( ) + ( ) +   , 
                           (

where  is the one-day return on the CRSP value-weighted index, and the dependent variable is the
average realized volatility over n days after t.  equals the fraction of codings attributed
to Monetary Policy on day t, if t is a jump day, and zero otherwise. We define 
analogously for the collection of other jump reasons. We control for positive and negative returns
on day t (following Black 1976) and so-called "HAR" variables that let volatility persistence differ
by horizon (following Corsi 2009).
          Figure 9 plots the estimated g and h coefficients and their 95 percent confidence intervals for
 = 1,2, ... ,22 trading days after a jump day. As the figure shows, jumps triggered by monetary
policy foreshadow less volatility over the next month than other jumps. At  = 10, for example, the
conditional forecast of stock market volatility is about 0.75 standard deviations lower after a jump


12
  Note that in columns 7 and 8, we are excluding `unknown' from the non-policy categories (which is why
the coefficients are not -1 times the coefficient in the corresponding `policy' columns).


                                                                                                      17
attributed to Monetary Policy than after other jumps. In the appendix, we break out jumps attributed
to Macroeconomic News & Outlook (Figure A14), consider a more granular breakdown of other
jump reasons (Table A9), distinguish between positive and negative jumps (Figure A15), and split
the sample between recessions and expansions (Figure A16). In all cases, we find lower volatility
after jumps attributed to Monetary Policy than after other jumps. Thus, the pattern displayed in
Figure 9 is robust in several respects.
       A natural interpretation of this pattern is that market-moving news about monetary policy
often lessens or resolves uncertainty. For example, the outcome of an FOMC meeting may resolve
uncertainty about whether the Fed decides to ease or tighten monetary policy. In contrast, it appears
that other types of market-moving news are often associated with greater uncertainty. For example,
a bad labor market report may trigger a large downward jump in the stock market and raise near-
term uncertainty about the economic outlook.


4. Clarity of Stock Market Jumps
4.1 Measurement and Trends in Clarity
       Early on in our project we realized there was a wide variation in how clear the cause of some
jumps was compared to others. As shown in Figures 1 to 3 some jumps have very clear causes while
others are hard for financial journalists to explain. So, we expanded the human analysis of jumps to
measure not only the category of a jump, but also the clarity regarding the cause. We create four
proxies of clarity and combine these into an overall "Clarity Index":
  i.   Agreement Across Coders: Consider all possible coding pairs for a given jump. (For
       example, if we have codings by persons 1, 2 and 3, then there are three pairwise codings:
       (1,2), (1,3) and (2,3). For each pairwise coding, set a measure of agreement A_ij=1 if i and j
       agree on the coding, and 0 otherwise. Then compute overall mean pairwise agreement = Sum
       A_ij / N, where the sum is over all i and j for i not equal to j, and N is the number of possible
       pairwise codings on the data. We expect agreement across newspapers to be lower if the
       cause of the jump is less clear ­ each paper may have their own narrative.
 ii.   Ease of Coding: When reading the newspaper, each coder reports how easy/difficult it was
       for them to code the article as a particular cause. On days with a clearly defined cause, we
       expect both the ease of coding to be high. On other days, the journalist may not clearly list a




                                                                                                     18
          particular cause, or put forth a complex cause which coder might have trouble linking to a
          particular category. On each day, we measure the average ease of coding score.
 iii.     Journalist Confidence: When reading the newspaper, each coder reports how confident the
          journalist was about the cause of the jump. On days with a clear cause, we expect the
          journalist confidence to be high. On days driven by narratives, the journalist might list several
          possible explanations or say that the cause of the movement was uncertain. On each day, we
          measure the average confidence score.
 iv.      Share of Unknown Codings: For each coder j, set Un_j = 1 if the primary category code is
          Unknown, zero otherwise. Compute the mean value of Un_j over coders to obtain the
          Unknown Cause share for the jump. A higher unknown share is less likely tied to concrete
          news.
          Figure 10 plots these four measures over time, showing in all cases a rise in clarity over time
(the "share of unknowns" is a reverse clarity measure). We also combine these into a `clarity index'.
To do so, we normalize each of the four clarity components to have mean zero and standard deviation
one, add together these four normalized components, and finally re-normalize the resultant index to
have mean zero and standard deviation one. Figure 11 plots this overall clarity index, showing a rise
until about 1980 and then an approximately flat index thereafter. This upward trend is not unique to
the US, and is mirrored in the UK (see online Appendix Figures A17 and A18).
          One plausible reason for an upward drift in the clarity of newspaper articles about stock
market jumps are improvements in the quality, scope, and timeliness of statistical information about
the U.S. economy. A full account is beyond the scope of our paper, but it is instructive to review
developments over time in the Current Employment Statistics (CES) program as an example. Data
from the CES and Current Population Survey form the basis for the BLS Monthly Employment
Situation Report, a closely watched statistical release about U.S. labor markets that is well known to
move stock, bond and currency markets. See, for example, Flannery and Protopapadakis (2002) and
Andersen et al. (2007).
          The CES program began in 1915 with data from 200 large manufacturing firms.13 In its early
decades, the program lacked a formal sample design and retained a focus on the manufacturing
sector. The BLS began to apply formal sample design methods to the CES around 1950, following
a series of memos and testing efforts in the late 1940s. There were significant improvements in CES

13
     This paragraph draws on Johnson (2016), Kelter (2016) and Mullins (2016).


                                                                                                        19
sample design in 1964 and incremental improvements over the next 25 years. Annual CES
benchmarking to universe-level employment data began in 1982, and began moving to a probability-
based sample design in 1995, completing the process in 2003. Monthly sample sizes grew from
about 107,000 establishments in 1964 to about 620,000 business and government worksites in 2016.
       In addition, the growth of the stock market, both in dollar terms and as a fraction of US GDP,
has provided additional incentives for understanding and reporting on market-relevant events. For
both market participants as well as journalists who cover business and financial markets, greater
resources had been made available over time, enabling timelier and more accurate reporting.
       One notable contrast in clarity is seen between the two largest financial crises during our
sample period. The Great Depression features some of the lowest levels of clarity of jump cause in
our sample, while the Great Recession contains some of the highest levels of clarity. Despite both
periods possessing extremely high levels of financial market volatility, most of the largest
movements during the Great Recession were clearly attributable to a particular cause, while most of
the largest movements in the Great Depression lacked a clear attribution to any particular cause in
the next day's newspaper reports. Intriguingly, clarity also fell somewhat in 2016 under the Trump
administration.


4.2 Validating our Clarity Index
       As one validation of the concept of clarity we examine the relationship between the clarity
of individual jumps and the concentration of the daily returns within any 5-minute window. The idea
builds on Figure 1 that obvious drivers of stock market jumps tend to generate large moves in short
time windows.
       To do this we regress concentration - the largest movement of the S&P500 over any 15-
minute window divided by the total movement during the day ­ on our clarity index in Table 5. For
each day, we calculate the absolute returns in 15-minute intervals, with the first window being
9:30AM to 9:45AM and the final window 3:45PM ­ 4:00PM. We then divide the largest absolute
move by the sum of all the absolute moves to obtain our concentration measure, with 1 being the
highest value (the entire days move happened in one 15-minute window) and 1/26 the lowest value
(equally spaced movement across each 15-minute window).
       In column (1), without any controls, we see that concentration is highly significantly related
to clarity with a t-statistic over 4. Given the mean value of concentration of 0.150 and a standard



                                                                                                  20
deviation of 0.056, this result implies that a two-standard deviation shock to clarity is associated
with an increase in concentration of 0.0436, or a 0.78 standard deviation increase. In column (2) we
add a full set of controls for returns, absolute returns and prior volatility and find the results are
similar. In columns (3) to (6) we examine each individual component of the clarity index and find
the expected coefficient.
        Table 5 shows that days with a single sudden burst of trading in a single direction tend to be
the most `clear' (e.g. the top two days in Figure 1), while days that vacillate back and forth or drift
throughout the day tend to have lower clarity according to our approach (e.g. the lower two days in
Figure 1). Moreover, as we demonstrate in the following section, these differences in stock market
behavior are correlated with clarity not only on the day of a given large stock market jump, but are
persistently different for weeks after.


4.3 Jump Clarity and Volatility
        In Figure 12, we compare absolute returns around high and low clarity jumps, defined as
days with above/below median clarity for the particular time period studied. In the all-years sample,
we find that the mean absolute return is significantly higher both in a +/- 3-day and a +/- 22-day
window around low clarity jumps than high clarity jumps. There appears to be a significant forward
and backward relationship between lower clarity and higher stock-market volatility. That is, jumps
that are harder to explain are both proceeded by and followed after by significantly higher stock-
market volatility. This is also shown in Figure 13 where we see clarity itself is also persistent,
suggesting the markets experience bouts of lower and higher clarity, moving alongside periods of
lower and higher volatility.14 Indeed, this suggests that one reason for the persistence of volatility in
financial markets may be the persistence of clarity of the factors driving markets.
        Many high-clarity jump days are driven by news about government policies. Figure 14 plots
the distribution of clarity for selected policy categories against all non-policy categories, excluding
unknown and no article found. Clarity is significantly higher for jumps attributed to sovereign
military action (about 1 standard deviation of clarity), monetary policy and government spending
(about half a standard deviation of clarity) than all the non-policy categories. So, while many recent
studies investigate the role of policy in driving economic uncertainty (e.g., Baker et al. 2016), our


14
  Appendix Table A8 includes more controls to account for the time series trend in clarity, jump categories
and the time between jumps, showing the persistence of clarity is robust to including all these controls.


                                                                                                        21
results suggest that policy-driven jumps tend to involve greater clarity and induce less future
volatility than other jumps.
       In Table 6, we regress future stock market volatility on our clarity index. The first measure
of volatility we use is the average squared returns over the five days following the jump. We see a
highly significant result in column (1), the specification without any controls. A two standard
deviation drop in clarity is associated with an increase in volatility of 10, or a 0.625 standard
deviation increase. This suggests that after days in when the movement in the stock-market was hard
for journalists to explain there is greater subsequent stock-market volatility. One natural
interpretation is that lower clarity events are more difficult for the market to parse, leading to greater
future volatility. This is consistent with Carlin, Longstaff and Matoba (2014) who find that increases
in disagreement predict future realized volatility. Indeed, clarity and disagreement are likely related,
noting in particular our clarity measure is based in part of the extent of agreement within and across
newspapers. This result is robust to controlling for the size of the jump, in column (2), and adding
HAR controls in column (3).
       Our second measure of volatility is the average cross-sectional standard deviation of
individual stock returns over the five days following the jump. Specifically, this is the value-
weighted standard deviation of returns across all ordinary common shares in CRSP in a given day.
Consistent with the first three columns, cross-sectional standard deviation is lower after higher
clarity jumps. This suggests that higher clarity events tend to have a similar effect on all firms, while
there are more winners and losers after low clarity events. In unreported results, we find that future
aggregate volatility and cross-sectional standard deviation are negatively related to each of our
individual clarity index components as well.


5. Algorithmic Jump Classification
       Overall, we have found that assessing the causes and clarity of large stock market jumps can
yield insights into both long-run macroeconomic trends and future stock market volatility around
the world. However, given the major costs and time involved with running large-scale human
evaluations in order to accurately code thousands of individual daily stock market movements, we
are only able to analyze a small fraction of daily market movements in a small fraction of countries.
Thus, it is natural to attempt to approach the question using automated textual-analysis tools which
would allow for a much greater scale.



                                                                                                       22
5.1 Barriers to Algorithmic Jump Classification
        There are a number of reasons to be wary of an automated approach to jump day
classification, at least when starting with the blank slate of a database of newspapers and stock
market movements.
        For instance, using no other input, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (see Blei et al. (2003))
can separate newspaper articles into N distinct topics composed of different weights on different sets
of terms, but these may not be able to be mapped to categories that humans may find useful or
applicable to research. For instance, researchers may be interested in understanding how trade policy
drives stock market movements, but a computer may not isolate this category as a distinct factor
given the small number of large stock movements driven by trade policy.
        This problem is compounded when focusing on large stock market movements. Such a
restriction reduces sample sizes and makes any automated approach more prone to issues of
overfitting. In addition, the substantial divergence in frequency that each category appears can cause
issues with the loss-functions of many off-the-shelf techniques, pushing algorithms towards a
tendency of defaulting to the most common categories.15
        These issues are amplified by the fact that language employed by journalists and members
of the financial industry have changed significantly over time. The choice of words that describe a
large stock move caused by `Corporate Earnings' or `Trade & Exchange Rate Policy' vary widely
from 1910 to 2010. This is due both to changes in common terminology over time but also to the
fact that the institutional framework of business, government, and financial markets has changed
substantially.16 The composition of journal articles has also changed significantly over the past 120
years, with recent articles being more focused on a particular aspect of the market while earlier
newspapers often touched on all facets of both financial and industrial markets in a single article.



15
   One may attempt to gain granularity by increasing the number of dimensions to attempt to fit over (eg.
moving from single words to 2-grams or n-grams in order to separate `war' from `trade war' or `deficits' from
`trade deficits'), but this decreases the generalizability of the resultant classification system out-of-sample.
While the automated system may perform well when automating the bifurcation of stock moves into two
types of explanations, attempting to split the data into 10-20 categories that exhibit hugely different base rates
tend to produce substantial Type 1 and Type 2 errors.
16
   These changes span the creation of the Federal Reserve, the creation and end of countries, the end of the
gold standard, the rise and fall of industries, and the broad innovations in financial reporting requirements
and new trade agreements.


                                                                                                               23
        Automated categorization is also limited to the quality of the PDF files being converted to
text. Earlier years (e.g. pre-1940), in particular, suffer from poor image quality which results in less-
than-perfect translation into machine-readable text.


5.2 TF-IDF Categorization Using Human-Coded Training Sample
        Here we develop a first attempt at categorizing jump day articles in an automated fashion.
We work to `rank' the most likely categories for each day based on the raw text of the newspaper
articles that were used by our human coders utilizing a TF IDF approach.17 The full details of this
approach are laid out in the Appendix.
        For each day, this approach allows us to rank the probability of each category being the
correct category in an out-of-sample test. The category with the highest sum will be given rank 1,
second highest rank 2, etc. Across our entire sample, our average ranking of the true category is 2.5.
That is, on average, the category our human coders identify as the correct cause is often only ranked
as the second or third most likely category based on the algorithmic reading.
        As mentioned previously, one large concern has to do with the evolution of language and
journalistic practices over time. We split our sample into four periods, each containing one fourth of
the total jump days in the United States since 1900: 1900-1931, 1932-1939, 1940-2007 and 2008-
2020. We repeat our ranking classifier on each sub-sample using a leave-one-out methodology for
out-of-sample categorizations. While the oldest sub-sample tend to see an average ranking of
approximately 3, the most recent sub-sample has an average ranking of approximately 1.5 (relative
to a best-possible ranking of 1). This reflects the tendency for more recent articles to be written in a
clearer and more focused fashion, allowing for greater differentiation between articles in terms of
the cause for the day's stock move. This tendency mirrors the evolution of our other measures of
human-coded `clarity' over time, showing that automated classification reveals a similar increase.
        While this was only a cursory evaluation of text-to-data methods for evaluating news articles
we hope our set of almost 1,200 US and 4,000 Rest of World coded alongside the PDFs of the
underlying articles will provide a corpus of text to develop more sophisticated methods by other
researchers in future.



17
  Here, we restrict our analysis to the Wall Street Journal, for which we can access the raw text of each article
back to 1900.


                                                                                                              24
6. Conclusion
       We examine newspapers the day after major stock-market jumps to catalog the proximate
cause, clarity as to cause, and geographic source of the market-moving news since 1900 in the United
StatES, 1930 in the United Kingdom, and the 1980s in 14 other national markets. We find four main
results. First, policy causes a significantly higher share of positive than negative stock market jumps.
This result holds in all 16 national markets we cover, and it becomes stronger after World War II in
the United States and the United Kingdom. Monetary policy and government spending jumps are
the most strongly over-represented in positive jumps, suggesting major policy announcements are
usually in response to negative economic news. We also provide direct evidence that policy-induced
jumps have become more countercyclical over time ­ and that this effect is concentrated in jumps
attributed to monetary and fiscal policy.
       Second, jumps caused by non-policy events lead to higher future stock-volatility, while
jumps caused by policy events, monetary policy in particular, lead to lower volatility. This suggests
while monetary policy surprises lead to stock-market jumps, they may reduce future volatility. Third,
the clarity of the cause of stock market jumps rises substantially over the past 90 years in the United
States and the United Kingdom, because information sources have deepened and financial markets
have become more transparent. Greater clarity is associated with lower levels of post-jump volatility,
suggesting that trend increases in clarity have been a force for less market volatility.
       Finally, we find the United States exerts an extraordinary influence on national equity
markets around the world. From 1980 to 2020, 32 percent of all jumps in non-U.S. stock markets
were triggered by news emanating from or about the United States. This assessment reflects the
reportage in leading own-country newspapers about their national stock markets. The U.S. role in
this regard dwarfs that of Europe and China. Jumps in other countries attributed to China-related
developments were rare before the mid 1990s but have become much more frequent in recent years.
This aspect of our findings highlights another facet of the uniquely large role played by U.S.
economic and policy developments in the international monetary and financial system.




                                                                                                     25
                                         References
Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F.X., Vega, C., 2007. Real-time price discovery in global
       stock, bond and foreign exchange markets. Journal of International Economics 73, 251­
       277.
Baker, S.B., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Sammon, M., 2021. Coding large daily financial market
       moves: Data construction guide. URL: https://stockmarketjumps.com/files/newguide.pdf.
Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Kost, K., 2019. Policy News and Stock Market Volatility.
       NBER Working Paper No. w25720.
Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Kost, K., Sammon, M., Viratyosin, T., 2020. The
       unprecedented stock market reaction to COVID-19. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies
       10, 742­758.
Barro, R.J., 1990. The stock market and investment. The Review of Financial Studies 3, 115­131.
Birz, G., Lott, J.R., 2011. The effect of macroeconomic news on stock returns: New evidence from
       newspaper coverage. Journal of Banking and Finance 35, 2791­2800.
Black, F., 1976. Studies of stock market volatility changes, in: Proceedings of the American
       Statistical Association Business and Economic Statistics Section, pp. 177­181.
Blei, D.M., Ng, A.Y., Jordan, M.I., 2003. Latent Dirichlet allocation. The Journal of Machine
       Learning Research 3, 993­1022.
Bollerslev, T., 1986. Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. Journal of
       Econometrics 31, 307­327.
Bollerslev, T., Engle, R.F., Nelson, D.B., 1994. ARCH models. Handbook of Econometrics 4,
       2959­3038.
Boudoukh, J., Feldman, R., Kogan, S., Richardson, M., 2013. Which news moves stock prices? A
       textual analysis. NBER Working Paper No. w18725.
Boz, E., Gopinath, G., Plagborg-Møller, M., 2017. Global trade and the dollar. NBER Working
       Paper No. w23988.
Brogaard, J., Detzel, A., 2015. The asset-pricing implications of government economic policy
       uncertainty. Management Science 61, 3­18.
Campbell, J.Y., Lettau, M., Malkiel, B.G., Xu, Y., 2001. Have individual stocks become more
       volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk. The Journal of Finance 56, 1­43.



                                                                                                26
Carlin, B.I., Longstaff, F.A., Matoba, K., 2014. Disagreement and asset prices. Journal of
       Financial Economics 114, 226­238.
Corsi, F., 2009. A simple approximate long-memory model of realized volatility. Journal of
       Financial Econometrics 7, 174­196.
Croux, C., Reusens, P., 2013. Do stock prices contain predictive power for the future economic
       activity? A Granger causality analysis in the frequency domain. Journal of
       Macroeconomics 35, 93­103.
Cutler, D.M., Poterba, J.M., Summers, L.H., 1988. What moves stock prices? NBER Working
       Paper No. w2538.
Dougal, C., Engelberg, J., Garcia, D., Parsons, C.A., 2012. Journalists and the stock market. The
       Review of Financial Studies 25, 639­679.
Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., Rigobon, R., 2011. Stocks, bonds, money markets and exchange
       rates: measuring international financial transmission. Journal of Applied Econometrics 26,
       948­974.
Engle, R.F., 1982. Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of
       United Kingdom inflation. Econometrica 50, 987­1007.
Fama, E.F., 1981. Stock returns, real activity, inflation, and money. The American Economic
       Review 71, 545­565.
Fernandez-Perez, A., Frijns, B., Tourani-Rad, A., 2017. When no news is good news - The
       decrease in investor fear after the FOMC announcement. Journal of Empirical Finance 41,
       187­199.
Fischer, S., Merton, R.C., 1984. Macroeconomics and finance: The role of the stock market.
       NBER Working Paper No. w1291.
Fisher, A.J., Martineau, C., Sheng, J., 2017. Media attention, macroeconomic fundamentals, and
       the stock market. University of British Columbia Working Paper.
Flannery, M.J., Protopapadakis, A.A., 2002. Macroeconomic factors do influence aggregate stock
       returns. The Review of Financial Studies 15, 751­782.
Glosten, L.R., Jagannathan, R., Runkle, D.E., 1993. On the relation between the expected value
       and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks. The Journal of Finance 48, 1779­
       1801.




                                                                                                    27
Goldberg, L.S., Grisse, C., 2013. Time variation in asset price responses to macro announcements.
       NBER Working Paper No. 19523.
Gopinath, G., Stein, J.C., 2018. Banking, Trade, and the making of a Dominant Currency. NBER
       Working Paper No. w24485.
Guo, H., 2002. Stock market returns, volatility, and future output. Federal Reserve Bank of St.
       Louis Review. 84, 75­85.
Gürkaynak, R.S., Sack, B.P., Swanson, E.T., 2005. Do actions speak louder than words? The
       response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements, in: International Journal
       of Central Banking. volume 1.
Johnson, N., 2016. One hundred years of Current Employment Statistics data collection. Monthly
       Labor Review 139, 1.
Kelly, B., Pástor, L'., Veronesi, P., 2016. The price of political uncertainty: Theory and evidence
       from the option market. The Journal of Finance 71, 2417­2480.
Kelter, L.A., 2016. One hundred years of Current Employment Statistics­the history of CES
       sample design. Monthly Labor Review.
Keynes, J.M., 1936. The general theory of employment, interest, and money. Palgrave Macmillan,
       London.
Li, F., 2008. Annual report readability, current earnings, and earnings persistence. Journal of
       Accounting and Economics 45, 221­247.
Lucca, D.O., Moench, E., 2015. The pre-FOMC announcement drift. The Journal of Finance 70,
       329­371.
Maggiori, M., Neiman, B., Schreger, J., 2020. International Currencies and Capital Allocation.
       Journal of Political Economy 128, 2019­66.
Manela, A., Moreira, A., 2017. News implied volatility and disaster concerns. Journal of Financial
       Economics 123, 137­162.
Moreira, A., Muir, T., 2017. Volatility-managed portfolios. The Journal of Finance 72, 1611­1644.
Mullins, J.P., 2016. One hundred years of Current Employment Statistics-an overview of survey
       advancements. Monthly Labor Review 139, 1.
Niederhoffer, V., 1971. The analysis of world events and stock prices. The Journal of Business 44,
       193­219.




                                                                                                  28
Obstfeld, M., 2015. Trilemmas and Trade-Offs: Living with Financial Globalisation. BIS Working
       Papers No. 480.
Pástor, L'., Veronesi, P., 2012. Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. The Journal
       of Finance 67, 1219­1264.
Pástor, L'., Veronesi, P., 2013. Political uncertainty and risk premia. Journal of Financial
       Economics 110, 520­545.
Roll, R., 1988. R2. The Journal of Finance 43, 541­566.
Russell, S., Norvig, P., 2002. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach. 2nd ed., Prentice Hall,
       Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Shiller, R., 1981. Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
       Dividends? American Economic Review 71, 421­436.
Shiller, R.J., 2017. Narrative economics. American Economic Review 107, 967­1004.
Tetlock, P.C., 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
       The Journal of Finance 62, 1139­1168.




                                                                                                    29
                                           Appendix

A1. Industry-Level Returns Validation
       For some daily stock market jumps, the explanation offered in next-day newspaper
accounts implies an amplified or dampened response of equity returns in particular industries to
the news that moved the overall market. Consider two examples, the first involving bank stocks
and the second involving defense-industry stocks
   ·   Example 1, Banks: During the GFC, the stock market responded positively to upward
       revisions in the likelihood or generosity of bank bailouts. For this type of jump, we expect
       an even more favorable response for Bank stocks. That is, the response of Banks is
       amplified relative to the overall market response.
   ·   Example 2, Guns: When bad news about the likelihood or duration of the Iraq war
       generated a negative jump, we expect the response for Guns (defense firms) to be
       dampened relative to the overall market response. While a longer war may be bad for the
       overall U.S. economy, it is less bad (or even good) for Guns.
These examples suggest that we can test whether newspaper-based explanations are accurate by
examining whether their implications for relative industry-level returns hold in the data.
       To do so, we proceed as follows. First, we work with the daily industry-level equity returns
data constructed by Gene Fama and Ken French, which are available at
https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html. Let NO = the daily
return for industry portfolio i on day t as measured by Fama and French.
       Second, we use the detailed explanations offered in next-day newspaper accounts ­ as
recorded by our human coders ­ to identify instances in which particular industries should have an
amplified or dampened return response if the newspaper explanation is accurate. Using these
detailed explanations, we construct an industry-level variable NO that takes on three possible
values for each industry i on each jump date t, as follows:
        NO = 1, if the detailed description for t implies an amplified response of NO ;
                = -1, if the detailed description for t implies a dampened response of NO ;
                = 0, otherwise.




                                                                                                   30
In constructing this variable, we take a conservative approach: We set Tri to 1 or -1 based on the
Primary jump reason only. We set  to 0 when the detailed explanation for the jump involves an
overly broad industry group. For example, "Manufacturing" maps to at least 15 of the 49 industry
groups and is too broad for our purposes.18
      Most jump-day explanations do not map readily to a particular industry. Sometimes, we
assign 2 industries to a given jump. Most, but not all, of these dual assignments involve Sovereign
Military Jumps, which implicate both Guns and Aerospace. Among our 339 jumps from 1960 to
2016, we obtain 115 Jump-by-Industry observations with nonzero Tri values, as follows: 38
nonzero values for Banks, 19 for Guns, and 16 for Aerospace. Several other industries had fewer
than 10 nonzero Tri values: Oil, Coal, Building Materials, Construction, Autos, Chips, Hardware,
Household Goods, Software, and Electrical Equipment.
        Third, we test whether the implications of newspaper accuracy for relative industry-level
returns hold in the data. In our one-industry-at-time approach, we fit the following regression
model by OLS to daily returns data for a given industry i,
                            NO =  + O + NO + NO O + O ,
where O = the daily return on the overall market portfolio on day t. The chief coefficient of
interest is  , which tells us whether the relative industry-i return is amplified or dampened on
particular jump days. The null hypothesis is  = 0. Newspaper accuracy implies the alternative
hypothesis,  > 0. The specification includes a control for the market return, because industry i
may be relatively sensitive or insensitive to market returns for reasons apart from the ones
identified in our newspaper explanations on jump days.
        We report the estimated  coefficient in this regression for the Banks industry in columns
(1) and (2) of Table A2. We soundly reject the null hypothesis in favor of the alternative, as seen
by the positive sign and statistical significance of the  coefficient. The estimated value for  in
Column (1), for example, says the return for Banks is amplified by 80 percent relative to the
average market return on jump days with [\]^_ = 1. Thus, the results in Columns (1) and (2)
strongly support the view that next-day newspaper explanations are accurate as to the reason for
the jump ­ at least for those jump explanations that imply an amplified response for Banks.


18
   In practice, Tri typically takes on only two values (0 and 1, or 0 and -1) for a given industry. However,
when pooling over industries to get additional power in the regression test below, we will need the
trichotomous variable.


                                                                                                         31
       As it turns out, Banks is the only industry with a large enough number of non-zero Tri
values to yield reasonably precise estimates of  . Thus, we also fit a multi-industry regression
specification, as follows:
                      NO = N N + N N O + N N NO + NO O + O .
When fitting this regression, we pool over all industries with at least one nonzero Tri value.
Columns (3) and (4) in Table A2 report the results. Again, we soundly reject the null hypothesis in
favor of the alternative, and the estimated value for  implies a large amplification/dampening
effect on returns in those industries that, according to the newspaper-based explanation, should
experience an amplification/dampening effect.
       In summary, the results in Table A2 provide evidence that next-day newspaper accounts
contain meaningful explanations for large daily moves in national stock markets. This evidence
about industry-level returns on jump days complements the evidence in Table 3 discussed in the
main text. In particular, we stress that Table 3 and Table A2 provide two distinct types of evidence
that validate our newspaper-based classifications for jump reasons, and the newspaper
explanations themselves.


A2. Algorithmic Stock Market Jump Categorization
       We start by OCRing the full text of each Wall Street Journal (WSJ) article. Unlike our other
newspapers, we only have 1 WSJ article per day, as part of an experiment to explicitly measure
differences among coders reading the same articles in the same paper, rather than reading different
articles from the same paper. For most supervised machine learning algorithms, we would like to
have exactly one category per day in the training sample. For days where the WSJ coders agreed,
this is straightforward. If they disagree, however, we take the category with the highest average score
among categories, if the highest average score is above a certain threshold. In this subsection, we
make that threshold 0.5, so at least one coder must assign it a lone primary and the other must assign
it at least as a secondary category. If no category on a given day crosses this threshold, that day is
dropped from the sample.
       We then clean the articles by removing all (1) non-English words, which are usually OCR
errors from early in the sample when the scanned articles are of lower quality (2) words that are parts
of headers/footers generated by ProQuest when the articles are saved as PDFs (3) stop words using
the NLTK toolbox in Python. We then do additional cleaning based on the algorithm in Loughran


                                                                                                    32
and McDonald (see https://sraf.nd.edu/textual-analysis/resources/ for detailed notes on their
cleaning procedure) to make the punctuation meaningful, making it easier to break the document
into sentences. Finally, we use the Porter Stemmer to reduce all words to their stems.
        After cleaning the articles, we extract the first 200 words of each article. This has two main
benefits: (1) It makes all the articles the same length, which is useful when doing tf-idf to prevent
biases caused by differences in document length and (2) many articles, especially early in the sample,
discuss several topics, including those unrelated to the jump. The first 200 words are usually the
most relevant for categorizing the article. Finally, we require that words appear in a category at least
3 times, and overall at least 5 times.
        Having cleaned the text data, we compute a tf-idf score for each word in each document. tf
is computed within an article, while idf is computed across all articles that survive the filters
described above. We then use these scores to perform a `leave-out-one' classification of each article.
To do this, we take the entire corpus, excluding the article we are trying to classify. We then take all
the unique words in those articles, and sort on the average tf-idf score for these words across articles
in each human-classified category. Finally, we take the top 100 words for each category from this
sorting: these are the words we associate with each category. For example, for Commodities the top
word is `wheat', while for Sovereign Military Action the top word is 'germani' (stem of Germany).
        As an alternative to the TF-IDF approach, we use our Wall Street Journal codings as the
training sample for a Naïve Bayes Classifier (see, for example, Russell and Norvig (2003)). To
reduce overfitting, we follow the same procedure described above when constructing the category
ranking. The main filters include removing stop words, words that appear in fewer than 5 articles,
and words that appear in more than 70% of articles (ie. those with low signal-to-noise ratio). In-
sample, the algorithm can fit nearly 100% of articles, but allowing this amount of flexibility may
drive overfitting issues. To test for over-fitting, we measure the out of sample performance of the
model. For each day, we fit the Bayes Classifier on all other days and then pass that day's article
into the classifier. To account for differences in base rates across categories, we restrict classification
among those categories with a sufficiently large sample and similar base rates: Corporate Profits,
Government Spending, Macroeconomic News & Outlook, Monetary Policy and Sovereign Military
Actions. Although there are a significant number of jumps classified as Unknown, we omit this
category, as it adds a noise to out of sample classifications. With this approach, we fit 63% of articles.
On average, the Bayes Classifier works better out of sample than randomly picking categories from



                                                                                                        33
the unconditional distribution (which would achieve a match rate of 31%), but the fit is far from
perfect.
       Restricting to the post-1984 to isolate the sample in which we can obtain the text directly
rather than OCRing PDF files, the fit improves slight. However, this reveals a significant problem:
because many of the categories are sparse, the model almost always guesses the modal category of
`Macroeconomic News & Outlook'. As discussed above, while it is possible to improve the out of
sample fit by stemming words and trying to identify `relevant' pieces of long articles (especially in
the pre-World War II period), there is a limit to how good the out of sample fit can be with the
`bag-of-words' approach.




                                                                                                     34
Figure 1: Intra-Day Moves Often, But Not Always, Point to the Likely Jump Reason

                                          2 July 2009, -2.9%
                                          Macro; Clarity 1.68;              Notes: Each panel plots
                                          BLS Employment Situation Report   the S&P 500 index at 1-
                                                                            minute intervals from
                                                                            market open to close on
          18 April 2001, +3.9%                                              the indicated date.
          Monetary; Clarity 1.68;                                           We also report the
          Surprise Rate Cut                                                 percent change from the
                                                                            previous-day close to
                                                                            the current-day close,
                                                                            the primary jump reason
                                                                            (as classified by our
                                                                            human readers), and our
                                                                            measure of clarity as to
    22 October 1987, -3.9%                                                  jump reason. The clarity
    Unknown; Clarity -1.20                26 December 2018, +5.0%           measure is standardized
    [Black Monday was 19 October]                                           to mean zero and unit
                                          Unknown; Clarity -0.03            standard deviation. The
                                                                            top two panels also
                                                                            report the specific event
                                                                            that, according to
                                                                            newspaper accounts,
                                                                            triggered the jump.




                                                                                35
Figure 2: Two Examples of Newspaper Articles about High-Clarity Jumps

                                                  For the WSJ article at left, we classify the primary jump
                                                  reason under Monetary Policy & Central Banking
                                                  (Policy), because the article links the rise to the Fed's
                                                  surprise interest rate cut. Geographic source is the
                                                  United States, because the Fed is a U.S. policy-
                                                  making institution. Journalist confidence is High, as
                                                  the article explicitly links the move to the rate cut. Ease
                                                  of coding is Easy.




For the WSJ article at right, we code the
primary jump reason as Macro News and
Outlook (Non-Policy), because the drop is
clearly linked to the poor jobs report.
Geographic source is the US. Journalist
confidence is high, and ease of coding is Easy.
                                                                                              36
Figure 3: Two Examples of Articles (from Different Papers) about a Low-Clarity Jump
For the WSJ article below, we code the jump reason as Unknown,
because "traders and investors were left scratching their heads."




For the NY Times article at right, we code the primary jump reason
as Macro News and Outlook, because the article attributes the
jump mainly to good news about consumer spending. Geographic
source is the US. Journalist confidence and ease of coding are both
Medium.                                                                               37
Figure 4: Jumps Per Year Vary Greatly but the Policy Share Is Fairly Stable, 1900-2020
                                 Second
                                Downturn                                               Notes: Each bar is the
                                                                                       number of positive or negative
                                  (1937)
                                                                    Global             jumps in that year. Black and
       1901                                                        Financial           red shadings indicate jumps
       and                                                           Crisis            triggered by "Policy" and
       1903                                                                    COVID   "Non-Policy," respectively. The
                    WWI                          Oil                            19     unshaded parts of each bar
      panics                                             Black
                                                Shock                                  indicate jumps attributed to
                                  WWII                  Monday
                                                                                       "Unknown or No Explanation
                                                                                       Offered" plus five instances of
                                                                                       "no article found" before 1926.


         Banking                                                  Tech
         Panic of                                                Boom/
          1907                                                    Bust     Trump
                                                                           China
                                                                         trade war
                    1929
                    Crash
                            Depression Lowest
                              Growth (1932)




                                                                                                  38
             Figure 5: Jumps in the US Stock Market Are Mostly Due to US News, 1900-2020
                                                                                       Notes: Dots show the yearly
                                                                                       share of U.S. stock market
                                                                                       jumps by the geographic
Share of jumps




                                                Share of jumps
                                                                                       origin stated at the top of the
                                                                                       panel. Dot size reflects the
                                                                                       number of jumps in that year.
                                                                                       This chart excludes jumps
                                                                                       classified as "Unknown or No
                                                                                       Explanation Offered" and "No
                                                                                       Article Found," which have no
                                                                                       geographic attribution.
Share of jumps




                                                Share of jumps




                                                                                                 39
  Figure 6: News about the United States Triggers a Large Share of National Stock Market Jumps
  in Other Countries, a Pattern that Does Not Hold for Europe
                                                                              Notes: This figure shows
                                                                              the yearly share of daily
                                                                              stock market jumps in
                                                                              Australia, Canada, China
                                                                              (HK), China (Shanghai),
                                                                              Japan, New Zealand, Saudi
                                                                              Arabia, Singapore, South
                                                                              Africa, and South Korea
                                                                              that leading own-country
                                                                              newspapers attribute to
Share




                                                                              news about the United
                                                                              States and to new about
                                                                              Europe (or individual
                                                                              European countries). The
                                                                              sample runs from 1980 to
                                                                              2020 but does not cover all
                                                                              countries in all years. Dot
                                                                              size is proportional to the
                                                                              average number of jumps
                                                                              per country in that year.
                                                                              GDP shares are 5-year
                                                                              moving averages of global
                                                                              GDP, evaluated at PPP, in
                                                                              IMF data. Table A1 reports
                                                                              the sample period by
                                                                              country.
                                                                                      40
Figure 7: Policy News Triggers A Larger Share of Positive than Negative Jumps, Especially After
1980, U.S. Data from 1900 to 2020
                                                                       Notes: Each plot is a binscatter
                                                                       (n=20) of jump-level policy scores
                                                                       against jump-day stock returns, where
                                                                       the policy score is the fraction of the
                                                                       jump's codings attributed to policy-
                                                                       related news. For each sub-period, we
                                                                       regress jump-level policy scores on
                                                                       jump-day returns and report the t-
      Slope: 0.928 [.37]                                               statistic on the return variable. For
                                                                       jump days only, we also run the
                                         Slope: 2.95 [.50]             following regression,
                                                                              !"#$%&'
                                                                              = ) + + ,-./,0' + % 1234'56
                                                                              + 7 ,-./,0' ×1234'56 + -9
                                                                       and report the coefficient on the
                                                                       interaction term d, and its t-statistic at
                                                                       the bottom of the figure.




                                                                                           41
Figure 8: Policy News Is More Likely to Be the Trigger for Positive Jumps When the
Market Has Been Falling, U.S. Data from 1900 to 2020
                                                                            Notes: This chart shows a bin
                                                                            scatter of jump-level net
                                                                            policy scores (on the Y-axis)
                                                                            against the cumulative log
                                                                            returns over the prior 66
                                                                            trading trading days. The net
                                                                            policy score equals the share
                                                                            of codings attributed to policy
                                                                            developments for upward
                                                                            jumps, and (-1) times the
                                                                            share of codings attributed to
                                                                            policy for downward jumps.




                                                                                      42
Figure 9: Volatility Is Lower after Monetary Policy Jumps than after Other Jumps, 1900-2020
                                                                                                                                         Notes: We regress average
                                                                                                                                         squared returns (volatility) over the
                                                                                                                                         next n trading days after a jump day
                                                                                                                                         on the fraction of codings that
                                                                                                                                         attribute the jump to "Monetary
                                                                                                                                         Policy" and the fraction that attribute
                                                                                                                                         it to "All Other" reasons. We run a
                                                                                                                                         separate regression for each
                                                                                                                                         n=1,2,...,22, and in each case
                                                                                                                                         control for the jump-day return, split
                                                                                                                                         into positive and negative pieces,
                                                                                                                                         and volatility over the day, week and
                                                                                                                                         month preceding the jump day (HAR
                                                                                                                                         controls). The chart plots
                                                                                                                                         coefficients on the two variables of
                                                                                                                                         interest and 95% confidence
                                                                                                                                         intervals computed using Newey-
                                                                                                                                         West standard errors with lags set
                                                                                                                                         to 1.5 times n. Numbers atop the
                                                                                                                                         horizontal scale are p-values for a
     .07   .01   .00   .00   .00   .00   .00   .00   .00   .01   .01   .00   .00   .00   .00   .00   .00   .01   .01   .01   .01   .01
                                                                                                                                         test of equal coefficients on the two
                                                                                                                                         variables of interest. The time-series
                                                                                                                                         standard deviations of average
                                                                                                                                         volatility over 1, 5, 10 and 20 days
                                                                                                                                         are 5.13, 3.23, 2.80 and 2.45,
                                                                                                                                         respectively.

                                                                                                                                                            44
Figure 10: All Four Clarity Index Components Have Trended Towards Greater Clarity, U.S. Data,
1900-2020
                                                                         Notes: Each red line shows a
                                                                         LOWESS-smoothed fit to the data,
                                                                         with a bandwidth set to 20 percent
                                                                         of the data. Pairwise Agreement is
                                                                         the average pairwise agreement
                                                                         rate in the codings for a given
                                                                         jump. There are up to 45 pairs
                                                                         arising from 5 newspapers per day
                                                                         and two coders per paper. Ease of
                                                                         Coding is rated on a 1-3 scale,
                                                                         with 3 being the easiest. Journalist
                                                                         Confidence is rated on a 1-3 scale,
                                                                         with 3 being the most confident.
                                                                         Share Unknown is the percentage
                                                                         of codings for a given jump coded
                                                                         as "Unknown or No Explanation
                                                                         Offered."




                                                                                        45
Figure 11: Perceived Clarity about the Reason for Daily Stock Market Jumps Has
Trended Up, U.S. Data from 1900 to 2020
                                                                         Notes: Clarity is the sum of Ease
                                                                         of Coding, Journalist Confidence,
                                                                         Pairwise Agreement Rate, and
                                                                         the share of codings attributed to
                                                                         "Unknown or No Explanation
                                                                         Offered" (multiplied by -1) after
                                                                         each component is scaled to zero
                                                                         mean and unit standard deviation
                                                                         one. Clarity is also scaled to have
                                                                         zero mean and unit standard
                                                                         deviation. The red line shows a
                                                                         LOWESS-smoothed fit to the
                                                                         clarity data, with a bandwidth set
                                                                         to 20 percent of the data. See the
                                                                         notes to Figure 10 for a
                                                                         description of each Clarity
                                                                         component.




                                                                                      46
Figure 12: Volatility is Lower Around High-Clarity Jumps, U.S. Data from 1900
to 2020
                                                                           Notes: High (low) clarity is
                                                                           defined as clarity above
                                                                           (below) the sample median
                                                                           for either All Years (1900-
                                                                           2020) or Post War (1946-
                                                                           2020). Each panel shows the
                                                                           average absolute return in a
                                                                           +/- 22-day window around
                                                                           jump days. The p-values are
                                                                           for t-tests of whether the
                                                                           mean absolute return in a +/-
                                                                           n-day window around the
                                                                           jump day differs between
                                                                           high-clarity and low-clarity
                                                                           jumps.




                                                                                      47
Figure 13: Movements in Clarity Tend to Persist, U.S. Data from 1980 to 2020
                                                                          Notes: The left panel shows a
                                                                          binscatter (n=20) of Clarity of
                                                                          the next jump against Clarity of
     Slope: 0.37 [.028]                    Slope: 0.12 [0.03]
                                                                          the current jump. The right
                                                                          panel shows a binscatter using
                                                                          Clarity values that are
                                                                          residualized on the current-day
                                                                          returns, split into positive and
                                                                          negative pieces, and HAR
                                                                          controls (volatility over the day,
                                                                          week and month before the
                                                                          current jump), the 17-way
                                                                          classification of the current
                                                                          jump, the 17-way classification
                                                                          of the next jump, a dummy
                                                                          variable for pre vs. post-World
                                                                          War II, a linear time trend, and
                                                                          the interaction between the time
                                                                          trend and the postwar dummy
                                                                          variable.




                                                                                       48
Figure 14: Policy Jumps have Higher Clarity Than Non-Policy Jumps on Average, 1900-2020

                                                                     Notes: The difference in means
                                                                     is the difference in average
                                                                     clarity between each policy
                                                                     category, and all non-policy
                                                                     categories. The t-Stat is from a
                                                                     test of equal means. The number
                                                                     of jumps is the number of
                                                                     codings in each of the policy
                                                                     categories. Non-policy does not
                                                                     include unknown jumps. US
                                                                     data, 1900-2020. Average clarity
                                                                     is higher in every policy
                                                                     subcategory than the average for
                                                                     all non policy subcategories.




                                                                                  49
Table 1: Distribution of (Primary) Jump Reasons by Era and Category
                                                                 UK      ROTW                 Notes: Thresholds for a day's
                                                                                              stock market movements to
                                               US Equities     Equities  Equities US Bonds    be considered a `jump' are
Time Period:                              1900-2020 1946-2020 1930-2020 1980-2020 1970-2020   listed in Table A1. Jumps are
                                                                                              generally      calculated      for
Macroeconomic News & Outlook                23.38      32.39    29.12     25.88     53.92     movements of the broadest
                                                                                              composite index for a given
Corporate Earnings & Outlook                10.99      12.33    10.94      9.23      0.93     country. Rest of the World
Sovereign Military & Security Actions        9.48       5.25     3.73      2.64      0.90     (ROTW) countries include:
                                                                                              Australia, Canada, China
Monetary Policy & Central Banking            7.38      10.17     9.53      8.51     18.23     (HK),     China      (Shanghai),
Government Spending                          6.72       6.92     7.14      5.59      4.11     Germany, Greece, Ireland,
                                                                                              Japan, New Zealand, Saudi
Commodities                                  5.57       2.47     2.26      3.45      1.68     Arabia, Singapore, South
Regulation                                   4.26       2.23     4.59      2.67      0.27     Africa, South Korea and
                                                                                              Spain. ROTW panel is not
Other Non-Policy                             4.29       5.94     3.82     10.31      2.80     balanced between 1980 and
                                                                                              2020 (see Appendix Table 1).
Elections & Political Transitions            2.42       3.43     2.78      1.93      0.88     Data for US/UK stock jumps
Other Policy                                 2.45       1.61     2.15      4.35      0.84     ends 2020. US bond jumps
                                                                                              are defined as daily changes
Taxes                                        1.71       1.25     0.86      0.49      1.21     in the 10-year treasury yield
Exchange Rate Policy & Capital Controls      1.07       0.75     0.86      0.66      0.18     of more than 15 basis points.
                                                                                              This     table     reports    the
International Trade Policy                   0.91       1.31     0.33      0.50      0.08     frequency distributions of the
Foreign Stock Markets                        1.01       0.89     5.98      8.84      0.19     primary reason for the jump,
                                                                                              according      to     newspaper
Terrorist Attacks & Non-State Violence       0.47       0.96     0.89      1.04      0.11     articles. In practice, we often
                                                                                              code a secondary (or even
Unknown & No Explanation                    17.44      12.11    12.14      5.86      8.64     tertiary) reason as well,
No Article Found                             0.43       0.00     2.87      8.05      5.02     based      on     the    article's
                                                                                              explanation for the jump.
Total                                       1,152       440      656      4,430      455
                                                                                                      50
                       Table 2: Categorical Coding Agreement Rates, U.S. Jumps

Time Period                                                   1900-1945                                     1946-2020
                                                  Policy vs. Non-       Granular                 Policy vs. Non-    Granular
                                                       Policy          Categories                     Policy       Categories
All Coders & All Papers                                  75%                      43%                   80%                  54%
All Coders Within Paper                                  89%                      70%                   90%                  73%
Within WSJ                                               92%                      77%                   92%                  77%
With Random Assignment                                   53%                      13%                   56%                  17%
Bootstrapped Std. Err.                                   10%                      7%                    12%                  10%

Notes: Granular categories include all 17 detailed jump-day categories, including no article found. Policy jumps include Monetary Policy,
Government Spending, Sovereign Military, Other Policy, Regulation, Trade Policy, Exchange Rate Policy, Elections, and Taxes.
Newspapers include the Wall Street Journal, the NY Times, the Chicago Tribune, the Washington Post, and the LA Times. For the random
assignment by period, we use the unconditional distribution of jumps for that sub-period. There are 712 from 1900-1945, and 437 jumps
from 1946-2020. Difference between random assignment agreement and all human agreement measures is significant at the 1% level,
where standard errors were bootstrapped using 10,000 simulations from the unconditional categorical distribution using all newspapers.




                                                                                                                            51
                                                  Table 3: Categorical Validation

                                         Monetary             Macro             Elections Monetary   Macro    Elections
                                         1994-2020          1953-2020          1900-2020 1994-2020 1953-2020 1900-2020
 FOMC meeting at t or t-1                2.144***                                         2.090***
                                          (0.261)                                          (0.266)
 Macro Announcement at t                   -0.201            0.824***                       0.061  0.863***
                                          (0.156)             (0.166)                      (0.226)  (0.179)
      Election at t or t-1                 -0.485              0.648            4.783***    -0.643    0.662   4.785***
                                          (1.077)             (0.965)            (0.225)   (1.080)  (0.966)    (0.225)
       Observations                        6,799              17,119             32,787     6,799    17,119    32,787
        R-Squared                           0.01               0.001              0.014     0.011     0.002     0.014
   # Codings in Category                     30                 137                 28        30       137        28
     Day of Week FE                          No                 No                 No        Yes       Yes       Yes
Notes: Each column (1) to (3) reports a regression of jump coding values (times 100) for the indicated category on a set of known information-
release dates. Because FOMC meetings span two days, we consider jumps that occur on either day of the meeting, or the day after the meeting.
We have 259 known FOMC meetings between 1994 and 2020. For elections, because the results are not usually known by the end of the trading
date, we consider the day after elections as well. We have 61 known federal elections between 1900 and 2020. For macro news announcements,
because they usually occur before the markets open, we only count the day of the announcement. For Macro Announcements, we include the
release of CPI, jobless claims and the Employment Situation Report (unbalanced panel between 1953-2020), for a total of 2,732 known dates.
Years vary by column. All specifications include day of the week fixed effects. US data, 1900-2020. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. US data, date
range varies by column.                                                                                                         52
Table 4: Policy Jumps are more often positive (negative) after recent stock market falls (rises)

                                                                                                                    Pos. Non- Neg. Non-
                                   Positive Policy                               Negative Policy                     Policy    Policy
                            (1)          (2)               (3)            (4)          (5)       (6)                   (7)       (8)
  Cumulative
 Return Past 66          -0.0856        -0.0397        -0.441**       0.214*** 0.177*** 0.504***                     0.133**         -0.0522
 Trading Days
                         (0.057)        (0.064)         (0.171)        (0.055)        (0.062)         (0.128)         (0.062)           (0.067)
  Observations            1,043           603             440           1,043           603             440            1,043             1,043
   R-squared              0.018          0.024           0.027          0.032          0.031           0.047           0.017              0.01
    Sample:                All          Pre-War        Post-War          All          Pre-War        Post-War           All                All
Notes: For columns 1-3, left hand side variable is equal !"#$%&' if ()*+(,' > 0, and is zero otherwise. For columns 4-6, left hand side variable is
equal !"#$%&' if ()*+(,' < 0, and is zero otherwise. For column 7, left hand side variable is equal to non!"#$%&' if ()*+(,' > 0, and zero
otherwise. For column 8, left hand side variable is equal to non!"#$%&' if if ()*+(,' < 0, and zero otherwise. In both columns 7 and 8, non-policy
excludes jumps classified as unknown. Sample is all US jump days, 1900-2020. Cumulative return past 66 trading days is the cumulative log
return on the broad US market index over the past 66 trading days. All specifications include HAR controls: volatility over the past day, week,
month and quarter. Pre-war is data from 1900-1937, and postwar is data from 1946-2020.




                                                                                                                                   53
 Table 5: Clarity is Higher When Intraday Movement is More Concentrated
                                                             Concentration x 100
                                   (1)              (2)          (3)        (4)                 (5)           (6)
Clarity                         2.179***         1.97***
                                 (0.584)         (0.610)
Avg. Ease of Coding                                              0.99*
                                                                (0.576)
Avg. Confidence                                                               1.88***
                                                                              (0.578)
Share Unknown                                                                                -1.82**
                                                                                             (0.799)
Pairwise Agreement                                                                                         1.78***
                                                                                                           (0.449)
Observations                       322              322           322            322           322           322
R-squared                          0.05            0.088         0.059          0.086         0.074         0.096
Return Controls                    NO              YES           YES            YES           YES            YES
HAR Controls                       NO              YES           YES            YES           YES            YES
Notes: Clarity has mean zero and standard deviation one. The left hand side variable is share of total distance traveled
in the 15 minute window with the largest absolute return, multiplied by 100. Sample spans US data for which high
frequency data is available from TickWrite for the S&P 500 Spot Market, 1985-2020. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                                                                      54
Table 6: Higher Clarity Jumps are Followed by Less Returns Volatility and Cross-Firm Dispersion
                                                  Volatility               X-Sectional Std. Dev.
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)     (4)          (5)          (6)
Clarity                                -4.975*** -4.846*** -2.232* -0.296*** -0.270*** -0.0997***
                                         (1.57)    (1.38)    (1.25)  (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.03)
Observations                              1,146     1,146    1,146     921         921          919
R-squared                                 0.009     0.156    0.248    0.043       0.187        0.564
Controls                                  None    Returns    +HAR     None       Returns      +HAR
Sample                                     All       All       All     All         All          All
Notes: For columns 1-3, left-hand-side is the sum of squared percentage returns over the 5 days following a jump day. US data, 1900-2020.
For columns 4-6, left-hand-side is the average value-weighted cross-sectional standard deviation over the 5-days following the jump, multiplied
by 100. This cross-sectional standard deviation is computed using all ordinary common shares traded on major exchanges in CRSP. US data,
1926-2020Q3. Column 6 has 2 fewer observations because we are including lagged cross sectional standard deviation on the right-hand-side.
For columns 2 and 4 controls are the jump day return, split into positive and negative components. For column 3, controls also include: 1-day,
5-day and 22-day lagged volatility (HAR controls). For column 6, controls also include: 1-day, 5-day and 22-day lagged cross-sectional
standard deviation (i.e. HAR for cross-sectional standard deviation). Clarity has mean zero and standard deviation one. Robust standard
errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                                 55
                              Table A1: Countries, Newspapers and Jump Thresholds
                                                                                                                           Jump
             Country                        Years                                   Sources
                                                                                                                         Threshold
             United States                1900-2020       Wall Street Journal, etc.                                       2.50%
                                                          Financial Times (UK Edition), Times of London,
             United Kingdom               1930-2020                                                                       2.50%
                                                          Telegraph, etc.
             Australia                    1986-2020       Australian Financial Times, Sydney Morning Herald               2.50%
             Canada                       1980-2020       The Globe and Mail                                              2.00%
             China (Hong Kong)            1989-2011       South China Morning Post                                        3.80%
             China (Shanghai)             1993-2013       Shanghai Securities News, China Securities Journal              4.00%
             Germany                      1987-2020       Handelsblat, FAZ                                                2.50%
             Greece                       2001-2015       Kathimerini, To Vima                                            4.00%
             Ireland                      1987-2012       The Irish Times                                                 2.50%
             Japan                        1981-2013       Yomiuri, Asahi                                                  3.00%
             New Zealand                  1996-2011       New Zealand Herald                                              2.50%
             Saudi Arabia                 1994-2013       Al Riyadh                                                       2.50%
             Singapore                    1980-2020       Business Times, Straits Times                                   2.50%
             South Africa                 1986-2020       Business Day                                                    2.50%
             South Korea                  1981-2011       Chosun Ilbo                                                     3.50%
             Spain                        1987-2020       ABC                                                             2.50%
Notes: The jump threshold is the minimum absolute return required for a day to be considered a jump in each country. We allow for differences across
countries to account for differences in unconditional volatility.                                                              56
Table A2: Regression Models Fit to Daily Industry-Level Equity Returns from 1960 to 2016

                                                  Banks                                       Pooled Sample
                                 (1) All Days             (2) Jump Days                 (3) All Days             (4) Jump Days

 ! Coefficient                     0.80***                   0.74***                     0.55***                    0.51***

 (St. Error)                         (0.23)                    (0.24)                      (0.13)                     (0.13)
 Observations                       13,469                        339                    109,760                       4720
 R-Squared                            0.67                       0.83                       0.56                        0.81
 Notes: See Appendix A for the regression specification and the interpretation of the ! coefficient. We use Fama-French industry-
 level returns data. A single-industry regression for Guns, yields results similar to the Pooled Sample, but the standard error is large
 and the coefficient estimate is insignificant. When we set Tri=-1 for the Aerospace industry for jumps attributed to Sovereign Military
 Conflict, the Aerospace regression yields a small, marginally significant coefficient of the wrong sign. That may reflect the
 ambiguous nature of Aerospace firms' responses to military conflict: (relatively) good news for defense-oriented aerospace firms
 may, at the same time, be bad for aerospace firms oriented toward civilian customers. If we set Tri=1 for Aerospace in jumps
 attributed to Sovereign Military Conflict, the anomalous Aerospace result disappears, and the Pooled Sample results get stronger.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1                                                                                                57
      Table A3: Comparison to the Cutler, Poterba and Summers Characterization of the
              50 Largest Daily Moves in the S&P Stock Index from 1946 to 1987

                                          Primary or secondary              Primary category
                                                                                                       Observations
                                           category agreement                  agreement

                    New York Times
                    High clarity                   81%                              75%                       32
                    Low clarity                    43%                              38%                       18
                    Total                          67%                              62%                       50

                    Wall Street Journal
                    High clarity                   64%                              55%                       32
                    Low clarity                    48%                              37%                       18
                    Total                          58%                              48%                       50
Notes: Cutler, Poterba and Summers (CPS) attribute a "cause" to the 50 largest U.S. stock market jumps from 1946 to 1987 based on
coverage in the New York Times. See their Table 4. For each jump, we map their description of the cause to a primary category and,
sometimes, a secondary category, according to our classification scheme. We then compare the resulting CPS classifications to our
classification as follows: For any given coding of the jump in question, we set "Primary category agreement: to 1 if the CPS primary category
matches ours, and 0 otherwise. We set "Primary or secondary category agreement" to 1 if there is any overlap between the CPS primary and
secondary categories and our primary and secondary categories, and 0 otherwise. We then average over all codings for the jump in question
to obtain an average agreement rate (over codings) per jump. Lastly, we average over jumps to obtain the entries reported in the table. "High"
and "Low" clarity jumps have Clarity values greater or less than 0, respectively.
                                                                                                                              58
                 Table A4: Policy-Share by Jump Size and Period, US

                                                                           US                                     Rest of the World
                                                  1900-1979                         1980-2020                         1980-2020
Absolute Jump Size
                                              Positive Negative                 Positive Negative                Positive Negative
[Thresh,Thresh+0.5%)                           41%         31%                   35%         20%                   32%        21%
[Thresh+0.5%,Thresh+1%)                        41%         34%                   38%         12%                   42%        22%
[Thresh+1%,Thresh+1.5%)                        40%         42%                   46%         34%                   29%        22%
Thresh+1.5% or Larger                          48%         40%                   55%         19%                   47%        24%
All                                            45%         33%                   43%         20%                   41%        23%
p-Value                                               0.01                              0.00                             0.00
Total                                                 802                               350                          3,664
Notes: Positive (Negative) columns are share of positive (negative) jumps attributed to policy categories. For rest of the world, we exclude jumps
attributed to Unknown or No Article Found when computing the totals. p-Value is from a t-Test that share of policy-share is the same among positive
and negative jumps. US data 1900-2020.




                                                                                                                               59
                        Table A5: Policy-Share by Jump Size, Period and Category, US
                                                        1900-1979                       1980-2020               Post-1980
                                                                                                                                  p-Value
                                                   Positive   Negative             Positive   Negative          Return Shift
Policy                                               161        152                  71         36                 0.023           0.000
Sovereign Military & Security Actions                33          65                   5          6                 0.011           0.401
Monetary Policy & Central Banking                    31          16                  29          9                 0.014           0.152
Government Spending                                  36          12                  19         10                -0.009           0.498
Regulation                                           21          25                   2          1                 0.004           0.888
Taxes                                                 7           9                   4          0                 0.042           0.007
All Other Policy                                     33          26                  11          9                 0.005           0.693
Non Policy                                           136        187                  76         132               -0.024           0.000
Macroeconomic News & Outlook                         68          79                  43         79                -0.026           0.000
Corporate Earnings & Outlook                         33          44                  23         26                 0.003           0.786
Commodities                                          24          34                   2          4                -0.017           0.435
All Other Non-Policy                                 11          29                   9         22                 0.000           0.995

Notes: Results shown for most common policy and non-policy categories. The final two columns are the from the coefficient d in the regression:
!"#$!%& = ( + * +(#",-!./ + + 1123&45 + 6 +(#",-!.& ×1123&45 + "/ US data, 1900-2020.




                                                                                                                             60
                   Table A6: Breakdown of Policy Jumps by Country
                     Non-Policy     Monetary Policy Government Spending      All Policy
                 Negative Positive Negative Positive Negative Positive Negative Positive
      Australia     84        42      4          9      5        15       15           30
       Canada      206        135    24         28      9        15       45           51
        China      118        107    14          7      0         0       58           63
      Germany      198        131    15         27      7        14       46           65
       Greece       54        34      6         11      10       22       29           42
     Hong Kong      87        56      8         22      5         4       23           43
       Ireland     148        106     8         16      7         7       42           56
        Japan      133        94      6         17      7        15       35           61
    South Korea    144        128     5         12      0         5       36           64
    New Zealand     33        16      0          1      0         1        0            2
    Saudi Arabia   151        96      0          1      0         2       16           22
     Singapore     145        113    12         16      3        12       28           39
    South Africa   165        121    10         20      5        13       32           54
        Spain      216        160    24         55      26       39       92          124
         UK        240        191    27         44      18       29      100          125
         All      2,121     1,530    161       287     102       193     596          839
Notes: Positive (Negative) columns are share of positive (negative) jumps attributed to policy categories. Data from 1980-2020.
                                                                                                                           61
Table A7: How the likelihood of positive and negative jumps attributed to
    monetary and fiscal policy vary with recent market performance
                                                  Positive Monetary               Positive Fiscal
                                              (1)          (2)       (3)     (4)        (5)          (6)
   Cumulative Return Past 66 Trading Days -0.0473* -0.0271 -0.201** -0.0880*** -0.0647* -0.170***
                                            (0.026)     (0.028)   (0.099) (0.034)    (0.038)      (0.063)
   Observations                              1,043        603       440    1,043        603         440
   R-squared                                 0.005        0.01      0.01   0.032      0.018        0.057
   Sample:                                    All      Pre-War Post-War      All    Pre-War Post-War
                                                  Negative Monetary               Negative Fiscal
                                              (7)          (8)       (9)    (10)       (11)         (12)
   Cumulative Return Past 66 Trading Days 0.0701*** 0.0557** 0.207** -0.0205 -0.0336              0.0136
                                            (0.021)     (0.022)   (0.086) (0.028)    (0.031)      (0.040)
   Observations                              1,043        603       440    1,043        603         440
   R-squared                                 0.021        0.02     0.038   0.019       0.03        0.015
   Sample:                                    All      Pre-War Post-War      All    Pre-War Post-War

   Notes: For columns 1-3, the dependent variable equals !"#$%&'( )"*+,(- if '$%.'#- > 0 , and zero
   otherwise. For columns 4-6, the dependent variable equals 1+2,&* )"*+,(- if '$%.'#- > 0 , and zero
   otherwise. Fiscal policy is defined as the sum of government spending and tax policy. The sample is all US
   jump days, 1900-2020. Cumulative return past 66 trading days is the cumulative log return on the broad US
   market index over the preceding 66 trading days. All specifications include HAR controls: volatility over the
   past day, week, month and quarter. Pre-war data run from 1900 to 1937, and postwar data run from 1946 to
   2020.
                                                                                                                   62
Table A8: Clarity Persistence, US, 1900-2020
                                                                           LHS: Clarity of Jump at t (All Years) x 100
Clarity of Last Jump                   0.237***        0.181***         0.132***             0.133***          0.113***     0.117***         0.114***
                                       (0.0320)        (0.0438)         (0.0311)             (0.0308)           (0.0314)     (0.0312)         (0.0390)
Return of Last Jump (Positive)                                                              -404.3***                       -306.0**         -286.7**
                                                                                              (121.5)                         (134.3)          (136.3)
Return of Last Jump (Abs, Negative)                                                         -475.9***                      -403.6***        -397.8***
                                                                                              (115.1)                         (126.8)          (127.0)
Volatility last day                                                                                              -846.9       -814.2           -621.8
                                                                                                                (1103.0)     (1043.0)         (1021.0)
Volatility last week                                                                                             -668.4       -378.3           -328.1
                                                                                                                 (570.3)      (581.6)          (582.3)
Volatility last month                                                                                            -135.2        -124            -78.35
                                                                                                                 (203.3)      (202.2)          (208.0)
ln(Time Since Last Jump)                                                                                                                        1.641
                                                                                                                                                 (1.4)
ln(Time Since Last Jump) x Clarity                                                                                                             0.0592
                                                                                                                                                 (1.2)
Observations                             1,151           1,151             1,151            1,151               1,149         1,149             1,149
R-squared                                0.222           0.256             0.62             0.625               0.625        0.628              0.629
Specification                                       Add Cat. Of Last    Add Cat of                                         Return/Har   ln(Time since last
                                                                                       Return Controls      Har Controls
                                                         Jump          Current Jump                                         controls            jump)
 Notes: Regressions, where the left-hand-side is the clarity of a jump on date t (multiplied by 100), and the right hand side was the clarity of the
 last jump chronologically. The first column has a linear time trend, a postwar dummy variable, and an interaction term between the postwar
 dummy and the time trend. The second column adds the category of the last jump, while the third column adds the category of the current jump
 ­ as long as neither of these categories are unknown. The fourth column adds controls for the return of the last jump, while the fifth column has
 HAR controls, all relative to the last jump (last 1-day, 1-week and 1-month volatility). The sixth column has both the past return and HAR
 controls. The 7th column controls for the log of time since the last jump (in days) and interacts this with the clarity of the last jump.
                                                                                                                                         63US data,
 1900-2020. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table A9: Volatility Following Policy and Non-Policy Jumps, US, 22-day
                                                     Next 22 Days                   Next 5 Days
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
                         Policy         3.628***    0.26
                                         (0.564)  (0.331)
                      Non-Policy        4.673*** 0.991***
                                         (0.637)  (0.361)
                     Commodities
                                                            6.954***   1.716*    9.185***   2.489*
                                                             (1.210)   (0.891)    (2.219)   (1.442)   Notes: Columns 1-4 represent regressions, where
                                                                                                      the left-hand-side is the average percentage squared
                  Corporate Earnings                                                                  return in the 22 days following the jump. In columns
  Non-Policy                                                                                          5-6, the left-hand-side is the average percentage
                                                            3.712***    0.788    3.870***   -0.0762
                                                             (0.797)   (0.538)    (1.358)   (0.871)   squared return in the 5 days following the jump. US
                                                                                                      data, 1900-2020. There are only dummy variables for
                     Macro News                                                                       the jump categories shown, as well as a residual
                                                            4.882*** 1.359*** 5.965***       1.393
                                                             (0.789)  (0.522)  (1.140)      (0.963)   category which includes all the non-enumerated
                                                                                                      categories. Fiscal policy includes government
                   Monetary Policy
                                                            2.187***    -0.668   1.772*** -1.900***   spending and taxes. Enumerated categories
                                                             (0.636)   (0.556)    (0.662)   (0.602)   represent the categories with the highest number of
                                                                                                      jumps by policy/non-policy groups. Columns 1-4:
                     Fiscal Policy
    Policy                                                  6.591***    1.639    7.299***    0.983    Newey-West standard errors with 33 lags. Columns
                                                             (1.559)   (1.298)    (1.919)   (1.253)   1-4: Newey-West standard errors with 8 lags.
                  Sovereign Military                                                                  *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                            1.538*** -0.559 3.266***      0.27
                                                             (0.391)  (0.375)  (0.871)  (0.786)
                           Obs           32,775    32,753    32,775   32,753   32,753   32,753
                       R-Squared         0.109      0.323     0.117    0.325    0.107    0.312
                    Return Controls        NO       YES        NO      YES       NO      YES
                     HAR Controls          NO       YES        NO      YES       NO      YES
  F-Test for joint equality of coefs.    0.0594     0.102    4.94E-05   0.0147 5.04E-05 0.00807
                                                                                                                                          64
Figure A10: Average Number of Codings and Newspapers
per Day by Year for U.S. Stock Market Jumps, 1900 to 2020


                                                            Notes: Shows average
                                                            number of coders and
                                                            newspaper per day, with
                                                            the circle areas
                                                            proportional to the number
                                                            of jumps in that year. Data
                                                            from 1900 to 2020.
                                                            Increase in papers per day
                                                            is coming from adding the
                                                            Financial Times and the
                                                            Houston Chronicle later in
                                                            our sample.




                                                                    65
                   Figure A11: UK Jumps by Year, 1930-2020
                                                                                                         Notes: Each bar is the
                                            Recession and 1976
                                                IMF crisis                                               number of positive or
                                                                                                         negative jumps in that
                                                                                                         year. Shadings indicate
                                                                                                         the number of jumps
                                                                                                         triggered by "Policy",
                                                                  Tech boom/                             "Non-Policy" and
                                                                     bust                                "Unknown" news.
                                                                                           Coronavirus   Unknown includes "no
                                                                                            pandemic     article found". Data
Great Depression                                                                                         from 1930-2020.
                   Suez Crisis




         WWII                    Sterling
                                  Crisis           Black Monday




                                                                        Global Financial
                                                                            Crisis




                                                                                                             66
Figure A12: Geographic Source of UK Jumps by Year, 1930-2020
                                                               Notes: Dot shows the share of
                                                               jumps in that year in the UK by
                                                               their geographic origin. The size
                                                               of the dots reflects the number
                                                               of jumps in that year. Data from
                                                               1930 to 2020. Excludes
                                                               unknown and no article found
                                                               jumps, which have no
                                                               geographic attribution.




                                                                              67
Figure A13: Policy News Also Triggers a Larger Share of Positive than Negative Jumps,
Especially After 1980, in U.K. Data from 1930 to 2020
                                                                      Notes: Each plot is a binscatter
                                                                      (n=20) of jump-level policy scores
                                                                      against jump-day stock returns, where
                                                                      the policy score is the fraction of the
                                                                      jump's codings attributed to policy-
       Slope: 0.743 [.49]                                             related news. For each sub-period, we
                                      Slope: 2.99 [.42]               regress jump-level policy scores on
                                                                      jump-day returns and report the t-
                                                                      statistic on the return variable. For
                                                                      jump days only, we also run the
                                                                      following regression,
                                                                             !"#$%&'
                                                                             = ) + + ,-./,0' + % 1234'56
                                                                             + 7 ,-./,0' ×1234'56 + -9
                                                                      and report the coefficient on the
                                                                      interaction term d, and its t-statistic at
                                                                      the bottom of the figure.




                                                                                          68
Figure A14: Policy News Also Triggers a Larger Share of Positive than Negative Jumps from
1980 to 2020 in 14 Other Countries (Excluding the U.S. and U.K.)
                                                                      Notes: The chart shows a binscatter
                                                                      (n=20) of jump-level policy scores on
                                                                      jump-day stock returns from 1980 to
                                                                      2020 for 14 countries (excluding the
                                                                      United States and the United
                                                                      Kingdom). The policy score is the
                                                                      fraction of the jump's codings
                                                                      attributed to policy-related news. The
                                                                      slope and standard error are from a
           Slope: 1.86 [.139]                                         regression of jump-level policy scores
                                                                      on a constant and jump-level returns.




                                                                                         69
Figure A15: Stock Market Volatility after Jumps Attributed to Macro News, Monetary Policy
News, and All Other Types of News in U.S. Data from 1900 to 2020

                                                                          Notes: Volatility is the average
                                                                          squared percentage return over
                                                                          the next n days after a jump day.
                                                                          To construct the plots, we
                                                                          regress volatility on jump-type
                                                                          indicators (Monetary, Macro, All
                                                                          Other) and include controls for
                                                                          the jump-day return, split into
                                                                          positive and negative
                                                                          components, and volatility over
                                                                          the day, week and month prior to
                                                                          the jump day (HAR controls). The
                                                                          95 percent confidence intervals
                                                                          reflect Newey-West standard
                                                                          errors with lags equal to 1.5
                                                                          times n.




                                                                                          70
Figure A16: Volatility after Positive and Negative Jumps, Jumps Attributed to
Monetary Policy and All Other News Compared, U.S. Data from 1900 to 2020

                                                                                Notes: Volatility is the average
                                                                                squared percentage return over
                                                                                the next n days after a jump
                                                                                day. To construct the plots, we
                                                                                regress volatility on four jump-
                                                                                type indicators (positive and
                                                                                negative jumps attributed to
                                                                                Monetary Policy, and positive
                                                                                and negative jumps attributed to
                                                                                "All Other" news) and include
                                                                                controls for volatility over the
                                                                                day, week and month prior to
                                                                                the jump day (HAR controls).
                                                                                The 95 percent confidence
                                                                                intervals reflect Newey-West
                                                                                standard errors with lags errors
                                                                                with lags equal to 1.5 times n.




                                                                                             71
Figure A17: Volatility after Jumps during Recessions and Expansions, Jumps Attributed
to Monetary Policy and All Other News Compared, U.S. Data from 1900 to 2020



                                                                        Notes: Volatility is the
                                                                        average squared percentage
                                                                        return over the next n days
                                                                        after a jump day. To construct
                                                                        the plots, we split the sample
                                                                        of jump days into recession
                                                                        and expansion periods. For
                                                                        each subsample, we regress
                                                                        we regress volatility on jump-
                                                                        type indicators for Monetary
                                                                        Policy and All Other and
                                                                        include controls for the jump-
                                                                        day return, split into positive
                                                                        and negative components,
                                                                        and volatility over the day,
                                                                        week and month prior to the
                                                                        jump day (HAR controls). The
                                                                        95 percent confidence
                                                                        intervals reflect OLS standard
                                                                        errors.




                                                                                        72
Figure A18: Clarity Index Components Over Time, UK Data, 1930 to 2020
                                                                        Notes: Each red line shows a
                                                                        LOWESS-smoothed fit to the data,
                                                                        with a bandwidth set to 20 percent of
                                                                        the data. Pairwise Agreement is the
                                                                        average pairwise agreement rate in
                                                                        the codings for a given jump. Ease of
                                                                        Coding is rated on a 1-3 scale, with 3
                                                                        being the easiest. Journalist
                                                                        Confidence is rated on a 1-3 scale,
                                                                        with 3 being the most confident.
                                                                        Share Unknown is the percentage of
                                                                        codings for a given jump coded as
                                                                        "Unknown or No Explanation
                                                                        Offered."




                                                                                         73
Figure A19: Clarity Index Over Time, UK Data from 1930 to 2020


                                                            Notes: Clarity is the sum of Ease
                                                            of Coding, Journalist Confidence,
                                                            Pairwise Agreement Rate, and the
                                                            share of codings attributed to
                                                            "Unknown or No Explanation
                                                            Offered" (multiplied by -1) after
                                                            each component is scaled to zero
                                                            mean and unit standard deviation
                                                            one. Clarity is also scaled to have
                                                            zero mean and unit standard
                                                            deviation. The red line shows a
                                                            LOWESS-smoothed fit to the
                                                            clarity data, with a bandwidth set to
                                                            20 percent of the data. See the
                                                            notes to Figure A17 for a
                                                            description of each Clarity
                                                            component.




                                                                              74
Figure A20: News about the United States Triggers a Large Share of National Stock Market
Jumps in Other Countries, a Pattern that Does Not Hold for Europe
                                                                           Notes: This figure shows the
                                                                           yearly share of daily jumps
                                                                           attributed to the US in 15
                                                                           other countries and the yearly
                                                                           share of daily jumps attributed
                                                                           to China in 14 other countries
                                                                           (i.e., excluding China (HK)
                                                                           and China (Shanghai)). The
                                                                           sample runs from 1980 to
 Share




                                                                           2020 but does not cover all
                                                                           countries in all years. Dot size
                                                                           is proportional to the average
                                                                           number of jumps per country
                                                                           in that year. Table A1 reports
                                                                           the sample period by country.




                                                                                      75
