                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      HOW DO BUSINESS OWNERS RESPOND TO A TAX CUT? EXAMINING THE
                199A DEDUCTION FOR PASS-THROUGH FIRMS

                                         Lucas Goodman
                                          Katherine Lim
                                         Bruce Sacerdote
                                         Andrew Whitten

                                       Working Paper 28680
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28680


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank seminar participants at the Office of Tax Analysis, NBER and National Tax
Association for helpful comments. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent
the official position of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
authors declare that they have no relevant financial interests that relate to the research described
in this paper.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Lucas Goodman, Katherine Lim, Bruce Sacerdote, and Andrew Whitten. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Business Owners Respond to a Tax Cut? Examining the 199A Deduction for Pass-through
Firms
Lucas Goodman, Katherine Lim, Bruce Sacerdote, and Andrew Whitten
NBER Working Paper No. 28680
April 2021
JEL No. H0,H2,H25,H3

                                         ABSTRACT

We consider the short-run responses of businesses and their owners to the introduction of Section
199A, a deduction implemented in 2018 that reduced the effective tax rate on pass-through
business income. We study the deduction using several datasets derived from de-identified tax
records of individuals and businesses. Overall, we do not find an increase in 2018 in business
income likely to be eligible for the deduction, either in the time series or among firms with
greater exposure to the deduction due to plausibly exogenous characteristics. We additionally
examine specific hypothesized margins of adjustment. We find that partnerships (one type of
pass-through business) reduce compensation paid to owners, in line with the incentives created by
199A, but that S corporations (another type of pass-through business) mostly do not.
Additionally, we do not find that workers ­ whether new hires or current employees ­ switch
from employee to contractor status to claim the new deduction. Finally, we find no evidence of
changes in real economic activity as measured by physical investment, wages to non-owners, or
employment of nonowners, though this analysis is underpowered in the short-run.

Lucas Goodman                                   Bruce Sacerdote
Office of Tax Analysis                          6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Treasury                          Department of Economics
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW                     Dartmouth College
Washington, DC 20220                            Hanover, NH 03755-3514
Lucas.Goodman@treasury.gov                      and NBER
                                                Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
Katherine Lim
Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank                Andrew Whitten
90 Hennepin Avenue                              Office of Tax Analysis
Minneapolis, MN 55401                           Department of the Treasury
katie.lim@mpls.frb.org                          Washington, DC 20220
                                                andrew.whitten@treasury.gov
     In 2018, over 17 million individual taxpayers benefited from a new deduction on pass-through
business income created by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA).1 The provision generally allows indi-
vidual taxpayers to claim a deduction of 20 percent of Qualified Business Income (QBI), a category
that includes most business income earned by pass-through entities. As a result, pass-through business
owners and the self-employed now typically face lower effective tax rates than wage earners, creating
a number of incentives to increase eligible business income. In this paper, we estimate individual and
business level behavioral responses to the 199A deduction using administrative tax data for tax year
2018.2 We analyze the total effect of the deduction on pass-through income as well as specific margins
across which taxpayers can potentially convert non-qualifying income into QBI.
     With some notable exceptions, we do not find evidence of large responses to the 199A deduction
in 2018. This contrasts with critical predictions made by some commentators that section 199A would
prompt a wave of tax avoidance, encouraging workers to move from employee to contractor status
and causing business owners to shift income and perhaps restructure businesses to obtain a greater
deduction.3 It also stands somewhat in contrast with optimistic predictions that the business tax cut
would encourage economic activity, although it is too early to observe any long-run effects (Hassett
and Hubbard, 2002; Barro and Furman, 2018). Both the optimistic and pessimistic predictions were
plausible a priori given the magnitude of the tax cut implicit in section 199A: the deduction effectively
reduces marginal tax rates on QBI by between two to seven percentage points, with larger cuts for
higher-income taxpayers. However, at least in the first year of data available, the observed effects on
taxpayers' behavior have been modest.
     We test for behavioral responses along a number of margins, using data on both the pass-through
entity and the individual owner. First, we look for increases in income of a sort that would be poten-
tially eligible for the deduction if other requirements are met; we term this income "potential QBI."4
Similarly, we examine shifts in the overall composition of income earned by individual pass-through
owners. To identify this effect, we use two difference-in-differences research designs based on statutory
limitations that restrict 199A eligibility. Specifically, taxpayers with taxable income above a phase-out
range (for married couples in 2018 this range starts at $315,000 and ends at $415,000) do not qualify
for the deduction to the extent that their business income is derived from a specified service trade or
business (SSTB; e.g., medical or legal services).5 This limitation allows us to construct two compar-
isons of taxpayers who are eligible vs. ineligible for the deduction (based on prior year characteristics):
SSTB owners below vs. above the thresholds, and owners above the threshold who have non-SSTB
vs. SSTB income. We caution, though, that we do not observe SSTB status directly; we infer it from
taxpayer-reported NAICS codes. This measurement error biases our results towards null effects.6
     We estimate that exposure to 199A leads to virtually no change in the share of the owners' income
that comes from potential QBI, among those who earned some potential QBI in recent years. Our most
   1 See Table 3 for more detail on the distribution of the deduction.
   2 We  plan to extend our analysis to 2019 outcomes once the data are reasonably complete. 2019 data remain substantially, and
non-randomly, incomplete due to COVID-19-related filing and processing delays.
   3 See for example Duke (2018), Kamin et al. (2019), and Kleinbard (2019).
   4 Potential QBI differs from pass-through income in that it excludes certain types of income from interest, dividends, and

other investment income, as well as guaranteed payments paid by partnerships to partners.
   5 For taxpayers above the thresholds with income derived from non-SSTBs, the deduction may also be limited. It cannot

exceed the greater of 50% of the owners share of W-2 wages paid or the sum of 25% of wages paid plus 2.5% of the owners
basis of qualified property. In our main regressions we ignore this complication and deem non-SSTB income eligible. Later, we
explore the specific incentives generated by this limitation.
   6 A calibration exercise looking at take-up rates of the section 199A deduction for taxpayers classified by our measure of

SSTB status indicates that our measure is useful but imperfect. See Appendix A for details.




                                                               1
credible estimates come from difference-in-difference regression specifications that compare SSTB-
owners above and below the section 199A income thresholds. We can rule out an increase in the
ratio of potential QBI to adjusted gross income (AGI) in excess of 0.4 percentage points, relative to a
baseline mean of 38 percent. We additionally find no effect (or, if anything, small wrong-signed effects)
of section 199A exposure on the overall amount of potential QBI, both in levels and transformed using
the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation (Pence, 2006). We show that these null results are robust
to modifying our definition of potential QBI and to using inverse propensity weighting to address
underlying differences between treatment and control groups.
    Second, we test for changes in the way income is distributed to owners at the business entity level.
Owners of partnerships and S corporations have some scope to shift the classification of income be-
tween the business profits of the firm and the labor compensation of its owners. Only the former may
qualify for the section 199A deduction. For S corporations, some owner compensation for labor ser-
vices is legally required and is taxed as wage income. For partners, receiving guaranteed payments for
labor services is entirely optional.7 Our analysis finds a null average treatment effect of Section 199A
on the wages paid to shareholders of S corporations, both in the time series and by comparing those
firms for whom shifting would be more or less constrained by coordination frictions. In contrast, we see
clear time series evidence that guaranteed payments to partners fell in 2018. Additionally, we find that
wages to shareholders increased among the small subset of S corporations for whom the limitations in
section 199A created an incentive to increase wages. One explanation for these divergent results is that
legal constraints may prevent S corporation owners from reducing wages; no such constraints apply to
increasing wages or reducing guaranteed payments.
    Next, we test whether 199A encourages contract work relative to wage employment using a sample
of individual workers. When the TCJA passed, there was concern that firms and workers would classify
existing or new workers as contractors rather than employees because contractor income would gen-
erally be eligible for the deduction while employee income would not. First, we look at the universe
of workers each year who change status within the same firm, as measured by Employer Identifica-
tion Number (EIN). We find no evidence that the aggregate number of worker transitions to contractor
status has risen nor do we see an increase in the percentage of firms with workers becoming contrac-
tors. Second, we use a sample of individual filers to examine whether there has been an increase in the
prevalence of contractor income either as a primary or secondary income source. The number of people
with contractor income has been rising in previous years, but we see no evidence in the aggregate that
transitions to contractor status have increased above the trend in 2018. When we use a difference in
differences strategy to compare workers above and below the 199A deduction limitation income thresh-
old, we see no evidence that those below the threshold were more likely to become contractors relative
to those above the threshold. We also find no evidence that new 2018 contractors were more likely to
claim the deduction than existing contractors or new 2017 contractors, which we would expect if many
of them became contractors to benefit from the deduction.
    Finally, we test for several potential "real" responses to section 199A. In particular, section 199A
could change the break-even rate of return for investment projects in existing firms, potentially leading
to changes in employment and investment in tangible property. Additionally, the tax reduction caused
by section 199A could be shared with workers in the form of higher wages as a bargaining model
would predict (Risch, 2020). We use entity-level S corporation data to test for the effect of exposure
    7 Guaranteed payments are analogous to wages paid to S corporation owners because they are payments made regardless of

the firm's profit; however, partners can also be compensated for labor services via their distributive share of profits.



                                                            2
to Section 199A on tangible investment, the number of non-shareholder employees, and the total non-
shareholder wage bill. This analysis uses variation in SSTB status of the entity to measure exposure
to the deduction. Our point estimates for each of these three margins are close to zero and statistically
insignificant, though the confidence intervals cannot rule out meaningful effects, especially given the
short-run nature of the evaluation period. Taken together, the results suggest it is unlikely that large
increases in capital and labor investments occurred due to the deduction in the first year it was available.
    Our analysis relates to several existing bodies of work. First, a small set of papers also study tax
provisions that reduce the tax rate on pass-through business income relative to wage income. Prior to
199A, this literature focused on a tax reform in Kansas (which has since been reversed) that exempted
some pass-through income from state income taxation (DeBacker et al., 2018, 2019; Goodman, 2018;
McCloskey, 2018). These papers generally find small effects on real economic activity as well as
shifting between various tax bases, with the exception that DeBacker et al. (2018) do find a large shift
away from guaranteed payments to partners. Along with our previous paper (Goodman et al., 2019),
which simulated the 199A deduction using 2016 data, we contribute to this literature by studying a
nationwide, highly salient change in the tax wedge between business and wage income. Additionally,
we contribute to an unresolved literature that assesses the potential ramifications of section 199A,
arguing that the unintended consequences might be severe (Kamin et al., 2019) or not (Oei and Ring,
2020).8
    Second, we expand the literature that uses tax data to describe the landscape of pass-through busi-
nesses in the United States. Two important such papers are Smith et al. (2019) and Cooper et al. (2016).
The former explores the characteristics of high-income owners of pass-through businesses, concluding
that most income of these owners reflects returns to human capital. The latter traces through the com-
plicated ownership structures of partnerships and finds that partnership income faces a relatively low
tax rate. We contribute to this literature by documenting some of the ways that the TCJA has and has
not altered the organization of pass-through business activity.
    More broadly, we add to studies of tax avoidance in the form of shifting income across tax bases.
This literature goes at least as far back as Slemrod (1992), which proposed a hierarchy of tax response
into (1) timing responses, (2) avoidance responses, including across tax bases, and (3) real responses.
Interested readers are directed to the thorough reviews of this literature in Slemrod and Yitzhaki (2002),
and Saez, Slemrod and Giertz (2012). Indeed, the growth of pass-through entities itself is arguably an
example of such a response: the share of business income earned by pass-through entities increased
substantially after the Tax Reform Act of 1986 made the pass-through form more tax favorable than the
C corporate form in many circumstances (Saez, 2004). Our study examines newly created channels for
tax avoidance, finding substantial shifting along some margins but not others.
    In sum, our paper provides evidence that a large policy change, which altered and created incen-
tives to shift income across a variety of margins, generally did not result in large behavioral responses
among business owners in 2018. In particular, we find null or small effects on behavioral margins that
are somewhat difficult to change, such as changing worker classification, which introduces potential
legal liability for the employer and changes many features of the job in addition to the tax conse-
quences. In contrast, we find a few significant responses across margins that are easier to adjust, such
as partnership guaranteed payments for services. We note that reducing these payments has material
economic effects, as shifting the partner's compensation to shares of profits results in a riskier income
   8 There also exists a small literature studying the response of C corporations to the TCJA, including Dowd, Giosa and Will-

ingham (2020) and Avi-Yonah (2018), among others.



                                                              3
stream. Nonetheless, this is a margin with fewer adjustment frictions. Further analysis will shed light
on whether responses along some of the margins with greater frictions increase in 2019 after more time
has passed for owners to respond to the new tax incentives.


I      Institutional Background
In this section, we provide a brief overview of business taxation to motivate our empirical approach
and offer background on the incentives created by the Section 199A deduction, which applies only
to pass-through business income earned by individual owners.9 Businesses can be divided into two
categories based on their taxation: C corporations and pass-through businesses. Virtually all of the
largest businesses in the United States are taxed as C corporations, which face an entity-level tax on
profits and whose shareholders in general pay tax on dividends and capital gains. However, most small
and medium (and some large) businesses are organized as "pass-through" entities, which generally do
not pay tax at the entity level. Instead, their income "passes through" the business and is taxed as
income to the owner. If the owner is an individual, then the income faces individual tax rates, with
items like long-term capital gains retaining their character and therefore facing lower tax rates than
items like ordinary business income, which faces ordinary income tax rates. Pass-through entities are
characterized as sole proprietorships, S corporations, or partnerships for tax purposes. Limited liability
companies (LLCs) as a default are taxed as sole proprietorships if they are single-member, and as
partnerships if they are multi-member; however, either form of LLC may elect to be taxed as an S
corporation (or as a C corporation, foregoing pass-through status).
    In addition to the issue of whether the business pays an entity-level tax, another key feature of
the pass-through tax regime regards the timing of income. Owners of C corporations pay individual
taxes only when dividends are distributed, while pass-through income is taxed in the year that it is
earned regardless of when the income is distributed to owners. C corporations can generally retain
earnings indefinitely, delaying the individual-level tax on dividends as long as desired. Determining
whether effective tax rates are lower for C corporation or pass-through owners depends on a number of
factors including the corporate tax rate, individual ordinary income tax rates, the dividend tax rate, the
business's net profits, and the extent to which the business retains earnings. Despite this complexity,
the overall trend is clear: since the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the share of business activity occurring in
pass-through entities has been steadily increasing (Smith et al., 2019; Saez, 2004). Today around half
of business income in the United States is earned through pass-through businesses (Cooper et al., 2016)
and in 2018 we estimate that 37.5 million individual tax units reported positive pass-through income
on their tax return.
    The taxation of pass-through owners' compensation for their labor varies depending on the en-
tity type. Owners of sole proprietorships generally do not pay themselves wages; instead ordinary
income from sole proprietorships faces ordinary income tax rates as well as self-employment taxes,
which mimic the payroll taxes that would be applied to wage income. In contrast, active owners of S
corporations are required to receive wages meeting reasonable compensation criteria. This income is
deductible to the S corporation and for the owner is treated as any other wage income and therefore
faces payroll tax. The remainder of S corporation income for these owners is not subject to payroll
or self-employment taxes, creating a tax incentive to receive S corporation income as profits rather
than reasonable compensation. Bull and Burnham (2008) estimate that S corporation owners disguise
    9 Portions   of this section are reproduced verbatim from our working paper, Goodman et al. (2019).


                                                                 4
35 percent of their labor income as profits. Individual partners face something of a hybrid of the tax
treatments of sole proprietors and S corporation shareholders. Like sole proprietors they do not re-
ceive wage income, nor are they subject to reasonable compensation rules and the ordinary income
they receive is generally subject to self-employment taxes. An important exception to this rule is that
traditional "limited partners" (that is, a partner in a general partnership who has limited liability for the
partnership's debt) are not subject to self-employment taxes on their ordinary business income. Thus
their income is taxed like S corporation profits.
    In December 2017, the bill originally titled the "Tax Cuts and Jobs Act" was signed into law. Among
its many provisions is the introduction of Section 199A, which creates a deduction for pass-through
owners, effective for tax years 2018 through 2025.10 Though the rules governing this deduction are
complex, at its core it allows individuals to deduct up to twenty percent of their pass-through business
income from taxable income. This change reduces effective average and marginal tax rates on pass-
through business income relative to other forms of ordinary income such as wages.
    Only income that is considered qualified business income (QBI) is eligible for the section 199A
deduction. QBI from pass-throughs generally includes ordinary business income, rents and royalties,
and interest income properly allocable to the business. As previously mentioned, income from a pass-
through business generally retains its character when passed to an owner, so while capital gains and
qualified dividends from a pass-through business are not considered QBI, they remain eligible for the
lower capital gains rates. Any wages paid to active S corporation owners or guaranteed payments paid
to partners are also not considered QBI.
    There are a number of provisions that limit income eligibility for the 199A deduction. As we show
in Goodman et al. (2019) these limitations could have a large effect on the distribution of the deduction
benefits in the absence of behavioral responses. Individuals with taxable income above the top of a
phase-in range (in 2018, $415,000 for married couples and $207,500 for other taxpayers) are subject
to two guardrails.11 The first is that income derived from a specified service trade or business (SSTB)
is not considered QBI and therefore is ineligible for the deduction.12 The second is that, for taxpayers
above the top of the phase-in range, any portion of the deduction derived from a non-SSTB is reduced
(potentially to zero) if the business does not pay a sufficient amount of wages to employees or own
a sufficient amount of tangible capital. Specifically, the amount of the deduction derived from a non-
SSTB cannot exceed the greater of: half of the owner's share of W-2 wages, or the sum of 25 percent
of the owner's share of W-2 wages plus 2.5 percent of the owner's share of the tangible capital of the
firm.13
    For all taxpayers, the section 199A deduction can only offset ordinary taxable income, not long-
term capital gains or qualified dividends. In particular, the deduction cannot exceed 20 percent of
  10 Section  199A replaces former Section 199, which provided the Domestic Production Activities Deduction. Section 199A
also allows a deduction for qualified Real Estate Investment Trust dividends, qualified publicly traded partnership income, and
certain income from co-operatives. In addition, Section 199A allows trusts to benefit from the general pass-through deduction.
We do not study these aspects of the law.
   11 In 2018, these limitations are phased in from $315,000 to $415,000 in income for joint filers and $157,500 to $207,500 for

other filers. For taxpayers with incomes in the phase-in region, only a fraction of the limitations apply while for taxpayers with
incomes above the end of the phase-in region the limitations are in full effect. The threshold values are indexed for inflation.
   12 To be clear, for taxpayers below the phase-in thresholds, SSTBs can generate QBI. Therefore we include SSTB income in

our definition of "potential QBI".
   13 "Owner's share of wages" refers to the taxpayer's share of the business owned (for purposes of the wage deduction) mul-

tiplied by the total W-2 wage bill paid to all employees. "Owner's share of tangible capital" refers essentially to the owner's
share of the business owned (for purposes of depreciation deductions) multiplied by the total cost of depreciable property that
was placed in service within the past 10 years (or longer for longer-lived assets such as structures). The total wage bill includes
the wages paid to S corporation shareholders, but does not include guaranteed payments paid to partners.



                                                                5
ordinary taxable income, meaning that taxpayers with little or no ordinary taxable income may not
receive much tax savings from the 199A deduction.14 In addition, owners of multiple businesses must
offset positive QBI with any negative QBI, potentially reducing the deduction. If the net quantity of
QBI is negative, it must be carried forward, reducing the section 199A deduction in future years when
QBI is positive.15


II      Data
Our analyses use four different representative samples of U.S. taxpayers and businesses as well as
a complete sample of workers who changed their worker classification. We need multiple datasets
to study the distribution of 199A benefits and to examine responses at the pass-through entity level,
the owner level, and among individual workers. In each dataset, all dollar-denominated variables are
adjusted for inflation to 2018 levels. Each sample is drawn from the near-universe of administrative
records of tax returns and information returns. The individual samples are summarized in Table 1 and
the S corporation sample is summarized in Table C1.


II.A      Pass-through Owner Sample
Our first sample is intended to capture individuals who are ex-ante likely to be impacted by changes in
the tax rate on pass-through income. We use this sample to examine how pass-through owners' earnings
respond to 199A. First we draw a stratified random sample of all individuals who appear as a primary
filer of a Form 1040 reporting nonzero pass-through income ­ i.e. income reported on Schedules C,
E, or F ­ in any year between 2008 to 2017. In order to maximize power given the nature of the
quasi-experimental variation, we oversample taxpayers with high-income.16 In all specifications, we
use sample weights to ensure the population is representative of the population of those who earned
pass-through income at some point between 2008-2017. We compile information from individuals'
tax returns and information returns for tax years 2008 through 2018 during which these individuals
are between the ages 18 and 90.17 We refer to the resulting panel dataset as the "Pass-through Owner
Sample".
     The information on businesses owned by individuals in our sample come from Form 1040 Sched-
ules C, E, and F, as well as the tax returns and Schedule K-1s of partnerships and S corporations. From
Schedule C (for sole proprietors), we gather total gross receipts, income before expenses, wages paid,
and expenses summed across all sole proprietorships for that taxpayer. We also retain the same vari-
ables at the business level for each of the taxpayer's two largest sole proprietorships (measured by the
absolute value of income), along with the reported NAICS codes for the business. We then conduct
the same exercise for Schedule K-1s from partnerships and S corporations; we gather totals across the
two different entity types as well as business-level data (including ownership shares) for the two largest
Schedule K-1s, as measured by the absolute value of ordinary income. We use NAICS codes and
    14 This limitation is meaningful because 20 percent of QBI could in certain cases exceed 20 percent of ordinary taxable income

due to tax deductions unrelated to the taxpayer's business, such as standard or itemized deductions.
    15 See Joint Committee on Taxation (2019) for a more detailed description of the 199A deduction, including examples of how

it is calculated.
    16 In particular, the sampling rate is 0.2 if the individual ever had AGI in excess of $300,000 or below -$100,000. If the

individual does not meet this condition, but ever had AGI in excess of $200,000 or less than $0, the sampling rate is 0.1.
Otherwise the sampling rate is 0.005. For the purpose of this sampling regime, we multiply the AGI of non-married filers by two.
    17 We follow such individuals over time, regardless of whether they are primary filers, secondary filers, or nonfilers in other

years. We exclude the year of death from our sample if applicable.



                                                                6
ownership shares from these K-1s, as well as the two highest-income Schedule Cs, to estimate 199A
eligibility for high-income business owners subject to the 199A limitations.
    Table 1 shows that the most common type of pass-through income is sole proprietorship income;
about one third of observations have sole proprietorship income while only eleven percent have either S
corporation or partnership income. For all types of pass-through business income, the variation across
our sample is quite large due to the skewed nature of business income.
    Half of our observations have our income construct "potential QBI". We define potential QBI as the
sum of all net income reported on Schedules C and F, rental and royalty income reported on Schedule
E, and ordinary business income reported on the individuals' Schedule K-1 information returns filed
by partnerships and S corporations.18 This income is considered "potential" QBI since qualification
for the deduction may depend on (i) whether the activity rises to the level of a trade or business, (ii)
whether the business is an SSTB, and (iii) whether the owner satisfies the wage and capital limitations,
among other factors, as explained in the prior section. Potential QBI excludes guaranteed payments to
partners, as this income is entirely ineligible for the 199A deduction.19


II.B      2018 Sample
Our second dataset is representative of all individual tax returns in 2018. We only use it in this subsec-
tion, providing information on Section 199A claiming to offer context for other results in the paper. We
take a stratified random sample of tax returns, using sampling weights to ensure representativeness.20
We refer to this as the "2018 Sample". It includes around 6 million observations.
    As Table 1 shows, we estimate that 27 percent of individual tax units had potential QBI in 2018.
Around half of these taxpayers claimed a Section 199A deduction. In Table 2, we show how these de-
ductions were dispersed amongst the income distribution. We also estimate the value of the deductions
using a crude calculation that only takes into account statutory brackets and rates, ignoring interactions
with other deductions, tax credits, and the alternative minimum tax schedule.
    In aggregate, we estimate that $151 billion in 199A deductions were claimed in 2018, providing
taxpayers with $43 billion in reduced tax liability. Of the 40.7 million taxpayers who reported pass-
through income, 42 percent (17.2 million) enjoyed tax savings by claiming a 199A deduction. For most
of these taxpayers, the tax savings were quite small. The median savings provided by 199A, among
those with positive savings, was about $200, while the mean was $2,300. These results reflect that
pass-through business income is known to skew towards the top of the income distribution ­ even more
so than other types of income such as wage income or corporate business income (Cooper et al., 2016).
    Of the $43 billion in tax savings provided by Section 199A in 2018, we estimate that 86 percent
($37 billion) accrues to taxpayers in the top decile of AGI. This group receives 77 percent of pass-
through business income (after excluding the negative AGI bin), and thus benefits disproportionately
from 199A. To some extent, this result arises naturally under a progressive tax code, as deductions are
more valuable in higher tax brackets. However, the 199A limitations for high-income taxpayers reduce
  18 For Schedule E rents and royalties, we observe gross income for each category but net income only for both categories

combined. To compute net income separately for rents and royalties, we allocate all of the implied expenses associated with
rental and royalty income to rents.
  19 In some specifications reported in Appendix B, we report results using an alternative measure of potential QBI that excludes

Schedule E rental real estate income and royalties, which is less likely to rise to the level of trade or business.
  20 If AGI exceeds $500,000 or is below -$100,000, the sampling rate is 1. If the individual does not meet this condition, but

AGI exceeds $300,000 or is below $0, the sampling rate is 0.5. If AGI is between $200,000 and $300,000, the sampling rate is
0.1. Otherwise, the sampling rate is 0.015.




                                                               7
the tax savings available to those in the top AGI decile. Absent these statutory limitations on eligibility
for Section 199A, these high-income taxpayers would receive an even greater share of the tax savings.
    Pass-through income and the benefits of 199A are skewed within the top decile, the top one percent,
and even the top 0.1 percent. Taxpayers in the top one percent of AGI receive 50 percent of pass-through
income but 58 percent of 199A tax savings ($25 billion). Thus the majority of pass-through income
and 199A savings in the top decile actually accrue to the top one percent. Moreover, the top 0.1 percent
highest-AGI taxpayers alone capture nearly one-third of total 199A tax savings ($13 billion). Within
the top 0.1 percent (AGI exceeding $2.4 million), the skewness continues. The median non-zero tax
savings from 199A for this group is $12,500, while the average is $129,100.


II.C      Individual Tax Filer Sample
Our third dataset is a representative sample at the individual level, and it allows us to study worker
transitions between employee and contractor status from year to year. In particular, it allows us to
check whether individuals who have no previous pass-through experience (and therefore are omitted
from the Pass-through Owner Sample) become independent contractors in 2018 in order to benefit from
the 199A deduction. The sample is representative of all individuals between the ages of 25 and 65 who
file a tax return as a primary or secondary filer (the "Individual Tax Filer Sample"). We start by drawing
a one-percent random sample of all individuals from Social Security Administration records and create
a panel of tax records from 2007 to 2018. Individuals are only included in the analysis sample in years
when they file a Form 1040 (as a primary or secondary filer) and meet the age criteria. The sample
includes nearly 38 million person-year observations.
     We measure the individual's labor income as the sum of wages from Form W-2 and contractor
earnings from non-employee compensation on Form 1099-MISC.21 As shown in Table 1, around 53
percent of observations have labor income; 51 percent have W-2 earnings and 6 percent have Form
1099-MISC earnings. The average wage earnings are around $21,100 while the average contractor
earnings are around $1,300. We do not use income reported on the Form 1099-K to measure contractor
income because of inconsistent reporting over time, including substantial reporting changes between
2017 and 2018 (Handwerger, 2018; Collins et al., 2019).


II.D      Reclassified Worker Sample
Our fourth dataset focuses on workers who change their form of compensation at the same firm in order
to study individuals' transitions between employee and contractor status within the firm. In particular,
we test for a break in the trend of employee-to-contractor reclassifications of worker-firm relationships
in 2018 in response to 199A. The dataset includes the universe of workers who received non-employee
compensation on a Form 1099-MISC in year  and also wages on a Form W-2 issued by the same
employer (as proxied by EIN) in any of years  - 1, , or  + 1.
    The Reclassified Worker Sample covers 2007 through 2018 and has 32 million observations. Due
to the sampling criteria, both wage earnings and contractor income are common. Seventy-eight percent
of observations have wage earnings, and 58 percent have contractor income. Moreover, 36 percent of
observations have both types of income.22 Average wage and contractor earnings are around $34,000
 21 Contractor earnings are included only if they exceed 600 nominal dollars, which is the threshold for mandatory reporting.

We exclude payments under the threshold to provide consistency in measuring contractor activity regardless of the issuing firm.
 22 This number is not reported in the table.




                                                              8
and $10,000, respectively.


II.E      S Corporation Sample
Our fifth and final sample is a panel of S corporations from 2012 to 2018 (the "S Corporation Sam-
ple"). These data allow us to examine entity-level outcomes of S corporations, including wages paid
to shareholders, wages paid to other employees, and investment. It is a stratified random sample of
all S corporations that existed at some point between 2012 and 2017, oversampling firms with high-
income owners.23 In all specifications, we use sample weights to make the sample representative of the
broader population of S corporations. To each firm-year observation, we attach information about the
shareholders, including the fraction of shareholders who are above the 199A phaseout thresholds. Ad-
ditionally, we use the firm's industry, indicated by reported NAICS code, to proxy for the firm's status
as an SSTB. We also simulate whether the firm's high-income shareholders would have been bound by
the wage limitation had section 199A been in effect that year.24
    Appendix Table C1 reports summary statistics for this sample. Mean net income (in 2018 dollars)
exceeds $115,000, while median net income is $11,000. Additionally, while mean wages to sharehold-
ers are in excess of $50,000, we find that only slightly more than half of S corporations pay a wage
to at least one shareholder. The mean number of shareholders is 1.6, with 65 percent of firms having
exactly one shareholder. Lastly, we find that one sixth of shareholders have income above the section
199A income thresholds.


III       Empirical Strategy and Results
In this section we present our empirical analyses. We divide the analyses of the effect of 199A into
three categories: (i) changes in broad measures of pass-through income, (ii) adjustments along specific
behavioral margins, including owner compensation and contracting vs. wage employment, and (iii)
early evidence on real economic outcomes, such as business investment.


III.A       The Broad Effect of 199A on Pass-through Income
By decreasing effective tax rates on QBI, Section 199A created an incentive to earn or report more of
this income. Using a number of different approaches, we test whether pass-through business owners
responded to this incentive. First, we check for a break in the trend of pass-through income receipt in
2018. Figure 1 plots estimated counts of pass-through owners over time, normalized to one in 2017,
using our Pass-through Owner Sample. The solid black series plots the number of owners with non-zero
pass-through income, which exhibits a relatively constant trend from 2010 to 2018.25 The remaining
series in Figure 1 plot the count of owners with pass-through income exceeding $10,000, $100,000, or
$1,000,000 (in 2018 dollars) respectively. These series tell a similar story: while there is year-to-year
  23 In particular, if the firm has an owner with AGI in excess of $750,000 (in 2018 dollars) or less than -$100,000 in some year

between 2012 and 2017, the sampling rate is 1. Otherwise, if the firm has an owner with AGI in excess of $150,000 or below $0,
the sampling rate is 0.5. The sampling rate is 0.1 for all other firms. For the purpose of this sampling regime, we multiply the
AGI of non-married filers by two.
  24 In practice, the measure of capital observed in the data is quite different from the definition of capital relevant for the 199A

calculation. Thus, for the analysis of S corporations, we consider only the wage limitation.
  25 For this purpose, we define pass-through income as "potential QBI" (labeled "QBI" in the figure) ­ that is, income that

would have constituted QBI in 2018 had the other requirements of section 199A been met.




                                                                 9
variation, there are no large trend breaks in 2018. Thus, at first glance, the time series fails to uncover
evidence of a large response to section 199A.
    While the time series evidence is the simplest way to display changes in pass-through income
receipt, it cannot rule out the possibility of a confounding temporal effect. In the absence of section
199A, pass-through income might have fallen in 2018. Therefore, our main analysis uses a difference-
in-differences regression framework to compare groups of taxpayers who are eligible for 199A to those
who are not due to the limitations of 199A built into the statute. As discussed in section I, not all
pass-through income constitutes QBI and qualifies for the 199A deduction. In particular, we focus on
the limitation on income received from SSTBs that applies to taxpayers with taxable income above the
199A thresholds.
    This limitation allows us to construct two sets of treatment and control groups. In one identification
strategy, we compare SSTB owners predicted to be below the 199A income thresholds (treatment) to
those above (control), based on prior-year income. Our classification of owners as SSTB owners or
non-SSTB owners is similarly based on prior year characteristics and is described in detail in Appendix
A. In a second identification strategy, we compare taxpayers with non-SSTB businesses (treatment)
to taxpayers with SSTB businesses (control) among taxpayers predicted to be above the 199A income
thresholds. This approach implicitly assumes that the non-SSTB businesses have sufficient wages
and/or capital to make their income eligible for the deduction, and therefore are properly considered
treated. To the extent this assumption is invalid, it biases the results of the second regression framework
towards a null finding. In Appendix A we also show that while the wage and capital limitation may
be binding for some owners, taxpayers above the threshold have relatively high rates of claiming for a
select group of non-SSTB NAICS categories. In both identification strategies, we characterize taxpay-
ers as above or below the income threshold using the beginning of the phase-in of the 199A limitations
($315,000 for married couples in 2018).
    Our difference-in-differences regressions estimate how outcomes change for the treated versus un-
treated group after 199A is implemented in 2018. Our estimation equation is:
                                                  2016
                                                  
                 = 0 + 1   +                                 + 2018   +  +  +  .                                              (1)
                                                  =2013

Here  refers to an outcome for taxpayer  in year  (2013-2018). The indicator   is a proxy for
(hypothetical) 199A eligibility in year ; it equals one if and only if the taxpayer in year  - 1 had either
non-SSTB status or was below the 199A income threshold. By using prior-year characteristics, we
avoid endogenous selection into eligibility in 2018. We control for year ( ) and individual ( ) fixed
effects. The term 1 captures the constant difference in outcomes between the treatment and control
groups.26 The coefficients  capture year-specific differences, with 2017 as the omitted category. Our
primary coefficient of interest is 2018 , which gives the difference in outcomes between the treatment
and control group in 2018, after adjusting for the fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the
individual level.
    Under the assumption that, in the absence of 199A, there would be no difference between the
average outcomes of the treatment and control groups in 2018 once we adjust for the fixed effects,
then 2018 captures the average treatment effect of section 199A for our sample. This is the standard
difference-in-difference identification assumption, often referred to as "parallel trends," in reference
  26 This term is not subsumed into the individual fixed effects because a given individual could switch SSTB status, or predicted

income, during the sample period.




                                                               10
to the common time trend captured by the  parameters. We note that while our controls include
the average difference between the treatment and control groups across all years (  ), as well as
year and individual fixed effects, they do not include any time-varying taxpayer characteristics. To the
extent such characteristics are correlated with the outcome variable and they exhibit non-parallel time
trends between the treatment and control groups, our coefficients would be a biased estimate of the true
treatment effect.27
    We study three different measures of pass-through business income as outcomes. The first is the
ratio of potential QBI to AGI. These regressions only include taxpayers with positive AGI, and the
share of potential QBI is censored at zero and one. The second is potential QBI in levels, with non-zero
values Winsorized at the 1 percent and 99 percent levels. The third is a noise-reducing transformation
of potential QBI known as the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) (Pence, 2006). For potential QBI that is
positive and not close to zero, the IHS is close to the natural logarithm (plus a constant).28 Each outcome
has advantages and disadvantages. Potential QBI in levels is most transparent, but this specification has
the potential to be driven by the tails of the distribution, increasing variance. The IHS specification
mitigates this problem in the tails, at the cost of the results being more difficult to interpret. The ratio of
potential QBI to AGI is more precise, but will miss any effect on QBI for those for whom the entirety
of their AGI comes from QBI in all years. Nevertheless, using all three of these measures together
provides a comprehensive examination of changes to pass-through income.
    Our first set of results compares SSTB owners above the income threshold with those below.
Across all three measures of pass-through income, we find little evidence that taxpayers increased
their business income in response to the section 199A deduction. In Figure 2, we plot the difference-
in-differences coefficients ( ) for each year for the three outcomes. In Panel A, we find a precisely
estimated null effect of the deduction on the share of AGI that is potential QBI in 2018. The 95-percent
confidence interval rules out an increase in excess of 0.4 percentage points relative to a baseline mean
of 38 percent. The coefficients for prior years show reasonably parallel trends, with economically
small coefficients in all years. This suggests that the treatment and control groups had similar trends
in the QBI share of AGI prior to 2018 and that this continued in 2018. Next, in Panel B we show the
estimated effect of Section 199A on potential QBI in levels. This specification suffers from modest
pre-existing trends, in which QBI experiences faster growth in the treatment group (those below the
income threshold) relative to the control group (those above the income threshold) of roughly $3,000
over the 2013-2018 period, relative to a baseline mean of $155,000. However, if anything, this trend
reverses in 2018, which presents a descriptive pattern consistent with a null effect. Finally, in Panel C
we present results for the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of potential QBI. This specification
uncovers a small but statistically significant negative (wrong-signed) effect: a reduction of potential
QBI of about five percent.29 Again the 2018 effect reverses the prior years' trend, consistent with a
null effect of 199A. Taken together, the three panels of Figure 2 corroborate the inference from Figure
1 that section 199A did not increase business income in 2018.
    Our second set of results focuses on the comparison between non-SSTB and SSTB business owners.
The analysis includes only taxpayers who have taxable income above the income threshold. Non-SSTB
owners are considered treated while SSTB owners are the control group. This specification suffers from
  27 In Appendix B, we show results under alternative specifications, including weighted regressions using time-varying taxpayer

characteristics to construct treatment propensity scores.    
  28 In particular, the inverse hyperbolic sine is ln  +
                                                     (                      )
                                                                2 + 1 , where we scale  in thousands of dollars.
  29 For positive values of potential QBI that are not close to zero, the resulting coefficient estimates can be interpreted as a

percentage effect.



                                                              11
substantial pre-existing trends; each outcome experiences faster growth in the treatment group relative
to the control group. The difference in growth remains even after reweighting the populations based on
observable traits to make them more similar (see Appendix B), suggesting that SSTB business income
is growing more slowly than non-SSTB business income during this time period. In light of this, we
stress that a traditional difference-in-differences estimate is unlikely to recover a causal effect in this
setting. Nonetheless, these results present a descriptive pattern consistent with a null effect. In all
panels, the effect in 2018 is either zero or a small reversal of the pre-existing trend, a wrong-signed
effect, as section 199A is predicted to increase the amount of pass-through income.
    Overall, we find no evidence that section 199A increased pass-through income in 2018. The time se-
ries evidence shows no measurable increase, while our difference-in-differences approach reveal either
economically small, statistically insignificant, or wrong-signed results across a number of specifica-
tions.


III.B      Specific margins of adjustment
While we do not find evidence that overall business income increased due to section 199A, there may
be specific behavioral responses that our previous analyses cannot detect. In this section, we take a
closer look at some of these behavioral margins. We begin with changes in compensation for owners
of S corporations and partnerships in response to incentives to reclassify income. Next, we consider
movement across the boundary between employee and independent contractor relationships. If large
enough, the behavior we study here would potentially show up in our previous analyses. However,
some of the incentives we consider only apply to a small fraction of pass-through business owners,
making it unlikely that we would observe their effects in the broad levels of pass-through income.

III.B.1    Owner compensation

First, we analyze whether owners of partnerships and S corporations reduced their labor compensation
(which is not eligible for 199A), creating a corresponding increase in the "profits" of the firm (which
might be eligible for 199A). For S corporations, labor compensation takes the form of W-2 wages.
In general, because wages are subject to FICA while the profits of S corporations are not, owners
face a wedge (predating TCJA) in favor of profits.30 In order to protect the FICA tax base, the IRS
requires owners of S corporations to pay themselves "reasonable compensation" for their labor services,
though there is no hard-and-fast rule that establishes whether compensation is reasonable. Section 199A
increased the tax preference in favor of profits, strengthening the incentive for owners to reduce their
wages.
    To identify the effect of section 199A on wages paid to S corporation shareholders, we compare
single-shareholder to multiple-shareholder firms. For a single-shareholder firm, the division between
wages and profits is entirely meaningless but for tax ­ the total pre-tax income is unaffected. By
contrast, in a multiple-shareholder firm in which at least one owner is not receiving a wage (in the
pre-199A counterfactual), the division is potentially meaningful. If the wage recipient were to reduce
his or her wages, the pre-tax income of each shareholder would change: each dollar of wage reduction
increases the profits of the firm by one dollar, but increases the pre-tax allocation to the wage-recipients
  30 One exception is high-income owners of S corporations who qualify as "passive" under the rules of section 469, who are

required to pay the 3.8 percent Net Investment Income Tax on S corporation profits, which would typically be the same as the
3.8 percent rate on wages for such individuals.



                                                            12
by less than one dollar. Thus, one would expect a larger response, all else equal, by single-shareholder
firms.31
    In Figure 4 we display the raw percentage change in wages paid to shareholders for both single
shareholder and multiple shareholder firms from 2013 to 2018.32 For each firm , we calculate  , the
wages paid to shareholders in year . We measure the percentage change as the arc-change, also known
as the Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh (DHS) difference (Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh, 1996), equal to
    -,-1
0.5( +,-1 ) . This formulation has the advantage of being defined when one endpoint is zero. In the
aggregate time series, we see no clear reduction in shareholder wages in 2018. Both single and multi-
shareholder firms' wages move in parallel over the sample period and, if anything, single shareholder
firms have a small increase in wages in 2018.
    In Figure 5 we perform the comparison between single and multi-shareholder firms more formally
in a difference-in-differences regression. Panel A shows the results from the simplest specification with
year effects and year-by-treatment effects, where 2017 is the omitted category. There does not appear to
be anything unusual about growth in wages for single shareholder firms in 2018 relative to the growth
in multi-shareholder firms. The point estimates from the simple specification suggest that wages in
single shareholder firms generally grew faster than wages in multi-shareholder over the sample period,
although the differences are not statistically significant. In particular, the 2018 estimated treatment
effect is statistically insignificant, wrong-signed, and economically small (less than one percent). Panels
B, C, and D add additional fixed effects interacted with year. Panel B controls for industry-time fixed
effects; Panel C controls for time fixed effects interacted with bins of (lagged) business income (defined
as ordinary income plus wages to shareholders); and Panel D controls for the full interaction of industry,
lagged business income bin, and year. Under any of these specifications, we can rule out a meaningfully
different response in 2018 between single- and multi-shareholder firms. In particular, the income-by-
time fixed effects of Panels C and D reduce the small, wrong-signed effect in 2018 even closer to zero.
    Next, we study owner compensation in partnerships, which are not allowed to pay their partners
W-2 wages. Instead, to the extent the partnership wishes to pay a partner a "salary" in exchange for
services provided, this is referred to as a "guaranteed payment."33 Guaranteed payments are (but for
tax) economically identical to wages: a partner will be allocated her guaranteed payments (if any) plus
her allocative share of the partnership income determined after subtracting guaranteed payments to all
partners. However, unlike wages, guaranteed payments are reported on the partner's Schedule E within
the broader category of partnership income.
    To explore the effect of 199A on guaranteed payments to partners, we focus on time series evidence.
We do so for two reasons. First, the effect is clear in the time series. Second, the baseline levels
of guaranteed payments between SSTBs and non-SSTBs, and between those above and below the
phaseout thresholds, are very different, complicating any difference-in-differences analysis. In Figure
6 we use the Pass-through Owner Sample to show the simple time series of the percentage change in
guaranteed payments to partners, averaged across individuals.34 This series is fairly stable with modest
positive growth throughout the sample window, with a clear drop in excess of 20 percent in 2018. Thus
  31 We estimate that 44% of firms with more than one shareholder, with positive wages to at least one shareholder, also paid

zero wages to at least one shareholder.
  32 In all specifications, we use sample weights such that the sample is representative of the population of S corporations.
  33 Less commonly, a partner can receive guaranteed payments in exchange for capital provided to the partnership; such guar-

anteed payments are also generally ineligible for 199A. In our data, both types of guaranteed payments are aggregated together.
Therefore, any estimated effects on guaranteed payments will include effects on both components.
  34 As in the case of S corporation wages, we again use the arc change (also known as the DHS difference):            -1
                                                                                                                  0.5( +,-1 )
                                                                                                                              ,
where  is the total guaranteed payments received by an individual  at year .



                                                             13
it does appear that partnerships responded to 199A by reducing (or eliminating) guaranteed payments.
    In Appendix Figure C1 we present this evidence in a slightly different way. Among individuals
who were partners in a partnership in both  - 1 and , we compute the share who "start" making
guaranteed payments (i.e., guaranteed payments are positive in  conditional on zero in  - 1) and
the share that "stop" (guaranteed payments are zero in  conditional on being positive in  - 1). The
left panel shows that the share stopping was relatively constant between 2006 and 2017, with some
expected variation around the Great Recession, before a large, nearly ten percentage point increase
in 2018. Thus there appears to have been a response along the extensive margin, with partnerships
ceasing guaranteed payments to some partners. The right panel shows that the share starting has been
relatively constant near 1.5 to 2 percent, with a small but noticeable spike in 2017, potentially reflecting
anticipatory behavior.
    Finally, we consider the response from a small subset of S corporations for whom 199A created an
incentive to increase owners' wages. As described in Section I, taxpayers who are above the income
threshold are still potentially eligible to use the 199A deduction subject to two restrictions: the business
must not be an SSTB, and the deduction is limited by a function of wages (to shareholders or otherwise)
and tangible capital. Specifically, the amount of the deduction cannot exceed the greater of (i) 50 per-
cent of the owner's share of W-2 wages paid by the business to all employees, or (ii) 25% of wages plus
2.5 percent of the owner's share of tangible capital. For illustration, suppose a high-income taxpayer's
only business earns profits of  before paying wages to shareholders (), and further assume that the
S corporation pays no wages to any other employee and does not have sufficient tangible capital. In
that case, the deduction would equal the smaller of 0.2( - ) (the net income of the firm) or 0.5.
Whenever  < 2     7  , the firm could increase its 199A deduction by increasing  .
    To study whether firms with such an incentive do in fact increase their wages to shareholders, we
refine our S corporation sample to include only single-shareholder firms in years when the wage limi-
tation is relevant. Specifically, we restrict to those firms that (1) are non-SSTBs (determined based on
 - 1 reported NAICS code), (2) have only one shareholder (as of  - 1), and (3) for which that share-
holder was above the bottom of the 199A phase-out threshold in  - 1. This severe set of restrictions
drops 94 percent of S corporation observations. Within the remaining group, we define a firm-year
observation to be "treated" if the wage limitation would have limited their deduction in  - 1 by at least
50 percent.35 Roughly 8% of observations in this subset are identified as "treated."
    In Figure 7, we plot the time path of wage changes (again measured using the DHS difference) for
businesses that are owned by taxpayers who are bound (solid line) versus not bound (dashed line) by the
wage limitation. There is a large level shift between the two series. Those that are bound have at least
a twenty percent increase in wages in every year, while those that aren't bound show small declines in
wages paid every year. This pattern likely reflects mean reversion: those who are bound (not bound) in
 - 1 will tend to be those whose wages to shareholders are temporarily low (high) in  - 1 and thus will
tend to experience an increase (decrease) from  - 1 to . Importantly for our identification, however,
these lines move mostly in parallel prior to 2018. That is, the mean reversion appears to be roughly
constant over time. The figure shows that these series diverge to some extent in 2018, with those bound
by the wage limitation increasing their wages more in 2018, as hypothesized, and with no such effect
for the group that is not bound.
   35 Because we are not able to observe the proper capital measure, we consider only the component of the limitation that refers

to 50 percent of wages. This will tend to cause us to misclassify certain firms as "bound" that are not actually bound, which will
have the general effect of attenuating our estimates.




                                                               14
     Figure 8 plots this in event study form in a manner analogous to Figure 8, including the same set
of fixed effects in panels B, C, and D. All four panels yield qualitatively similar results: prior to 2017,
businesses with and without an owner hypothetically bound by the wage limitation experience similar
time trends in wages paid. In 2018, those with an owner bound by the limitation see a 10 percent
increase in wages paid relative to businesses without an owner bound by the limitation, and the jump is
statistically significant.
     To summarize, we find no effect of 199A on wages to S corporation shareholders in general, while
we do find fairly large effects in the expected direction for guaranteed payments to partnerships and
wages to shareholders in the small subset of S corporations that faced an incentive to increase wages.
One potential explanation for this discrepancy is that owners of S corporations may not reduce their
wages because they are legally constrained by the reasonable compensation standard. By contrast, there
is no legal constraint preventing owners of S corporations from increasing their wages or preventing
owners of partnerships from reducing or eliminating guaranteed payments.
     The behavioral responses we have uncovered in this section affect only a small subset of business
owners and are consistent with our null results on the effect of 199A on business income overall.
Around 8 percent of partners received guaranteed payments in 2017 and the total amount of guaranteed
payments represented only 11 percent of individual partnership income. Moreover, only 0.5 percent
of S corporations, accounting for 1.7 percent of S corporation income, faced an incentive to increase
owner wages.

III.B.2   Employment vs. contracting

Finally, we examine whether the deduction affected transitions between employee and contractor sta-
tus. Under section 199A, income received as an independent contractor is generally eligible for the
deduction because it is taxed as business income, while wages earned by an employee are not eligible.
At the time of the law's passage, many observers speculated that a substantial number of workers might
transition from employees to contractors to decrease their tax liability. The new tax differential added a
consideration to firms' and workers' decisions about how to structure employment arrangements. Prior
to 199A, there was already a modest increase in hiring workers as contractors rather than employees
(Katz and Krueger, 2019; Abraham et al., 2018). This rise in contracting could be driven by firms'
and workers' changing demands for the traditional employee benefits versus workplace autonomy and
flexibility. Additionally, new platform economy companies such as Uber and Lyft have used a large
number of contractors to provide their services. We confirm the rising trend in contractor transitions
using information on non-employee compensation from the Form 1099-MISC. One caveat for our anal-
ysis is that we do not directly use information from the Form 1099-K, where many platform economy
workers receive their compensation, because of inconsistent reporting over time among some compa-
nies (Handwerger, 2018; Collins et al., 2019). If 1099-K recipients properly report their income, they
are included in our analysis when we consider Schedule C filing as a proxy for contracting. However,
to the extent that new 1099-K recipients fail to report their income, we are unable to detect a rise in this
activity.
    We use a number of approaches to test whether contracting has increased in response to Section
199A. First, we examine whether worker reclassifications within firms increased in 2018. While some
analysts predicted that these types of changes would be substantial, the Section 199A regulations spec-
ify that the nature of the work relationship must change for an employee to become an independent



                                                    15
contractor; otherwise the contractor income would be deemed ineligible for the deduction, possibly
disincentivizing some of these transitions. We begin with our Reclassified Worker Sample, which is
the universe of individuals who receive non-employee compensation on a Form 1099-MISC in year 
(2007 to 2018) and also wages on a Form W-2 issued by the same employer (as proxied by EIN) in
any of the years  - 1, , or  + 1. We define transitions as a change in the primary type of income the
worker receives from the firm, where the primary type of income must be at least 60 percent of labor
income paid that year. In particular, we say an employee-to-contractor reclassification occurs in year 
when an individual receives at least 60 percent of labor income from a firm on Form W-2 in year  - 1
and at least 60 percent of labor income from that firm on Form 1099-MISC in year .
    Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows the total number of workers who experience these employee-to-contractor
reclassifications each year. There is no increase in 2018. Similarly, panel (b) shows that the number of
EINs that have at least one worker moving from employee to contractor status did not increase in 2018.
Our data show no evidence that firms, at least within the same EIN, are reclassifying existing workers
from employees to contractors in response to 199A.
    Next, we examine transitions to contractor status more generally, including transitions between
firms. Using our Individual Tax Filer Sample, we examine three types of transitions towards contract-
ing: new receipt of any contracting income as measured by non-employee compensation income from a
Form 1099-MISC, newly receiving the majority of labor income from 1099-MISC contracting (which
we refer to as being a "primary contractor"), and newly filing a Schedule C. Although the Schedule C
measure is an indirect and imperfect measure of contracting (because Schedule C includes other types
of income as well), we include it as 199A may encourage individuals to report contracting income
that may have otherwise gone unreported (Collins et al., 2019). In addition, the Schedule C measure
includes contractors whose income is reported on Form 1099-K, allowing us to study this population
as well.
    Trends in our three measures of contractor transitions are shown in Figure 10, which plots the
likelihood of a transition to contractor status for an individual taxpayer, relative to the 2017 level of
transitions. The green line represents transitions to primary contractor status. The probability of be-
coming a primary contractor is roughly constant from 2008 through 2018; we do not find a discrete
jump in 2018. The navy blue and aqua lines are for transitions into any contractor income and Sched-
ule C filing, respectively. Both of these lines show steady upward trends from 2008-2017, and these
increases continue into 2018, with no evidence of sharp departures from the trend.
    As with our time series evidence on pass-through income, these analyses are not definitive, as one
cannot know the counterfactual outcomes that would have obtained in 2018 in absence of 199A. Thus
we again employ a difference-in-difference approach to better isolate the causal effects of 199A, com-
paring individuals above and below the 199A income thresholds (based on prior year income).36 We
assume that contractors above the thresholds are providing labor services and therefore are ineligible
for a substantial 199A deduction either because their business is an SSTB or because it is a non-SSTB
with insufficient amounts of wages paid or tangible capital. To the extent that this assumption fails, it
biases our estimates towards zero, as some control group observations (those above the threshold) will
in fact be treated.
    Figure 11 plots the results of this difference-in-difference analysis. The three panels correspond
to our three measures of transitions: primary contractor, any contracting income, and Schedule C fil-
   36 This analysis requires the individual to have filed a Form 1040 in both the year of analysis and the prior year. The aggregate

statistics discussed previously in this subsection only require filing in the year of analysis.



                                                                16
ing. In all panels, the orange line denotes the treatment group (taxpayers below the threshold) while
the green line denotes the control group (taxpayers above the threshold). We do not see strong evi-
dence of a causal effect of 199A on contractor transitions. In Panel (a), while taxpayers below the
threshold experience a slight increase in the probability of switching to primary contractor status in
2018 and taxpayers above the threshold experience a slight decrease, the differences between the two
point estimates are small and statistically insignificant. Moreover, there are larger differences between
the two groups in several of the years prior to 2017. Panels (b) and (c) tell a similar story. The year
2018 does not appear to be an unusual year for contractor transitions nor does the above versus below
difference-in-differences comparison suggest a large treatment effect from 199A.
    Next, we examine whether individuals who were already receiving contracting income shift their
compensation towards contracting using a similar empirical approach. We first show the share of labor
income an individual receives from contracting in year  among those who had contracting income in
year  - 1 (Appendix Figure C2, Panel A). If the individuals who were contractors in 2017 shifted
their compensation towards contracting in 2018, we would expect a positive estimate. The point esti-
mate for 2018 is negative and not statistically different from zero. In Panel B, we look at the average
within person percentage change in the share of contractor income from the prior year among the same
                                                                                          --1
population. The percentage change is defined using the DHS difference: 0.5       *( +-1 ) .
Here we see a slight increase in the share, but it may be a continuation of an existing trend prior to
199A. In Panel C, we examine the DHS difference in Form W-2 wages among those with both wage
and contractor income in year  - 1 to test whether individuals with both types of income earn lower
wages in response to 199A. The point estimate is positive, which is the opposite sign we would ex-
pect if these individuals shifted labor supply to their contracting work and away from wage and salary
employment.37
    Finally, we check whether individuals who are new contractors in 2018 are more likely than existing
contractors to claim the 199A deduction. If a substantial number of individuals transition to contracting
because of the deduction, they should be more likely to claim it. Table 3 shows the probability that new
2018 contractors claim the deduction relative to existing contractors. The top panel examines individu-
als who become primary contractors in 2018, while the bottom panel focuses on individuals who start
receiving any contractor income that year. The first four columns use all existing contractors of that type
as a reference group and the last four use new 2017 contractors only. The odd columns report raw re-
gression results, without any additional covariates. In these columns, we find that new 2018 contractors
are significantly less likely claim the section 199A deduction than existing contractors, a wrong-signed
effect relative to the hypothesis that new contractors are transitioning to take advantage of section 199A.
Once we add controls for taxable income, contractor income, and demographic characteristics, these
differences shrink much closer to zero, though they remain negative in all specifications.38 We also test
whether the predicted positive effect may be limited to those with incomes below the 199A threshold in
columns 3-4 and 7-8, but the point estimates are similar and negative. Thus, relative to both reference
groups, individuals who became contractors in 2018 are less likely to claim the deduction, even after
   37 Appendix Figure C3 shows the same outcomes as Figure C2 using our difference-in-differences strategy. None of the panels

shows evidence that taxpayers with income below the threshold shifted their compensation towards contracting income relative
to those above the threshold.
   38 Across specifications, we find that the contractor income and taxable income controls explain the vast majority of the

difference in coefficients between "no controls" and "controls." On average, new contractors earn less in contracting income
and have lower taxable income than existing contractors; furthermore, higher contracting income and higher taxable income
is correlated with claiming the section 199A deduction. These omitted variables drive the large negative estimates in the "no
controls" columns.



                                                             17
controlling for taxable income, contractor income, and demographic characteristics.
    Taken together, our analyses of contractor transitions do not provide any evidence of a substantial
increase in independent contracting as a result of section 199A. It is possible that the tax wedge was not
large or salient enough to encourage many individuals to change employment types, or that the kind of
substantial shift that many predicted will occur only over a number of years as individuals change jobs
and employers.


III.C     Effects on real outcomes
In this section, we evaluate the evidence that section 199A impacted real inputs to production. We test
whether investments in capital and labor changed in response to the deduction. While these investments
would likely lead to increases in pass-through income in the long-run, they may decrease income in
the short-run by increasing business deductions, potentially changing the interpretation of our earlier
analyses of pass-through business income.
    Section 199A changed the tax rate on business income for certain firms, which can alter their profit
maximization decisions in a model of entrepreneurial effort or under imperfect deductibility of capital
expenses. In the standard user cost of capital model (Hall and Jorgenson, 1967), the firm's break-even
rate of return ( ) on a marginal investment in tangible property is given by:
                                                1 -  
                                          =           × ( + ).                                           (2)
                                                 1 - 
In this expression,  is the tax rate,  is the schedule of depreciation deductions converted to present
value,  is the geometric depreciation rate, and  is the firm's exogenous discount rate. Thus, so long
as  < 1, a reduction in tax rate reduces the required rate of return, and thus could increase investment.
Furthermore, to the extent that labor is either a complement or substitute to capital, the tax rate could
also be expected to affect employment (with ambiguous sign).
    One complication is that, in fact, it is the case that  = 1 (which corresponds to the case of full
expensing) for many types of investment by pass-through firms. Under sections 179 and 168(k) (as
amended by TCJA), most equipment investment can be deducted immediately, in the initial year. Thus,
taking this model literally, we should not expect exposure to section 199A to affect investment in
categories of assets eligible for full expensing. However, a small modification to the standard model
implies that the tax rate could affect investment. In particular, suppose that for each dollar of investment,
the firm incurs  dollars of non-deductible costs (e.g., entrepreneurial effort). In that case, the threshold
rate of return becomes:
                                              1 +  -  
                                        =              × ( + )                                           (3)
                                                1 - 
In this case, even with  = 1, a lower tax rate decreases the required rate of return. Thus, under this
extension to the standard model, exposure to section 199A could plausibly increase investment.
    We test for responses along these margins using the S Corporation Sample. First, we study tangible
investment, which we define as the sum of property placed in service on Form 4562, including structures
and equipment, whether expensed (under section 179 or bonus depreciation) or depreciated over time.
One limitation is that data from this form are available to us only for the 90 percent of S corporations
that file Form 1120S electronically. Conditional on filing electronically, approximately 50 percent




                                                     18
report some investment on Form 4562.39
     Our analysis compares firms that are classified as SSTBs to those who are non-SSTBs.40 In particu-
lar, among the set of firms with at least 50 percent of owners above the phaseout thresholds (in  - 1), we
regress the DHS difference in tangible investment on SSTB status and SSTB status interacted with year
indicators, omitting 2017. The results are presented in the left panel of Figure 12; while there is some
choppiness in the pre-treatment period, there is no evidence of any treatment effect in 2018. The right
panel of Figure 12 adds a control for twenty bins of  - 1 investment interacted with year. This control
calms the choppiness in the pre-period and increases precision somewhat. In this specification, using
a 95 percent confidence interval, we can rule out increases in investment in excess of two percentage
points caused by exposure to section 199A.
     To evaluate the magnitude of this effect, we translate this estimate into the implied effect of a
                                        - 
change in the "tax term" (that is, 1+  1+ ) on investment scaled by (lagged) capital. This parameter,
motivated by the Q-theory of investment, has been estimated in the context of C corporations, with a
"consensus" range of 0.5-1.0 (Hassett and Hubbard, 2002). Consider the illustrative case with  = 1
(full expensing) and  = 0.1; that is, each dollar of investment expense is associated with 10 cents
of non-deductible costs such as entrepreneurial effort. In this case, exposure to section 199A causes
the tax term to change by 0.0167 for top-bracket taxpayers (who face a statutory federal tax rate of 37
percent). Furthermore, the top of the confidence interval corresponds to an effect of section 199A on
log investment of 0.02. At the average values of investment and lagged assets, this corresponds to an
effect of section 199A on investment scaled by assets of 0.001. Scaling this effect by the change in the
tax term leads to a value of 0.067 for the structural parameter. Therefore, with  = 0.1, we can bound
the effect on investment to be much lower than has been estimated in the literature (predominantly for
C corporations). However, this parameter scales linearly with the inverse of , for which we have little
a priori evidence. For instance, if we instead assume  = 0.01, then we would not be able to rule out a
value of the parameter in line with other estimates. In other words, two scenarios are equally consistent
with our evidence: either (1) S-corporation investment is relatively unresponsive to large changes in
investment incentives, or (2) the change in investment incentives due to 199A is small in the presence
of full expensing. We cannot distinguish between these hypotheses. In either case, though, we find no
evidence that section 199A affected investment in 2018.
     Next, we study the effect of the deduction on wages and employment in S corporations. Even in
the absence of an effect on investment, an employment and wage response could occur in a model
of bargaining or surplus-sharing (Risch, 2020). We begin by studying the number of employees. We
define the total number of employees as equal to the number of Forms W-2 issued to individuals other
than shareholders.41 As with investment, we use SSTB status for identification. We regress the DHS
difference in the number of employees on the SSTB indicator and its interactions with year, omitting
2017.
     Panel A of Figure 13 presents these results without any additional fixed effects. There exists a mod-
est pre-treatment trend, with this trend appearing to continue into 2018. The confidence intervals are
   39 These statistics restrict to the set of S corporations with high-income owners, which is the potential universe in this specifi-

cation, as discussed below.
   40 Classifying firms based on whether their owners are above or below the phaseout thresholds yields results with large pre-

treatment trends, suggesting that the parallel trend assumption does not hold in this specification. For this reason, we do not use
this identification strategy in this section.
   41 There will be some measurement error in these definitions, since firms need not use the same EIN on their W-2's as they

do on their Form 1120S. However, we expect this measurement error to be modest for all but the largest firms and the relatively
small number of firms that use payroll service firms as Professional Employer Organizations.



                                                                 19
sufficiently narrow as to rule out effects in excess of a 0.5 percent increase in the number of employees.
Panel B of Figure 13 adds controls for twenty bins of  - 1 employment interacted with year. The
additional controls have little effect on the point estimate but tighten the confidence intervals, ruling
out any meaningful increase in the number of employees.
     Panels C and D of 13 repeat this analysis using the DHS difference in wages paid to all non-
shareholder employees as the outcome of interest. Both in the baseline specification (Panel C) and in
the specification that controls for the baseline level of wages interacted with year (Panel D), we fail to
uncover an effect of section 199A exposure on wages. In both specifications, we can rule out an effect
in excess of one percent.
     In sum, we find no evidence that exposure to section 199A changed real outcomes in the form of
investment, employment, or wages by S corporations. We stress, however, that we might expect real
effects to occur after a lag; all we are able to do is rule out large short-run effects.


IV     Conclusion
Overall we find scant evidence of large responses by businesses and taxpayers to 199A in the first year
that the deduction was available. Eligibility for the deduction does not appear to have impacts on the
fraction of adjusted gross income that is qualified business income. In our most credible difference-
in-differences specification, we compare taxpayers above versus below the claiming threshold (all of
whom own service sector trade or businesses). In this specification, we can rule out an increase in the
share of income attributable to potential QBI in excess of 0.2 percentage points (Figure 2 panel A).
Likewise, we find no effect (or, if anything, slight wrong-signed effects) of section 199A exposure on
the total amount of potential QBI.
     Section 199A creates incentives to reduce wages (and increase profits) paid to shareholders of S
corporations. This incentive is particularly strong for single shareholder businesses where the recipient
of the wage income and business income is the same person. Yet following the passage of section
199A, we do not see evidence of changes in wages paid by S corporations ­ either in the time series,
or when comparing single- and multi-shareholder S corporations. The one important exception to this
finding is that some S corporations owners are bound by the wage and capital limitation in their ability
to claim the deduction. For these businesses we do see the predicted increase in wages paid which
would increase the available deduction.
     Among partnerships, section 199A similarly creates strong incentives to reduce guaranteed pay-
ments (and increase profits) since labor income can face a higher tax rate than business income. Here
we do find a sharp reduction in guaranteed payments (by about 20 percent) and a sharp rise (10 per-
centage points) in the fraction of partnerships that cease making guaranteed payments in 2018.
     When we test for an increase in the number of workers who transition from employee to contractor
status, we see little effects associated with Section 199A. This is a key finding of our work since many
observers were concerned that 199A would accelerate a trend towards contracting and would reduce
access to employer-sponsored health and retirement plans as well as the job stability associated with
employee status. Similarly, we find no evidence of any immediate "real" responses to section 199A in
terms of investment, employment, or wages.
     In sum, the first-year responses of businesses and their taxpayers owners to 199A are modest. A
critical question is whether businesses will make further and more significant adjustments in coming
years as they have more time to reorganize and make tax-advantageous shifts and as they better under-


                                                   20
stand the rules surrounding the deduction.


References
Abraham, Katharine G, John C Haltiwanger, Kristin Sandusky, and James R Spletzer. 2018.
  "Measuring the Gig Economy: Current Knowledge and Open Issues." National Bureau of Economic
  Research Working Paper 24950.
Avi-Yonah, Reuven S. 2018. "The International Provisions of the TCJA: Six Results after Six Months."
  University of Michigan Law & Economics. Unpublished manuscript.
Barro, Robert J., and Jason Furman. 2018. "Macroeconomic Effects of the 2017 Tax Reform." In
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 257­345.
Bull, Nicholas, and Paul Burnham. 2008. "Taxation of capital and labor: The diverse landscape by
  entity type." National Tax Journal, 397­419.
Collins, Brett, Andrew Garin, Emilie Jackson, Dmitri Koustas, and Mark Payne. 2019. "Is Gig
  Work Replacing Traditional Employment? Evidence from Two Decades of Tax Returns." Statistics
  of Income, IRS.
Cooper, Michael, John McClelland, James Pearce, Richard Prisinzano, Joseph Sullivan, Danny
  Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2016. "Business in the United States: Who Owns It, and
  How Much Tax Do They Pay?" Tax Policy and the Economy, 30(1): 91­128.
Davis, Steve J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh. 1996. Job Creation and Destruction. MIT
  Press.
DeBacker, Jason, Bradley T. Heim, Shanthi P. Ramnath, and Justin M. Ross. 2019. "The impact of
  state taxes on pass-through businesses: Evidence from the 2012 Kansas income tax reform." Journal
  of Public Economics, 174(C): 53­75.
DeBacker, Jason, Lucas Goodman, Bradley T. Heim, Shanthi P. Ramnath, and Justin M. Ross.
  2018. "Pass-Through Entity Responses to Preferential Tax Rates: Evidence on Economic Activity
  and Owner Compensation in Kansas." National Tax Journal, 71(4): 687­706.
Dowd, Tim, Christopher P Giosa, and Thomas Willingham. 2020. "Corporate Behavioral Re-
  sponses to TCJA for Tax Years 2017-2018." Unpublished manuscript.
Duke, Brendan. 2018. "Pass-Through Deduction in 2017 Tax Law Could Weaken Wages and Work-
  place Standards."
Frolich, Markus. 2004. "Finite-Sample Properties of Propensity-Score Matching and Weighting Esti-
  mators." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1): 77­90.
Goodman, Lucas. 2018. "Shifting by S Corporation Shareholders: Evidence from the 2013 Kansas
  Tax Reform." Unpublished manuscript.
Goodman, Lucas, Katherine Lim, Bruce Sacerdote, and Andrew Whitten. 2019. "Simulating the
  199A Deduction for Pass-through Owners." Office of Tax Analysis Working Paper 118.
Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior." The American
  Economic Review, 57(3): 391­414.
Handwerger, Samuel. 2018. "A Tax Loophole You Could Drive an Uber Through."
Hassett, Kevin A., and R. Glenn Hubbard. 2002. "Tax Policy and Business Investment." In Handbook
  of Public Economics, Volume 3. , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 1293­1343.
Joint Committee on Taxation. 2019. "Overview of Deduction for Qualified Business Income: Section
  199A."
Kamin, David, David Gamage, Ari Glogower, Rebeca Kysar, and Darien Shanske. 2019. "The
  Games They Will Play: Tax Games, Roadblocks, and Glitches Under the 2017 Tax Legislation."
  Minnesota Law Review, 103: 1439­1520.
Katz, Lawrence, and Alan Krueger. 2019. "Understanding Trends in Alternative Work Arrangements
  in the United States." NBER Working Paper 25425.
Kleinbard, Edward. 2019. "Congress' Worst Tax Idea Ever."
McCloskey, Jessica A. 2018. "The Kansas Tax Experiment: Impact of 2012 Kansas Tax Reform on
  Output, Employment, & Establishments." Unpublished manuscript.
Oei, Shu-Yi, and Diane M. Ring. 2020. "Is New Code Section 199A Really Going to Turn Us All into
  Independent Contractors?" Unpublished manuscript.


                                                21
Pence, Karen M. 2006. "The Role of Wealth Transformations: An Application to Estimating the Effect
  of Tax Incentives on Saving." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1): 1­24.
Ridgeway, Greg, Stephanie Ann Kovalchik, Beth Ann Griffin, and Mohammed U. Kabeto. 2015.
  "Propensity Score Analaysis with Survey Weighted Data." Journal of Causal Inference, 3(2): 237­
  249.
Risch, Max. 2020. "Does Taxing Business Owners Affect Employees? Evidence from a Change in the
  Top Marginal Tax Rate." Unpublished manuscript.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2004. "Reported Incomes and Marginal Tax Rates, 1960-200: Evidence and Policy
  Implications." In Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 18. , ed. James Poterba, 117­173.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth H. Giertz. 2012. "The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
  Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review." Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1): 3­50.
Slemrod, Joel. 1992. "Do Taxes Matter? Lessons from the 1980's." American Economic Review,
  82(2): 250­256.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. 2002. "Tax Avoidanve, Evasion, and Administration." In Hand-
  book of Public Economics, Vol. 3. , ed. Alan J. Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, 1423­1470.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick. 2019. "Capitalists in the 21st Cen-
  tury." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134(4): 1675­1745.




                                               22
Tables and Figures

                             Figure 1: Counts of tax units with pass-through income over time, relative to 2017
               1.1       1
   Count relative to 2017
     .8        .9
               .7




                             2008            2010             2012             2014                2016                  2018
                                                                       Year

                                                         QBI ~= 0                      QBI > $10k
                                                         QBI > $100k                   QBI > $1m


Notes: Using the Pass-through Owners Sample, this figure plots aggregate counts of pass-through owners satisfying various
criteria relative to those counts in 2017. The solid black series plots the aggregate counts of those with non-zero potential QBI.
The remaining series plots the aggregate counts of those with potential QBI exceeding $10,000, $100,000, and $1,000,000,
respectively. Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations, Schedule F
income, and Schedule E rents and royalties. All dollar values are adjusted for inflation to 2018 values. All panels were created
by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                     23
                   Figure 2: Difference-in-differences: comparing those above and below income thresholds


                                             A: QBI/AGI                                                                                            B: QBI (000s)




                                                                                                                               2
        -.002 0 .002.004.006
       Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                         Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                       -6 -4 -2          0
    -.004




                               2013   2014   2015   2016                              2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                 Year                                                                                                    Year


                                                                                                 C: I.H.S.
                                                                         .05
                                                    Treatment coefficient
                                                  -.1   -.05     0




                                                                               2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                    Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample. The regression sample is limited to SSTB owners near the 199A thresholds, and treatment is
defined as being below the thresholds. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential QBI as the dependent variable. In
Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the dependent variable is potential QBI (in
000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential
QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations,
Schedule F income, and Schedule E rents and royalties. See Section III.A for further regression details. All panels were created
by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                  24
                                      Figure 3: Difference-in-differences: comparing SSTB and non-SSTB owners


                                               A: QBI/AGI                                                                                           B: QBI (000s)




                                                                                                                                5
    -.02 -.015 -.01 -.005 0
       Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                          Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                        -10    -5      0




                               2013     2014   2015   2016                             2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                   Year                                                                                                   Year


                                                                                                  C: I.H.S.
                                                                           .1
                                                     Treatment coefficient
                                                     -.2   -.1    0




                                                                                2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                     Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample. The regression sample is limited to taxpayers above the 199A thresholds, and treatment is
defined as being a non-SSTB owner. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential QBI as the dependent variable. In
Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the dependent variable is potential QBI (in
000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential
QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations,
Schedule F income, and Schedule E rents and royalties. See Section III.A for further regression details. All panels were created
by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                   25
                                           Figure 4: Raw wages to shareholders
               .04     .02
     DHS change in wages
   -.02      0 -.04




                             2013   2014             2015                2016                 2017                 2018
                                                               Year

                                      Single shareholder                        Multiple shareholders


Notes: Using the S Corporation Sample, this figure plots the average DHS difference in wages to shareholders  , separately
                                                                                        -,-1
by single- and multiple-shareholder S corporations. The DHS difference is defined as 0.5(   +        )
                                                                                                       .
                                                                                              ,+1




                                                            26
                              Figure 5: Event study: wages to S corporation shareholders


                          A. No extra fixed effects                                          B. Industry-by-time FE
        .02




                                                                         .02
          .01




                                                                           .01
   Effect




                                                                    Effect
   0




                                                                    0
        -.01




                                                                         -.01
                2013   2014     2015          2016   2017   2018                 2013     2014    2015          2016   2017   2018
                                       Year                                                              Year


                          C. Income-by-time FE                                          D. Industry-by-income-by-time FE
        .02




                                                                         .02
          .01




                                                                           .01
   Effect




                                                                    Effect
   0




                                                                    0
        -.01




                                                                         -.01
                2013   2014     2015          2016   2017   2018                 2013     2014    2015          2016   2017   2018
                                       Year                                                              Year




Notes: This figure plots the event study coefficients of the DHS difference in wages to shareholders, omitting 2017. The treated
category is single-shareholder firms (defined as of time  - 1); the control category is multiple-shareholder firms. Panel A
includes only treatment and year fixed effects. Panel B includes treatment and year-by-industry fixed effects, where industry is
the three-digit NAICS code (as of  - 1). Panel C includes the treatment fixed effects and a fixed effect for year interacted with
20 bins of  - 1 business income, where business income is defined as ordinary income plus wages to shareholders. Panel D
includes a treatment fixed effect and fixed effects for business income interacted with industry interacted with year. The DHS
                            -,-1
difference is defined as 0.5(    +        )
                                            .
                                        ,+1




                                                               27
                                    Figure 6: Change in guaranteed payments

          .1
          0
   DHS difference
       -.1-.2
          -.3




                    2008       2010                 2012                 2014                 2016                 2018
                                                               Year


Notes: This figure plots the DHS difference in guaranteed payments to partners, using the Pass-through Owner Sample,
                                                                                                    -,-1
restricted to observations who are partners in both  - 1 and . The DHS difference is defined as 0.5(  +
                                                                                                               ).
                                                                                                         ,+1




                                                            28
                                      Figure 7: Raw wages to shareholders: those bound by wage limitation
                .4        .3
   DHS difference in wages
        .1      0 .2
                -.1




                               2013            2014             2015            2016             2017                 2018
                                                                        Year

                                                               Bound                 Not bound


Notes: Using the S Corporation Sample, this figure plots the DHS difference in wages to a subset of S corporation shareholders.
In particular, the sample is restricted to those firms that (as of 1 ) are non-SSTBs, have one shareholder, and that one
shareholder has income above the 199A thresholds. Firms are grouped into two categories: bound (those whose simulated 199A
deduction in  - 1 would have been reduced by at least 50 percent by the wage limitation, assuming no tangible capital) and
unbound (those whose simulated 199A deduction in  - 1 would not have been affected by the wage limitation). Firms whose
deduction would have been reduced by more than zero but less than 50 percent are dropped. The DHS difference is defined as
   -,-1
0.5( +
                   ).
                               ,+1




                                                                       29
                                                     Figure 8: Event study: S corporations bound by wage limitation


                                                   A. No extra fixed effects                                                                              B. Industry-by-time FE
                               .2




                                                                                                        .2
                        .1




                                                                                                           .1
                 Effect




                                                                                                    Effect
                 0




                                                                                                    0
                               -.1




                                                                                                        -.1
                                     2013     2014        2015          2016     2017    2018                                 2013                    2014     2015          2016    2017     2018
                                                                 Year                                                                                                 Year


                                                   C. Income-by-time FE                                                                             D. Industry-by-income-by-time FE
                               .2




                                                                                                        .2
                        .1




                                                                                                           .1
                 Effect




                                                                                                    Effect
                 0




                                                                                                    0
                               -.1




                                                                                                        -.1



                                     2013     2014        2015          2016     2017    2018                                 2013                    2014     2015          2016    2017     2018
                                                                 Year                                                                                                 Year




Notes: This figure is the event study that corresponds to Figure 7, omitting 2017. The treatment group are the "bound" firms and
the contrl group are the "unbound" firms. Panel A includes only treatment and year fixed effects. Panel B includes treatment
and year-by-industry fixed effects, where industry is the three-digit NAICS code (as of  - 1). Panel C includes the treatment
fixed effects and a fixed effect for year interacted with 20 bins of  - 1 business income, where business income is defined as
ordinary income plus wages to shareholders. Panel D includes a treatment fixed effect and fixed effects for business income
interacted with industry interacted with year. See also the notes to Figure 7.




                                                                 Figure 9: Employee-to-contractor reclassifications
               225000




                                                                                                                          140000
                                                                                                         Number Firms with New Contractors
                      200000




                                                                                                                                 130000
    Number New Contractors
           175000




                                                                                                                     120000
 150000




                                                                                                          110000
               125000




                                                                                                                          100000




                               2008         2010       2012          2014      2016     2018                                                 2008       2010    2012          2014     2016     2018
                                                              Year                                                                                                     Year


                                                     (a) Individuals                                                                                            (b) Firms

Notes: Panel (a) shows the total number of individuals who experience employee-to-contractor reclassifications, while panel (b)
shows the total number of firms who experience these reclassifications. An employee-to-contractor reclassification occurs when
an individual receives at least 60 percent of labor income from a firm in the form of wage income in year  - 1 and as contractor
income in year . Data come from our Worker Reclassification Sample, derived from administrative records of individual tax
returns and information returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service.




                                                                                               30
                                       Figure 10: New contractor transitions
                .002
    Probability Contractor in
   -.004      -.002
                -.006     0




                                2007                           2013                                             2018
                                                             Year

                                                     Primary                       Any
                                                     Sched C


Notes: Transitions into receiving any Form 1099-MISC non-employee compensation, receiving majority of labor income from
Form 1099-MISC non-employee compensation, and filing a Schedule C ­ all relative to 2017. The sample represents
individuals 25-65 years of age who file a Form 1040.




                                                          31
                                                                              Figure 11: Difference-in-differences: contractor transitions
 Probability New primcont_in Above v. Below Inband 1




                                                                                                                                                                            Probability New anycont_in Above v. Below Inband 1
                                              .006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .01
                                      .004




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .005
                             .002




                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.005
  -.004 -.002




                                                                                                                                                                             -.01




                                                       2007                        2013                                                                     2018                                                                 2007                            2013           2018
                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                                                          Year

                                                                             Above                                                         Below                                                                                                           Above        Below



                                                              (a) Above vs. below Primary Contractor                                                                                                                                      (b) Above vs. below Any Contracting
                                                                                      Probability New schedc_in Above v. Below Inband 1
                                                                                       -.01       -.005       0        .005        .01




                                                                                                                                          2007                           2013                                                                       2018
                                                                                                                                                                       Year

                                                                                                                                                                   Above                                                          Below



                                                                                                                                                   (c) Above vs. below New Schedule C

Notes: Difference in difference estimates comparing individuals with taxable income in the prior year placing them between
50% and 200% of the income threshold. Sample represents individuals 25-65 years of age who file a Form 1040 in both the
current and prior tax year. Panel (a) shows estimates for transitions into receiving a majority of labor income from Form
1099-MISC NEC, (b) shows estimates for transitions into receiving any Form 1099-MISC NEC income, and (c) shows
estimates for new Schedule C filings.




                                                                                                                                                                    32
                                 Figure 12: Effect of 199A exposure on S-corporation investment


                                      Baseline                                                  Lagged investment controls
            .1




                                                                                 .1
            .05




                                                                                 .05
   Effect




                                                                        Effect
            0




                                                                                 0
            -.05




                                                                                 -.05
                   2013   2014      2015          2016   2017   2018                    2013   2014    2015          2016   2017   2018
                                           Year                                                               Year




Notes: This figure plots an event study of the effect of section 199A on investment,  , in the S Corporation Sample. The
                                                               -,-1
dependent variable is the DHS difference of investment, 0.5(    +,+1
                                                                          ). Investment is defined as the basis of all property
placed in service as reported on Form 4562. The sample is restricted to S corporations for whom at least half of shareholders
(weighted by ownership) had income in excess of the 199A thresholds in  - 1. Firms that are non-SSTBs (determined as of
 - 1 are the treated group; SSTBs are control. Panel A includes only treatment and year fixed effects. Panel B includes a
treatment fixed effect and fixed effects for twenty bins of  - 1 investment. The sample is additionally restricted to those firms
that file Form 1120S electronically in both  and  - 1. Standard errors are clustered by firm.




                                                                   33
                                    Figure 13: Effect of 199A exposure on S-corporation employment and wages


                             Panel A: Employment, no controls                                       Panel B: Emp., control for baseline
    -.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03




                                                                           -.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03
             Effect




                                                                                    Effect
                             2013     2014    2015   2016   2017   2018                             2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                  Year                                                                Year


                                Panel C: Wages, no controls                                   Panel D: Wages, control for baseline
    -.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03




                                                                           -.02-.01 0 .01 .02 .03
             Effect




                                                                                    Effect




                             2013      2014   2015   2016   2017   2018                             2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                  Year                                                                Year



Notes: Panels A and B figure plots an event study of the effect of section 199A on number of non-shareholder employees in the
S Corporation Sample. Panels C and D plot an event study of the effect of section 199A on the wages paid to non-shareholders.
                                                                                              -,-1
The dependent variable is the DHS difference of employment or wages ( ), respectively, 0.5(    +,+1
                                                                                                           ). Employment is
measured as the number of Forms W-2 issued by the firm, excluding those issued to shareholders; wages are measured as total
(box 1) wages on such Forms W-2. The sample is restricted to S corporations for whom at least half of shareholders (weighted
by ownership) had income in excess of the 199A thresholds in  - 1. Firms that are non-SSTBs (determined as of  - 1 are the
treated group; SSTBs are control. Panels A and B include only treatment and year fixed effects. Panels B and D include a
treatment fixed effect and fixed effects for 20 bins of  - 1 employment or wages. Standard errors are clustered by firm.




                                                                      34
                                Table 1: Summary statistics on individual samples

                                             Pass-through                              Individual           Worker
                                                                       2018
                                                Owner                                   Tax Filer        Reclassification
                                                                      Sample
                                               Sample                                    Sample             Sample
  Fraction married filing jointly                     0.44                  0.36             0.34                     0.53
  Fraction non-joint male                             0.27                  0.30             0.33                     0.27
  Fraction non-joint female                           0.29                  0.34             0.33                     0.21
  Mean age                                            46.4                  45.3             44.6                     43.1
  Years covered                                 2008-2018                  2018        2007-2018                2007-2018
  Observations (thousands)                         33,809                 6,141           37,686                   32,227

                                                                                       Standard           Fraction with
                                                   Mean             Median
                                                                                       Deviation          nonzero value
  Pass-through Owner Sample
  Adjusted gross income                              83,795              40,500           957,956                       0.90
  Sole proprietorship income                          4,180                   0         2,565,509                       0.31
  S-corp and partnership income                       7,374                   0           574,901                       0.11
  Partner guaranteed payments                           715                   0            69,170                       0.01
  Rent and royalty income                               573                   0            45,867                       0.14
  Potential QBI                                      13,037                   0         8,832,437                       0.50

  2018 Sample
  Adjusted gross income                              76,722              40,800           794,086                       0.99
  Sole proprietorship income                          2,078                   0         3,198,553                       0.17
  S-corp and partnership income                       4,518                   0           419,794                       0.06
  Partner guaranteed payments                           381                   0            25,241                       0.00
  Rent and royalty income                               352                   0           353,351                       0.07
  Potential QBI                                       7,322                   0         2,198,109                       0.27
  199A deduction                                      1,017                   0            46,390                       0.13

  Individual Tax Filer Sample
  Adjusted gross income                              48,647              15,600            626,899                      1.00
  Labor income                                       22,436               1,500            171,075                      0.53
  Wages                                              21,142                 200            141,580                      0.51
  Contractor income                                   1,294                   0             95,549                      0.06

  Worker Reclassification Sample
  Labor income                                       43,480              21,200         1,515,979                       1.00
  Wages                                              33,651              12,300           253,256                       0.78
  Contractor income                                   9,829               1,000         1,494,336                       0.58

Notes: See discussion in Section II for our sample and variable definitions. Observation counts are rounded to the nearest
thousand, and dollar-denominated medians are rounded to the nearest hundred. All dollar values are adjusted for inflation to
2018 levels. Sample weights are used for tabulations using the Pass-through Owner Sample and the 2018 Sample, except for
reported observation counts. Data are derived from administrative records of individual tax returns and information returns
processed by the Internal Revenue Service.




                                                              35
                                                                            Table 2: Distribution of 199A tax savings in 2018

                                                            Total              Total 199A             Total tax              Mean                Median             Number with         Percent of (6)
                                                        pass-through           deductions             savings               nonzero              nonzero            pass-through          with tax
            Income (AGI)                               income ($mil)             ($mil)                ($mil)               savings              savings           income (thou)           savings
                                                             (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)                   (6)
            Negative AGI                                   -65,032                  7                    0                    --                     --                 1,191                 0.0%
            Decile 1: 0-8,400                              15,745                   52                   9                   200                     0                  3,138                 1.3%
            Decile 2: 8,400-15,400                         41,601                  166                   17                   0                      0                  3,966                12.4%
            Decile 3: 15,400-23,000                        28,178                  831                   84                  100                    100                 3,196                31.4%
            Decile 4: 23,000-31,300                        20,123                 1,510                 169                  100                    100                 2,715                46.6%
            Decile 5: 31,300-41,300                        18,243                 2,530                 282                  200                    200                 2,769                49.9%
            Decile 6: 41,300-54,500                        26,086                 3,726                 449                  300                    200                 3,094                59.8%
            Decile 7: 54,500-72,700                        27,531                 5,441                 811                  400                    200                 3,642                49.9%
            Decile 8: 72,700-99,000                        53,317                 8,251                1,244                 500                    200                 4,341                50.9%
            Decile 9: 99,000-148,700                       39,203                14,211                2,961                 900                    300                 5,266                53.0%
            90th-95th: 148,700-213,900                      73,876               14,769                3,402                1,600                   500                 3,029                60.9%




36
            95th-99th: 213,900-530,200                     230,157               32,561                8,903                3,700                  1,100                3,233                64.8%
            99th-99.9th: 530,200-2,459,700                 327,887               31,729                11,618               16,600                 2,000                1,019                62.2%
            Above 99.9th: 2,459,700-                       253,364               35,614                13,177              129,100                12,500                 133                 73.7%
            Total                                         1,090,278              151,399               43,126                2,300                  200                40,732                42.3%

     Notes: This table presents estimates of Section 199A tax savings by AGI bin, using the 2018 Sample. See discussion in Section II for our sample and variable definitions. Sample weights are used for all
     tabulations. AGI cutoff points are rounded to the nearest hundred, as are the mean and median nonzero savings amounts. We use individuals' reported deduction amounts to estimate tax savings. The
     underlying data are derived from administrative records of individual tax returns and information returns processed by the Internal Revenue Service.
                                                                            Table 3: New 2018 Contractor 199A Claiming

                                                                                                                 Probability Claiming 199A
                                                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)      (6)               (7)          (8)

                                 New 2018 Primary Contractor                    -0.134       -0.021      -0.117       -0.018      -0.078       -0.009       -0.057      -0.007
                                                                               (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.006)      (0.004)      (0.006)     (0.004)

                                 New 2018 Any Contractor Income                 -0.133       -0.031      -0.124       -0.028      -0.079       -0.018       -0.064      -0.014
                                                                               (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.002)     (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.003)
                                 Controls                                                      X                        X                        X                        X
                                 Reference Group                                  All          All        All           All        2017         2017       2017          2017
                                 Sample                                           All          All       Below       Below          All          All       Below       Below


     Notes: Regressions predict claiming section 199A in 2018. The top row of results represent the difference in claiming behavior between new 2018 primary contractors relative to a reference group of
     individuals who were primary contractors in both 2017 and 2018. The next row of results represents the difference in claiming between individuals with any contracting income in 2018 who didn't have




37
     contracting income before relative to individuals who have contracting income in 2018 and 2017. Standard errors are shown below coefficient estimates. Odd columns have no controls while even columns
     have controls for contractor income, taxable income, and demographic characteristics. Columns 1-4 use all individuals who were contractors in 2017 and 208 as a reference group, while columns 5-8 limit
     the reference group to those who were new contractors in 2017 and continued in 2018. Columns 1-2 and 5-6 make no income exclusion while columns 3-4 and 7-8 restrict the sample to individuals with
     income below the 199A limitations threshold. New primary contractors are those who previously received less than 40 percent, and now receive more than 60 percent, of labor compensation by contracting.
A      Estimating and validating SSTB status
In this Appendix, we describe and validate how we classify business owners as SSTB or non-SSTB.
To distinguish SSTB vs. non-SSTB owners in year , we use year  - 1 data. We first look to the
business's reported NAICS code. If this code indicates a service sector industry, we label that business
an SSTB. Then, if at least twenty percent of a tax unit's potential QBI comes from SSTB businesses, we
label that tax unit an SSTB owner.42 This inevitably results in some misclassification, as NAICS codes
do not map cleanly onto SSTB status, which depends on the facts and circumstances of the business.
Moreover, one entity for tax purposes may consist of multiple trades or businesses, some of which may
be SSTBs and some of which may not. Since our data are at the tax-entity level, we cannot observe this
complexity. This mismeasurement of SSTB status implies that both of our regression frameworks are
biased towards null results.
    To explore the validity of our SSTB strategy, we examine claiming behavior in 2018 among tax-
payers above and below the income threshold by NAICS code of their highest income business. Our
sample includes taxpayers with positive potential QBI, and we divide codes into those that are likely
to be SSTBs, a few that are more borderline, and a few that are likely to be non-SSTB businesses.43
Appendix Table A1 shows the ratio of the claimed QBI deduction on Form 1040 to a rough measure
of their potential deduction ­ 20 percent of potential QBI ­ in the percent claimed column, the total
dollars in that industry, and the number of taxpayers in our sample.
    For example, consider individuals whose primary source of pass-through income is from NAICS
code 523 (securities and other financial investments), the first row in the table. We estimate that approx-
imately 187,000 tax units with this NAICS code with income below the 199A thresholds are claiming
QBI deductions of $14 billion, which is 48 percent of their potential deduction. For those individuals
whose primary source of pass-through income is from NAICS code 523 but have income above the
threshold, we estimate 83,000 tax units claim a deduction of $45 billion, which is 29 percent of their
potential deduction. We note that there are multiple reasons this group does not claim a zero deduction.
For example, while we have categorized taxpayers into a NAICS code based on their highest income
business, it is common for pass-through business owners to own multiple businesses. Pass-through
income from other sources may contribute to positive deductions, and more generally to the percent
claimed statistic. Another important reason deductions are not zero for the NAICS 523 group above
the 199A threshold is that some businesses with this NAICS code may generate non-SSTB income.
    With these caveats in mind, the results indicate that, among taxpayers whose highest-income busi-
ness we classify as SSTB, claiming percentages differ for those above vs. below the 199A thresholds
in the predicted way. That is, those above the 199A thresholds generally claim a smaller share of their
potential QBI than those below the 199A thresholds. Moreover, among those whose highest income
business we classify as non-SSTB, we see that individuals with incomes above the threshold actually
claim a higher share of their potential QBI. If these businesses were more properly classified as SSTBs,
we would expect the opposite. Overall, we take the results of Table A1 to suggest that our SSTB
characterization is an imperfect but meaningful signal of ineligibility due to the 199A SSTB limitation.

   42 For SSTB classification purposes, we only consider potential QBI derived from up to four of the tax unit's businesses: the

top two Schedule Cs, and the top two K1s from partnerships or S corporations. If a taxpayer lacks these sources of income, we
label them a non-SSTB owner. By "top two" we mean the two associated with the largest absolute values of potential QBI.
   43 We stress that this list of NAICS codes is a modeling approximation. Neither the law nor the regulations define SSTB with

reference to NAICS codes, but rather, based on the facts and circumstances of each business. Readers should not infer that
this list of NAICS codes represents an interpretation by the Department of the Treasury regarding which businesses would be
considered SSTBs.


                                                              38
                Table A1: 2018 Deduction Amounts by SSTB Status and Income Threshold

                                                           Below Threshold           Above Threshold
 Industry                                 NAICS       Percent Dollars    Number Percent Dollars    Number
                                                      claimed (billions) (000s) claimed (billions) (000s)

 SSTBs
 Securities, Other Financial In-          523         48        14             187         29        45             83
 vestments
 Hospitals                                622         58        0              4           21        1              2
 Nursing and Residential Care             623         48        4              34          55        1              2
 Facilities
 Performing Arts and Related              711         53        9              394         33        11             18
 Industries
 Motion Picture and Video In-             5121        63        2              42          51        1              2
 dustries
 Legal Services                           5411        61        24             231         19        56             74
 Accounting, Tax Preparation,             5412        58        12             228         21        12             24
 Bookkeeping, Payroll
 Management, Scientific, and              5416        58        15             240         33        15             49
 Technical Consulting Services
 Offices of Physicians                    6211        61        12             113         21        29             94
 Offices of Dentists                      6212        67        8              65          25        9              26
 Offices of Other Health Practi-          6213        62        13             259         30        5              21
 tioners
 Outpatient Care Centers                  6214        53        1              12          29        3              10
 Home Health Care Services                6216        32        3              112         52        1              3
 Other Ambulatory Health Care             6219        50        0              9           29        1              3
 Services
 Lessors of Nonfinancial Intan-           53311       28        0              5           42        1              1
 gible Assets
 Veterinary Services                      54194       70        2              22          30        1              4

 Borderline SSTBs
 Architectural,   Engineering             5413        65        10             159         73        8              15
 Services
 Specialized Design Services              5414        59        3              93          54        1              4
 Computer Systems Design                  5415        64        10             165         65        8              15
 Services

 Non-SSTBs
 Manufacturing                            31          60        16             211         82        37             40
 Wholesale Trade                          42          62        13             199         79        31             38
 Construction of Buildings                236         48        17             374         77        12             13
 Newspaper, Book Publishers               5111        59        0              9           74        1              1
 Restaurants and Eating Places            7225        65        8              140         84        6              13


Notes: Table categorizes taxpayers with positive QBI, as measured by K1 income from partnerships and S corporations, and
Schedule C and F income, into a NAICS code based on their highest income business. We divide codes into those that are likely
to be SSTBs, a few that might be more borderline, and a few that are likely to be non-SSTB businesses. We stress that this list
of NAICS codes is a modeling approximation. Neither the law nor the regulations define SSTB with reference to NAICS codes,
but rather, based on the facts and circumstances of each business. Readers should not infer that this list of NAICS codes
represents an interpretation by the Department of the Treasury regarding which businesses would be considered SSTBs. Using
sample weights to estimate nationally representative figures, we show the ratio of the claimed QBI deduction on Form 1040 to
20% of our calculated QBI measure, the total amount of calculated QBI attributable to that industry among these taxpayers, and
the number of taxpayers. We divide taxpayers into those above and below the 199A income threshold.




                                                             39
B     Alternative Specifications
In this appendix, we report results under a number of alternative specifications that measure the effects
of 199A. None of these alternative specifications yields results that are qualitatively different than the
baseline specifications.


Overall effect on pass-through income
As an alternative approach to detecting the overall effect of 199A on pass-through income, we used in-
verse probability weighting (IPW) to account for underlying differences in the populations between our
treated and control groups. Specifically, we run a first-stage probit regression (separately by year) that
predicts treatment status based on the following characteristics: marital status (married, single male,
or single female); number of child dependents (censored at three); state; a quadratic function of age;
one-year lags of indicators for having partnership income, S-corporation income, sole proprietorship
income, passive income, and passive losses; lagged decile bins for the outcome variable for each of the
past five years; and lagged treatment status proxies (themselves based on prior-year data) for each of
the past five years. The resulting treatment propensity,    ^ , forms the basis for the inverse propensity
weights. The final weight used in the regressions is the inverse propensity weight multiplied by the
sample weight (Ridgeway et al., 2015). 44
    In Appendix Figures B1 and B2, we report our results using inverse probability weighting (IPW).
The IPW method has only a modest effect on the results; in particular, there remains a substantial
(though slightly smaller) pre-existing trend when using SSTB status for identification. Thus, any differ-
ences in trends in pass-through income between these groups cannot be explained by simple differences
in observable characteristics.
    Next, we redo our original analyses and our IPW analyses using an alternative definition of potential
QBI that excludes rents and royalties. While rent and royalty income may be eligible for the section
199A deduction, it has to rise to the level of a trade or business. Around 14 percent of our sample have
rent and royalty income, so if a large share of this income is not eligible for the deduction, including it
in potential QBI could bias us towards finding null results.
    Figures B3 and B4 show our baseline difference-in-difference results remain using the alternative
income definition. There is no evidence that including ineligible rents and royalties led to a null result.
Figures B5 and B6 show our difference in difference results using IPW and excluding rents and royalties
from our QBI definition. We find that IPW again does not have much effect on the results, and it does
not remove the pre-trend differences between SSTB and non-SSTB business owners.


Wages to shareholders
In this section, we report two alternative specifications that examine the effect of section 199A on wages
paid to S corporation shareholders. The main specification compares wages paid to shareholders of
single-shareholder firms, who have the easiest ability to make changes to owner compensation, to wages
paid to shareholders of multiple-shareholder firms, who face a more complicated problem. One might
be concerned that two- and three-shareholder firms might be able to solve any coordination problems
required to successfully reduce wages to shareholders while generally holding pre-tax allocations fixed.
If this were the case, such firms might also plausibly be "treated," attenuating the results of the baseline
  44 We   winsorize the inverse propensity score weights at 60, as suggested by Frolich (2004).


                                                                40
exercise. The time series evidence in Figure 4 suggests this is not the case ­ or, alternatively, a large
positive 2018 fixed effect would be required to explain this result. Nevertheless, Appendix Figures
B7 and B8 repeat the above analysis dropping two- and three-shareholder firms, meaning that the
comparison is made between single-shareholder firms and firms with at least four shareholders.45 While
the series is a bit noisier, these figures show no evidence any large reduction in wages to owners of
single-shareholder firms.
    Additionally, it is feasible to use SSTB status for identification. Among owners above the income
threshold, SSTB owners did not face the additional incentive to reduce wages, while non-SSTB owners
did. In Appendix Figures B9 and B10, we trace the change in wages for the treatment (non-SSTB) and
control (SSTB) S corporations, restricting to single-owner shareholders who were above the income
threshold in  - 1. Given the sample restrictions, the estimates are slightly noisier than the main
specifications, but remain consistent with a null effect.




  45 We estimate that 75% of firms with at least four shareholders, with positive wages to at least one shareholder, also paid zero
wages to at least one shareholder.


                                                               41
  Figure B1: Difference-in-differences: comparing those above and below income thresholds, using
                                               IPW


                                               A: QBI/AGI                                                                                            B: QBI (000s)
        -.002 0 .002 .004 .006




                                                                                                                                 2
       Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                           Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                                -2      0
    -.004




                                                                                                         -4
                                 2013   2014   2015   2016                              2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                   Year                                                                                                    Year


                                                                                                   C: I.H.S.
                                                                           .05
                                                      Treatment coefficient
                                                    -.1   -.05     0




                                                                                 2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                      Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample and IPW as described in Section B. The regression sample is limited to SSTB owners near the
199A thresholds, and treatment is defined as being below the thresholds. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential
QBI as the dependent variable. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the
dependent variable is potential QBI (in 000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is
the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole
proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations, Schedule F income, and Schedule E rents and royalties. See Sections III.A and B
for further regression details. All panels were created by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                    42
               Figure B2: Difference-in-differences: comparing SSTB and non-SSTB owners, using IPW


                                            A: QBI/AGI                                                                                           B: QBI (000s)




                                                                                                                             5
                       .005
     Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                       Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                                    0
              0




                                                                                                            -5
    -.005




                                                                                                     -10




                              2013   2014   2015   2016                             2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                Year                                                                                                   Year


                                                                                               C: I.H.S.
                                                                       .05
                                                  Treatment coefficient
                                                 -.1   -.05    0




                                                                             2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                  Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample. The regression sample is limited to taxpayers above the 199A thresholds, and treatment is
defined as being a non-SSTB owner. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential QBI as the dependent variable. In
Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the dependent variable is potential QBI (in
000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential
QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations,
Schedule F income, and Schedule E rents and royalties. See Section III.A for further regression details. All panels were created
by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                43
Figure B3: Difference-in-differences: comparing those above and below income thresholds, excluding
                                         rents and royalties


                                                A: QBI/AGI                                                                                            B: QBI (000s)
                            .01




                                                                                                                                  2
       Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                            Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                                            0
                  .005




                                                                                                          -6 -4 -2
    -.005    0




                                  2013   2014   2015   2016                              2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                    Year                                                                                                    Year


                                                                                                    C: I.H.S.
                                                                            .05
                                                       Treatment coefficient
                                                     -.1   -.05     0




                                                                                  2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                       Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample. The regression sample is limited to SSTB owners near the 199A thresholds, and treatment is
defined as being below the thresholds. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential QBI as the dependent variable. In
Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the dependent variable is potential QBI (in
000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential
QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations,
and Schedule F income. See Sections III.A and B for further regression details. All panels were created by the authors using
data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                     44
 Figure B4: Difference-in-differences: comparing SSTB and non-SSTB owners, excluding rents and
                                             royalties


                                            A: QBI/AGI                                                                                           B: QBI (000s)




                                                                                                                             5
                       .005
     Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                       Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                                    0
              0




                                                                                                            -5
    -.005




                                                                                                     -10




                              2013   2014   2015   2016                             2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                Year                                                                                                   Year


                                                                                               C: I.H.S.
                                                                       .05
                                                  Treatment coefficient
                                                 -.1   -.05    0




                                                                             2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                  Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample. The regression sample is limited to taxpayers above the 199A thresholds, and treatment is
defined as being a non-SSTB owner. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential QBI as the dependent variable. In
Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the dependent variable is potential QBI (in
000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential
QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations,
and Schedule F income. See Section III.A for further regression details. All panels were created by the authors using data from
the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                45
  Figure B5: Difference-in-differences: comparing those above and below income thresholds, using
                                 IPW, excluding rents and royalties


                                               A: QBI/AGI                                                                                            B: QBI (000s)
        -.002 0 .002 .004 .006




                                                                                                                                 2
       Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                           Treatment coefficient
                                                                                                                -2      0
    -.004




                                                                                                         -4




                                 2013   2014   2015   2016                              2017     2018                                2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                   Year                                                                                                    Year


                                                                                                   C: I.H.S.
                                                                           .05
                                                      Treatment coefficient
                                                    -.1   -.05     0




                                                                                 2013     2014     2015  2016                               2017     2018
                                                                                                      Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample and IPW as described in Section B. The regression sample is limited to SSTB owners near the
199A thresholds, and treatment is defined as being below the thresholds. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential
QBI as the dependent variable. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the
dependent variable is potential QBI (in 000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is
the inverse hyperbolic sine of potential QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole
proprietorships, partnerships, S-corporations, and Schedule F income. See Sections III.A and B for further regression details.
All panels were created by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                    46
Figure B6: Difference-in-differences: comparing SSTB and non-SSTB owners, using IPW, excluding
                                        rents and royalties


                                            A: QBI/AGI                                                                                                B: QBI (000s)



                                                                                                       Treatment coefficient (000s)
                                                                                                                                5
                       .005
     Treatment coefficient




                                                                                                                        0
              0




                                                                                                              -5
    -.005




                                                                                                       -10




                              2013   2014   2015   2016                               2017     2018                                   2013     2014     2015   2016   2017   2018
                                                Year                                                                                                        Year


                                                                                                 C: I.H.S.
                                                                         .05
                                                    Treatment coefficient
                                                 -.15 -.1 -.05 0




                                                                               2013     2014     2015  2016                                  2017     2018
                                                                                                    Year



Notes: This figure presents regression estimates of the year-specific treatment effects ( ) in equation (1), using our
Pass-through Owners Sample and IPW as described in Section B. The regression sample is limited to taxpayers above the 199A
thresholds, and treatment is defined as being a non-SSTB owner. In Panel A, the share of AGI attributable to potential QBI as
the dependent variable. In Panel B, the dependent variable is a dummy for non-zero potential QBI. In panel C, the dependent
variable is potential QBI (in 000s), Winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. In panel D, the dependent variable is the inverse
hyperbolic sine of potential QBI (scaled in 000s). Here potential QBI is the sum of profits/losses from sole proprietorships,
partnerships, S-corporations, and Schedule F income. See Section III.A for further regression details. All panels were created
by the authors using data from the population of tax returns.




                                                                                                  47
                                    Figure B7: Raw wages to shareholders: dropping 2-3 shareholder firms

               .04     .02
   DHS change in wages
      -.02      0
               -.04
               -.06




                             2013                 2014                 2015                          2016                2017                2018
                                                                                Year

                                                           Single shareholder                                 4+ shareholders


Notes: Using the S Corporation Sample, this figure plots the average DHS difference in wages to shareholders, separately by
single- and multiple-shareholder S corporations, except that S corporations with two or three shareholders are dropped. See also
the notes to Figure 4.


                              Figure B8: Wages to shareholders: Event study, dropping 2-3 shareholder firms


                                     A. No extra fixed effects                                              B. Industry-by-time FE
          .06




                                                                                       .06
    .02 .04




                                                                                    .02 .04
   Effect




                                                                                   Effect
          0




                                                                                       0
          -.02




                                                                                       -.02




                 2013           2014       2015          2016   2017     2018                 2013     2014      2015          2016   2017    2018
                                                  Year                                                                  Year


                                      C. Income-by-time FE                                           D. Industry-by-income-by-time FE
          .06




                                                                                       .06
    .02 .04




                                                                                    .02 .04
   Effect




                                                                                   Effect
          0




                                                                                       0
          -.02




                                                                                       -.02




                 2013           2014       2015          2016   2017     2018                 2013     2014      2015          2016   2017    2018
                                                  Year                                                                  Year




Notes: This figure is analogous to Figure 5, except that S corporations with two or three shareholders are dropped.




                                                                              48
                               Figure B9: Raw wages to shareholders: using SSTB status for identification.

               -.01   -.02
   DHS change in wages
      -.04    -.03
               -.05
               -.06




                             2013                2014                 2015                               2016               2017                2018
                                                                               Year

                                                                      Non-SSTB                                    SSTB


Notes: Using the S Corporation Sample, this figure plots the average DHS difference in wages to shareholders, separately by
SSTBs and non-SSTBs. The sample is restricted to firms with a single shareholder, where the owner was above the income
thresholds in  - 1. See also the notes to Figure 4.


                         Figure B10: Wages to shareholders: Event study, using SSTB status for identification.


                                    A. No extra fixed effects                                                   B. Income-by-time FE
            .04




                                                                                           .04
            .02




                                                                                           .02
   Effect




                                                                                  Effect
            0




                                                                                           0
            -.02




                                                                                           -.02




                   2013         2014      2015          2016   2017     2018                      2013     2014     2015          2016   2017    2018
                                                 Year                                                                      Year




Notes: This figure plots the event study associated with the sample in Figure B9.




                                                                             49
Appendix C: Additional Figures and Tables

                                Figure C1: Starting and stopping guaranteed payments


                        Panel A: Share stopping GP                                  Panel B: Share starting GP




                                                                     .022
           .3




                                                                     .02
           .25
   Share




                                                                   Share
                                                                    .018
           .2




                                                                     .016
                                                                     .014
           .15




                 2008   2010   2012          2014   2016   2018             2008   2010    2012          2014   2016     2018
                                      Year                                                        Year




Notes: This figure uses the Pass-through Owner Sample, restricted to those who are partners in a partnership at both  and  - 1.
The left panel plots the probability of not receiving a guaranteed payment in , conditional on receiving a guaranteed payment in
 - 1. The right panel plots the probability of receiving a guaranteed payment in  conditional on not receiving a guaranteed
payment in  - 1.




                                      Table C1: S Corporation Sample: Summary table

                                                                                      (1)           (2)
                                                                                     Mean         Median
                           Net income                                               115,713       10,691

                           Tangible investment                                       43,197              0
                           Wages paid to shareholders                                54,253        2,690
                               Any wages to shareholders                              0.512

                           Number of shareholders                                     1.605              1
                               Share single shareholder                               0.647
                           Share of shareholders above 199A thresholds                0.167              0
Notes: This figure displays summary statistics from the S corporation sample, weighted to be representative of the population of
S corporations from 2012 through 2018. "Net income" is ordinary income from Form 1120S. Tangible investment is equal to
equipment and structures investment reported on Form 4562. See text for further discussion of sample selection and variable
construction. To protect privacy, the reported median is equal to the mean of the 20 observations closest to the true median.




                                                              50
                                      Figure C2: Changes in Compensation Among Contractors




                                                                                                     .02
      .015




                                                                                                             0
      .01




                                                                                            delta_cont_share
 cont_share




                                                                                                  -.02
   .005




                                                                                                     -.04
      0
      -.005




                                                                                                     -.06




              2007                         2013                               2018                               2007                2013                 2018
                                         Year                                                                                      Year

                                         cont_share                                                                             delta_cont_share



                     (a) Change in share of contractor income                                           (b) Percentage change in share of contractor income
                                                    .05
                                                    0
                                                  delta_w2
                                               -.05 -.1




                                                             2007                       2013                             2018
                                                                                      Year

                                                                                       delta_w2



                                                                    (c) Percentage change in W2 earnings

Notes: Sample represents individuals 25-65 years of age who file a Form 1040 in both that year and the prior year. Panel (a)
shows estimates for the share of Form 1099-MISC NEC income relative to 2017 among those with that type of income in the
prior year, (b) shows estimates for the percentage change in that share from the prior year among the same group, and (c) shows
estimates for the percentage change in Form W-2 earnings from the prior year among those who had both Form W-2 and Form
1099-MISC NEC income in the prior year.




                                                                                     51
                                                             Figure C3: Diff in Diff Changes in Compensation Among Contractors




                                                                                                                                                              Probability New delta_cont_share Above v. Below Inband 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .15
 Probability New cont_share Above v. Below Inband 1
                                              .06




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                      .04




                                                                                                                                                                                             .05
                             .02




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                            -.05
            -.02




                                                                                                                                                                  -.1
  -.04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2007                  2013           2018
                                                      2007              2013                                                                  2018                                                                                           Year
                                                                      Year
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Above        Below
                                                                  Above                                                        Below


                                                                                                                                                                      (b) Diff in diff Percentage change in share of contractor
                                  (a) Diff in diff Change in share of contractor income
                                                                                                                                                                                               income
                                                                           Probability New delta_w2 Above v. Below Inband 1
                                                                           -.15      -.1    -.05     0       .05     .1




                                                                                                                              2007                         2013                                                                   2018
                                                                                                                                                         Year

                                                                                                                                                     Above                                                                Below



                                                                                                                              (c) Diff in diff Percentage change in W2 earnings

Notes: Difference in difference estimates comparing individuals with taxable income in the prior year placing them between
50% and 200% of the income threshold. Sample represents individuals 25-65 years of age who file a Form 1040 in both the
current and prior tax year. Panel (a) shows estimates for changes in the share of labor income from Form 1099-MISC NEC
among those who received NEC income the prior year, (b) shows estimates for the percentage change in the share of labor
income from Form 1099-MISC NEC among those who received NEC income the prior year, and (c) shows estimates for the
percentage change in Form W-2 compensation among those who received both types of income the prior year.




                                                                                                                                                      52
