                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    BARRIERS TO GLOBAL CAPITAL ALLOCATION

                                      Bruno Pellegrino
                                       Enrico Spolaore
                                      Romain Wacziarg

                                     Working Paper 28694
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28694


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Julian Di Giovanni and Dmitry Mukhin for their excellent discussions of this paper at
ASSA 2021 and the Yale Junior Finance conference. We also thank Ariel Burstein, Henry
Friedman, Jean Imbs, Sebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Pete Kyle, Andrei Levchenko, Max Maksimovic,
Alessandro Rebucci, as well as seminar participants at CSEF, Tufts, the University of Maryland,
UCLA, UT Austin, and the University of Verona for helpful comments. We thank Pablo Roa
Prieto and Michele Schincaglia for outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Bruno Pellegrino, Enrico Spolaore, and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Barriers to Global Capital Allocation
Bruno Pellegrino, Enrico Spolaore, and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 28694
April 2021
JEL No. E22,E44,F2,F3,F4,G15,O4

                                          ABSTRACT

We quantify the impact of barriers to international investment, using a novel multi-country
dynamic general equilibrium model with heterogeneous investors and imperfect capital mobility.
Our model yields a gravity equation for bilateral foreign asset positions. We estimate this gravity
equation using recently-developed foreign investment data that have been restated to account for
offshore investment and financing vehicles. We show that a parsimonious implementation of the
model with four barriers (geographic distance, cultural distance, foreign investment taxation, and
political risk) accounts for a large share of the observed variation in bilateral foreign investment
positions. Our model predicts (out of sample) a significant home bias, higher rates of return on
capital in emerging markets, as well as "upstream" capital flows. In our benchmark calibration,
we estimate that the capital misallocation induced by these barriers reduces World GDP by 7%,
compared to a situation without barriers. We also find that barriers to global capital allocation
contribute significantly to cross-country inequality: the standard deviation of log capital per
employee is 80% higher than it would be in a world without barriers to international investment,
while the dispersion in output per employee is 42% higher.

Bruno Pellegrino                                 Romain Wacziarg
University of Maryland                           Anderson School of Management at UCLA
Robert H. Smith School of Business               C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
7621 Mowatt Ln                                   110 Westwood Plaza
College Park, MD 20742                           Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
United States                                    and NBER
bpellegr@umd.edu                                 wacziarg@anderson.ucla.edu

Enrico Spolaore
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall
8 Upper Campus Road
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
enrico.spolaore@tufts.edu
1        Introduction

International capital flows have increased greatly in recent decades (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2018).
However, economists have been asking why we do not observe much larger flows from capital-abundant
to capital-scarce economies (Lucas, 1990; Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych, 2008), while portfolios
continue to be disproportionately allocated towards domestic assets ("home bias" in international financial
markets - French and Poterba, 1991; Lau et al., 2010; Coeurdacier and Rey, 2013). Are there significant
barriers to global capital allocation, and do they matter for income and welfare?
        To address such questions, this paper makes three new contributions. First, we provide a novel general-
equilibrium model of international investment that can be taken to the data. Second, we use the model to
estimate what factors prevent capital from flowing freely from one country to another, using (a) updated
measures of international investment that take into account offshore investment and financing vehicles,
(b) novel measures of cultural distance, capturing a broad set of differences in values and beliefs across
countries, and (c) updated measures of foreign investment taxation and political risk. Third, we use our
empirical estimates to quantify the impact of barriers on the efficient allocation of capital across countries,
as well as cross-country inequality.
        In our model, heterogeneous investors choose to allocate capital among different destinations with
varying returns. Cross-border investment is affected by expropriation risk and taxation, as well as by
intermediation costs, which we parametrize in terms of measures of physical and cultural distances between
societies. The model yields a gravity equation for foreign assets demand. Equilibrium allocations of capital
from each origin country to each destination country are characterized as a function of the investment
frictions and other fundamentals. To calibrate the model, we estimate the gravity equation using recently-
developed foreign investment data that have been restated by Damgaard, Elkjaer, and Johannesen (2019)
and Coppola, Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger (2020) from a residency to a nationality basis. These
databases account for the presence of offshore investment and financing vehicles located in tax havens
such as Bermuda and the Cayman Islands.1 Intermediation costs and other obstacles to capital flows
are captured using a parsimonious specification, with four types of barriers: geographic distance, cultural
distance, foreign investment taxes, and political risk.
        We obtain three sets of empirical results. First, our measures of barriers exert substantial effects
on international financial positions, controlling for origin and destination fixed effects. The effects are
similar for different subcategories of foreign investment (equity vs. debt, foreign direct investment vs.
foreign portfolio investment). They are robust to using different specifications, and remain quantitatively
large irrespective of the estimation method (OLS regressions, Poisson regression, and IV regressions).
Our IV approach, used to ensure that our estimates are not amplified by reverse causality, is based on

    1
    The first paper restates IMF and OECD data on foreign direct investment, while the latter restates data on portfolio
investment.



                                                           1
the assumption that deeply-rooted factors, such as measures of ancestral and religious distance between
populations, have an impact on contemporary measures of cultural distance. These in turn act as current
barriers to the global allocation of capital.
   Second, we find that a conservative calibration of our model predicts, out-of-sample, allocations of
domestic capital that are consistent with the home bias in international investment documented in the lit-
erature (French and Poterba, 1991; Coeurdacier and Rey, 2013). Our estimates also match independently-
measured differences in rates of return across countries. In particular, our model predicts higher rates of
return on capital in emerging markets.
   Third, we conduct a counterfactual analysis, using the model to study the quantitative implications
of removing barriers to global capital allocation. We find that our estimated barriers introduce significant
capital misallocation across countries. Compared to a situation without barriers, World GDP is 7% lower.
Interestingly, the effect of cultural distance is of a similar magnitude as the effect of geographic distance.
Barriers to global capital allocation also contribute significantly to cross-country inequality. We find that
the standard deviation of log capital per employee is 80% higher than it would be in a world without
barriers to international financial flows, and the dispersion in output per employee is 42% higher.
   Our core contribution is to bring together, in a structural general equilibrium framework, the theoret-
ical and empirical literatures on gravity in international finance. Two path-breaking theoretical contribu-
tions in this area were Martin and Rey (2004) and Okawa and Van Wincoop (2012). The first provided
a two-country, two-period model of international investment capturing a number of features of empirical
gravity relations. The latter provided the first fully specified theoretical gravity model of foreign invest-
ment (broadly-defined) in a two-period multi-country setting. Our model differs from these contributions
along several dimensions. We provide a multi-country, multi-period setting, and integrate assets markets
with the real economy. Portfolio diversification at the country level arises, in our setting, from investor
heterogeneity rather than risk aversion. This approach delivers a tractable, exact form for the gravity
equation which does not rely on approximation methods.
   The theoretical section of this paper also shares some modeling choices with Head and Ries (2008)'s
theory of cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A), although there are several differences here as
well: our theory is built to describe cross-border investment in a broader sense than just international
M&A, and it is embedded in a multi-country general equilibrium model - with consumption, saving, and
production - that we use to perform quantitative counterfactuals. Moreover, unlike Head and Ries (2008),
our model produces a fully specified gravity equation, where bilateral investment flows are proportional
to the GDP of investor and destination countries. Other related models are those by Sellin and Werner
(1993) and Jin (2012). Unlike previous contributions, our framework explicitly features geographic and
cultural barriers to the international allocation of capital, and delivers an explicit gravity relationship that
we take to the data, allowing us to perform counterfactuals.
   Empirically, our paper contributes to a large literature that estimates the determinants of interna-

                                                       2
tional flows using a gravity approach, originally suggested by Tinbergen (1962) for trade. Ghosh and Wolf
(1999), De Ménil (1999) and Di Giovanni (2005) were among the first to use gravity regressions to study
international assets flows. Applications of gravity models to financial flows have benefited from advances
in the trade gravity literature (Eaton and Kortum, 2002; Anderson and Van Wincoop, 2003; Santos Silva
and Tenreyro, 2006; Helpman et al., 2008). Building on Martin and Rey (2004), Portes and Rey (2005)
showed systematic geographical patterns in gross cross-border equity portfolio flows. Subsequent empirical
analyses of cross-border investment flows considered the role of historical and cultural factors (Eichengreen
and Luengnaruemitchai, 2008; Guiso et al., 2009; Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2008; Rose and Spiegel, 2009;
Blonigen and Piger, 2014). Leblang (2010) found that diaspora networks affect international investment,
and argued that cultural ties increase trust and reduce informational frictions. More recently, Burchardi
et al. (2019) documented a causal effect of the ancestry composition of US counties on foreign direct
investment sent and received by local US firms to and from the immigrants' nations of origin, and inter-
preted this effect as resulting from lower information frictions. Our paper also relates to the literature on
historical and cultural barriers to international exchanges and the spread of innovations and development
across countries (Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009; Guiso et al., 2009; Felbermayr and Toubal, 2010; Spolaore
and Wacziarg, 2012; Fensore et al., 2017; Bove and Gokmen, 2018; Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2018).
   Building on this large empirical literature on the determinants of international flows, we take a further
step by explicitly connecting theory and empirics in a unified framework, allowing us to quantify the extent
of misallocation induced by barriers to international investment. Thus, our work also contributes to the
literature on the misallocation of capital and other factors of production (Hopenhayn, 2014; Gopinath,
Kalemli-Özcan, Karabarbounis, and Villegas-Sanchez, 2017; David and Venkateswaran, 2019; Baqaee
and Farhi, 2020). This paper also contributes to related research on the effects of financial integration
and globalization (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2006, 2013; Caselli and Feyrer, 2007; Mendoza et al., 2009;
Colacito and Croce, 2010; Hoxha et al., 2013; Broner and Ventura, 2016). Finally, it connects to the
trade literature on multinational enterprises (Arkolakis et al., 2018; Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare, 2013;
Tintelnot, 2016), which uses gravity models to study multi-national production, a specific aspect of foreign
direct investment. While we share the structural modeling approach of these contributions, our focus is
instead on foreign investment in a broader sense and on capital misallocation. Since we find that barriers to
international investment amplify cross-country dispersion of capital and output per worker, our study also
provides new evidence on the origins of cross-country income differences (Hall and Jones, 1999; McGrattan
and Schmitz Jr, 1999 - among many others).




                                                     3
2     A Multi-Country Gravity Model of Foreign Investment

2.1   Production

In this section, we present a multi-country, general equilibrium overlapping generations (OLG) model with
heterogeneous investors and imperfect capital mobility that describes the allocation of capital investment
across countries.
    Time is discrete and indexed by t. There is a set of n countries i  {1, 2, , . . . , n}. Each country has
fixed labor supply   i   and a representative firm (also called i) that acts competitively and produces a
perfectly-substitutable and tradable good using a Cobb-Douglas production function:

                                                         i        1-i
                                               yit = it kit       it                                        (2.1)


where yit is the level of output and kit and   it   denote capital and labor input. i is country i's total factor
productivity. The production function parameter i , which in equilibrium is equal to the capital income
share, is allowed to vary across countries.
    The final good can either be used for consumption or saved and transformed into units of capital to
be used for production in the next period. Hence, the global resource constraint is:

                                          n              n
                                               yit =          (cit + kit+1 )                                (2.2)
                                         i=1            i=1


where cit is the current-period consumption of country i's agents. The final homogeneous good is assumed
to be the numéraire of the economy (we normalize its price to one).
    Investors from any country can purchase claims to country i's capital stock. By doing so, they are
entitled to a proportional share of the capital income from next period's production. In what follows, we
use the index i to refer to the country where production takes place (the destination country), and the
index j to refer to the country that provides the capital (the investor country).
    Assuming that the representative firm acts as a price-taker in input markets as well, the equilibrium
rate of return on capital and wage rate are determined as usual:

                                               yit                             yit
                                     rit = i              wit = (1 - i )                                    (2.3)
                                               kit                              it


    We make an additional assumption about the structure of production, which will be helpful later on
when we model consumers' investment choices: production is carried out in plants. We identify individual
plants with the index x. We assume that plants can be built and decommissioned costlessly, but each
plant can contain a maximum capital stock of . In short, plants are a discretization of country i's capital
stock. This implies that the number of active plants in each country is ki /, and that there are total K/



                                                          4
plants distributed over the n countries, where:

                                                              def
                                                    K =                      ki                                         (2.4)
                                                                        i


2.2   Consumption and Saving

In each country j , a continuum of agents z  [0, 1] is born every period t. They live for two periods and
are endowed with    i   units of labor in period t. Saving is their only source of income in period t + 1.
   The preferences of agent z , who is born in country j at time t, are described by the following intertem-
poral utility function:
                                   U (z ) = (1 - ) log ct (z ) +  log ct+1 (z )                                         (2.5)

where ct (z ) is agent z 's consumption at time t. The amount of final good saved by investor z at time t
is st (z ). Thus, agent z 's intertemporal budget constraint is defined by the following two equations:


                                             wjt    j       = ct (z ) + st (z )                                         (2.6)


                                           ct+1 (z ) = Rt+1 (z ) · st (z )                                              (2.7)

where Rt+1 (z ) is the subjective return earned by investor (z ) on their worldwide investment. Then, the
Euler equation for agent z is:

                                                                                         1-
                                                  · Rt+1 (z )                =                                          (2.8)
                                        ct+1 (z )                                        ct (z )
   We look for a steady-state equilibrium, with constant consumption, output, capital and saving (ct , yt , kt , st ).
Thus, we will drop time subscripts when referring to steady-state solutions. By plugging (2.6) and (2.7)
inside (2.8), we have that, in equilibrium, all investors save a constant share  of their labor earnings:


                  st (z )   =    sjt   =     wjt        j      =         (1 - j ) yj               j  {1, 2, ..., n}    (2.9)


   We assume, without loss of generality, that the claims to capital are denominated in the same units
as physical capital, so that:
                                                n                            n
                                                        kit+1 =                    sjt                                 (2.10)
                                               i=1                          j =1

   Define aij as the assets purchased in country i by investors from country j . Therefore, the following
two accounting relationships hold: 1) Country i's supply of physical capital ki equals the sum of all units




                                                                    5
of financial capital invested from all countries j

                                                                 n
                                                       ki =             aij ;                                        (2.11)
                                                               j =1


2) The total financial capital supplied by country j to all countries i must equal total country j 's total
savings aj :
                                                                    n
                                                       sj =              aij                                         (2.12)
                                                                 i=1


2.3      Asset Allocation

Define ij , the share of capital invested in country i as a percentage of countryj 's aggregate saving:

                                                              def       aij
                                                        ij =                                                         (2.13)
                                                                        sj

In matrix form, the following equation describes the flow of capital across countries:
                                                                                                    
                                               k1          12 · · · n1                         s1
                                                        11                                          
                                               k2          22 · · · n2                         s2
                                                                                                    
                                                     =  21
                                                                                                    
                       k = s :              
                                                .       .  .  ..    .
                                                                                           
                                                                                                .
                                                                                                                     (2.14)
                                            
                                                .
                                                .   
                                                    
                                                        .
                                                        .  .
                                                           .      . .
                                                                    .
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                                                                           
                                                                                                .
                                                                                                .   
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    
                                               kn       n1 n2 · · · nn                        sn

We next describe how agents allocate capital across countries ­ that is, how the matrix  is determined
in the steady-state equilibrium. We assume that capital investment is lumpy: an atomistic investor z in
country j invests their savings by buying claims to the return on the capital from of one plant x, anywhere
in the world.
       Asset markets are imperfect: investment is intermediated by an agent that collects a fee from investors.
This fee depends on the investors' asset allocation choice and is then rebated back to investors. Specifically,
if investor z chooses to invest in plant x (located in country i), they receive the following subjective return
R (x, z ):
                                                    def
                                          R (x, z ) = (1 - ij ) · ri · e-(x,z )                                      (2.15)

where ri (x) is the return on capital in country i where plant x is located. ij is a tax imposed by country
i to investors from country j . We intend ij to represent actual taxes levied by the destination country
government, as well as broader government-imposed costs, such as the risk of expropriation.2  (x, z ) is

   2
    It is possible to microfound the ij as the probability of j investors being expropriated. For this, the utility function
of the investor needs to be made stochastic. Specifically, investors need to hold risk-neutral Epstein-Zin preferences with
unitary intertemporal elasticity:
                                        U (z ) = (1 - ) log ct (z ) +  log E ct+1 (z )                                (2.16)
The resulting model will then be isomorphic to one where ij is simply the fraction of capital income expropriated.


                                                               6
the intermediation cost incurred by investor z to invest in plant x. We intend this term to capture the
costs associated with monitoring, enforcing and acquiring information about cross-border investments.
      We assume that  (x, z ) can be decomposed linearly into three components: 1) a component that is
systematic at the country pair-level (i, j ) and which depends on a metric of distances between the investor
and the destination country; 2) a random idiosyncratic component that varies at the investor-plant pair
level (x, z ); 3) an investor (j ) country-level rebate:


                                              (x, z ) = dij | | -  (x, z ) - Gj                          (2.17)


The components of the vector
                                              dij =       d1
                                                           ij   d2
                                                                 ij   · · · dD
                                                                             ij
                                                                                                         (2.18)

are bilateral measures of distance between country i and country j . By allowing the distance vector d
to be multi-dimensional (where D is the dimensionality), we can allow cross-border investment costs to
depend on measures of distance other than physical, such as cultural distance.
       (x, z ) is an idiosyncratic component that is specific to the (x, z ) investor-plant pair, and is assumed
to be drawn from an Extreme Value Type I (i.e., Gumbel) distribution.
      The term Gj is a proportional rebate that is equal for all investors from country j , and is determined
in such a way that the investment intermediary of country j makes zero profits. Hence, ij does not
(directly) affect the aggregate resource constraint: it distorts asset allocation, but it does not actually
destroy capital. For simplicity, we abstract from modeling randomness explicitly. Investors' incentives to
diversify across countries do not depend on uncertainty and risk aversion, but on their idiosyncratic cost
shocks over different locations.3 Hence, each agent z invests their savings sj in the plant that offers the
highest subjective return:


                        x (z ) = argmax log 1 - ij (x,z ) + log ri(x) + dij (x,z )  +  (x, z )           (2.19)
                                        x


      Next, we aggregate the choices of individual investors. Following the seminal result of McFadden
(1973), we have that the share of country j assets invested in plant x, located in country i, is:

                                                        (1 - ij ) · ri · exp dij 
                                 j (x) =                                                                 (2.20)
                                                 K/
                                                 x =1   1 - i(x )j · ri(x ) · exp di(x )j 

      The idiosyncratic component  (x, z ), which has been averaged out in the aggregate, has the effect of
making the portfolio shares imperfectly inelastic with respect to the rate of returns ri . In other words,
while at the investor-level  (x, z ) captures investor heterogeneity, at the aggregate level it acts as a

  3
      We allow for a consideration of risk in an extension of the model, see Section 2.7.



                                                                7
motive for diversification. This is a parsimonious way to introduce diversification in a setting where data
on individual investors' portfolios and individual assets' returns, risks and covariances are unavailable (we
can only observe country-level investment positions).
   Because the probability of investing in any of the ki / plants in country i is the same, we can then
sum these probabilities at the level of destination country:

                             def                          ki
                      ij     =          j (x)     =          · j (x)                   x  j  {1, 2, ...n}          (2.21)
                                                          
                                   xi


By summing across plants (within destination country) we obtain the following equilibrium expression for
ij - the share of country j 's foreign asset positions in destination country i:

                                                 (1 - ij ) · ri ki · exp dij 
                                   ij =                                                                            (2.22)
                                                n
                                                c=1   (1 - cj ) · rc kc · exp dcj 

which mimics Eaton and Kortum (2002)'s equation for international trade shares. This expression does
not depend on plant size (). Hence, in practice, we can ignore the fact that ki may not be divisible by
 , because we can make plants arbitrarily small (  0) without affecting country portfolios.


2.4    Efficient Allocation of Capital

Let Y be World GDP:                                                  n
                                                         def
                                                      Y =                 Yi                                       (2.23)
                                                                   i=1

and let us call a vector k = (k1 , k2 , ..., kn ) , a capital allocation. Because labor is fixed and the production
function is exogenous, Y is a function of k alone. We say that an allocation k is efficient if it maximizes
                                                               def         n
World GDP Y for a given level of world capital K =                         i=1 ki .
   We can now show that equilibrium in input and asset markets, combined with the absence of taxes on
international investment (ij = 0 for all i, j and dij  is invariant across i, j ), coincides with World GDP
maximization for a given level of world capital K . Input markets equilibrium implies that the marginal
product of capital in country i is equal to the objective rate of return on capital ri .
   We start by showing that a necessary and sufficient condition for World GDP maximization is that
the rates of returns on capital are equalized across countries. To show necessity, consider the first-order
Taylor approximation for the change in Y following a change k such that                            i ki     = 0:

                                                                n
                                                 Y                       ri ki                                     (2.24)
                                                               i=1


then, if ri > rj for some (i, j ), we can construct a Y -increasing k by simply reallocating an arbitrarily-


                                                               8
small amount of capital from j to i.
       To show sufficiency, notice that we can write country i's capital stock as a strictly-decreasing function
of the common rate of return r:
                                                                 1                       1
                                                              - 1-
                                                 ki = r            i      (i i ) 1-i          i                       (2.25)

This implies that K and Y are also strictly-decreasing functions of r. As a consequence, it is not possible
to change r and increase Y without also increasing K .
       Next, we consider the relationship between asset markets equilibrium and efficient capital allocation.
First, notice that, if asset markets are unaffected by distance (dij  is invariant across i, j ), if there are no
investment taxes or risk of expropriation (ij = 0 for all i, j ) and investors are optimizing, then equation
(2.22) implies that all countries have their capital invested in identical destination country portfolios:

                                                             ri ki                  ki
                                           ij =             n                 =               (i, j )                 (2.26)
                                                            c=1 rc kc               K

The right hand side of the equation is a consequence of the fact that the share of capital invested in
country i (ij ) is independent of the origin country j . Because the right side of equation (2.26) is true if
and only if rate of returns are equalized, we have thus shown that, provided that companies and investors
are optimizing, the following three statements are equivalent: 1) capital is efficiently allocated; 2) rates
of returns are equalized across countries; 3) asset markets are undistorted by distance (dij  is invariant
across i, j ) and investment taxes (ij = 0 for all i, j ).                4

       We have also shown that, if asset markets are in equilibrium and undistorted, all origin countries j
hold identical portfolios of foreign assets (ij is independent of j ) - implying that there can be no domestic
bias in the aggregate portfolio such case.
       Having shown that efficient capital allocation is equivalent to rates of return being equalized, the next
step is to show formally that capital misallocation manifests itself as cross-country dispersion in the rate
of return on capital. We do that by considering a second-order Taylor approximation of the change in
World GDP around an efficient k5 :
                                                      n                       n
                                                                       1                          r
                                    Y             r         ki -                    (1 - i )         (ki )2           (2.27)
                                                                       2                          ki
                                                      i=1                     i=1


In order to focus on capital misallocation, we consider a k that leaves K unaffected. This implies that
the first-order term of the equation above is zero. We can then divide both sides by world GDP and

   4
       This is not a re-statement of the First Welfare Theorem, because it is a statement about GDP, not welfare.
   5
     This expression is derived using the fact that, in equilibrium, the rate of return r is equal to the marginal product of
capital




                                                                      9
rearrange the second-order term as:

                                                                n
                                         Y    1                                rki
                                            -                       (1 - i )       ( log ki )2                            (2.28)
                                         Y    2                                 Y
                                                            i=1


We then use the following facts:
                                               log ri = - (1 - i )  log ki                                                (2.29)

                                                             ri ki = i yi                                                 (2.30)

to re-write the second-order percentage change in World GDP as:

                                                                    n
                                       Y                    1             i   yi
                                                        -                    · · ( log ri )2                              (2.31)
                                       Y                    2           1 - i Y
                                                                i=1


This expression can be seen as a weighted measure of dispersion of the rate of return ri across countries.
This formula allows us to approximate World GDP loss based only on observed rates of return. A simple
                                                                                                            i        yi
way to operationalize this measure is to compute half the weighted variance of ri , where                  1-i   ·   Y    is the
weight given to country i.6


2.5      Gravity

Since, in equilibrium, the capital share of income is equal to GDP times i , Equation (2.22) can be
rearranged as follows:
                                                        (1 - ij ) · i yi · exp dij 
                                        ij =        n                                                                     (2.32)
                                                          (1 - cj ) · c yi · exp dcj 
                                                    c=1

The denominator of this expression can be interpreted as a distance-discounted measure of the total size
of the global market for capital that is available to country j investors. We shall call this Gj :

                                                     n
                                              def
                                         Gj =               (1 - cj ) c yc · exp dcj                                      (2.33)
                                                    c=1


      Multiplying both sides by sj and using the fact that sj =  (1 - j ) yj , equation (2.32) can be rear-
ranged as a gravity equation:

                                                                                             yi · yj
                              Gravity :        aij = i (1 - j ) (1 - ij ) ·               ·                               (2.34)
                                                                                        Gj exp d 
                                                                                                  ij




  6
      This computation assumes that the efficient rate r is approximately equal to the weighted mean of ri .




                                                                        10
2.6     Global Capital Markets Clearing

To close the model, we find the vector of capital stocks k that simultaneously clears the market for inputs
and assets. First, the matrix of country shares  is a function of the vector of country output (y) and
the matrices of the distortions ij and the distances dij ­ that is:


                                               =  (y; , , T)                                                         (2.35)
                                                                                                                  
                        d 11 , d 12 ,             . . . d 1n                                  1 , 0, . . .    0
                                                                                                                  
                   def  d 21   d 22               . . . d 2n                                  0    2 . . .    0
                                                                                                                  
                                                                             def                                  
         with      =      .      .                ..      .
                                                                   ;         =                .    . ..       .
                                                                                                                     (2.36)
                       
                          .
                          .      .
                                 .                    .   .
                                                          .        
                                                                                 
                                                                                              .
                                                                                              .    .
                                                                                                   .     .    .
                                                                                                              .   
                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  
                        d n1 d n2                 . . . d nn                                  0    0   . . . n
                                                                                               
                                                          , 12 ,              . . . 1n ,
                                                         11                                    
                                                    def  21 22                ...        2n
                                                                                               
                                                                                               
                                                  T =    .  .                 ..         .
                                                                                               ;                     (2.37)
                                                         .  .                    .       .     
                                                         .  .                            .     
                                                                                               
                                                         n1 n2                ...        nn

   Since s can be written as  (I - ) y and y in turn can be written as a function of k, equation (2.14)
can be re-written as:
                                   k   =     (y (k) ; , , T) ·  (I - ) y (k)                                         (2.38)

where I is the identity matrix. The market-clearing equilibrium vector of capital stocks k is then deter-
mined as the fixed point of equation (2.38). Notice that there is a trivial equilibrium at k = 0. When we
solve equation (2.38) numerically, we can rule out the trivial equilibrium by taking logs of both sides of
the equation.
   The consumption of final good by country j (by old and young agents) balances the domestic con-
sumers' budget:
                                            cj = r aj + (1 - j ) wj            j                                     (2.39)

where
                                           aj =     a1j      a2j      · · · anj                                      (2.40)

and the following equation balances country j 's current account:


                   cj - (yj - sj )     =    r aj - wj     j   - rj kj + sj           =         r aj - rj kj          (2.41)

                     Net Imports                                                            Net Foreign Income


That is, all consumption in excess of production (net of savings) is financed by a positive net foreign capital



                                                             11
income. Conversely, a negative balance in net foreign income has to be balanced by a trade surplus.


2.7       Extensions

Our model can be extended to accommodate additional barriers and frictions to global capital allocation.
In Section 6, we present three extensions: we model capital controls, the presence of currency hedging
costs, and risky asset returns in destination countries. In that section, we also explore the empirical
implications of allowing for these additional frictions.


3        Specification and Data

3.1       Econometric Model

Our regression equation can be estimated using a linear-in-logs specification. We assume that capital
flows are observed with a multiplicative error term:


                             ^ij = aij · exp (ij )
                             a                           with       E ( ij | i, j, dij , ij ) = 0                    (3.1)


we can then re-write equation (2.34) as the following fixed effects linear regression model for the log of
foreign investment:
                                       ^ij = µi + j + log (1 - ij ) + dij  + ij
                                   log a                                                                             (3.2)

where µi is a country of origin fixed effect and j is a country of origin fixed effect. Because our foreign
investment data has a panel structure, we expand the gravity equation above to include the time dimension:


                                      ^ijt = µit + jt + log (1 - ij ) + dij  + ijt
                                  log a                                                                              (3.3)


        This is our main econometric specification. The dependent variable is measured using data on Foreign
Equity Investment, Foreign Debt Investment, and the sum of the two (Total Foreign Asset s).                 7   To capture
d, we propose a parsimonious specification based on two measures of distance, hypothesized to capture
information asymmetries in international investment: Geographic Distance and Cultural Distance. To
capture ij , we use bilateral data on investment taxes and risk of expropriation. µit and jt are year-
specific destination and origin country fixed effects.
        Because the vector of distances d varies at the level of the undirected country pair, in our regression
analysis we compute standard errors clustered by undirected country pair. Additional bilateral variables

    7
     In the Appendix, we also consider the determinants of global asset holdings that distinguishes between Foreign Direct
Investment and Foreign Portfolio Investment, as is often done in the literature. We prefer to focus on the debt / equity
distinction in the main analysis because the distinction between FDI and equity FPI is somewhat arbitrary. See for instance
Blanchard and Acalin (2016) and Alfaro and Chauvin (2020).




                                                            12
are used either as instruments or control variables, depending on the specific empirical model under
consideration. We now turn to describing these variables in more detail.


3.2    Dependent Variables: Restated Foreign Investment Data

Our analysis improves upon the empirical literature on the determinants of foreign investment by using
recently-developed foreign investment data that account for the existence of tax havens. These tax havens
may serve as indirect conduits between the origin and destination countries. For instance, the Cayman
Islands are often used to transit funds between origin and destination countries in a tax-efficient manner. In
recent work, Damgaard, Elkjaer, and Johannesen (2019) combined FDI data from the IMF's Coordinated
Direct Investment Survey (CDIS) and the OECD's Foreign Direct Investment statistics. They restated
the data in order to account for the fact that some countries act as offshore investment centers. In such
countries, there is a high concentration of investment companies that only act as investment vehicles, and
do not actually engage in productive activities. Damgaard, Elkjaer, and Johannesen (2019) used cross-
border entity ownership data from Bureau Van Dijk's Orbis to reallocate asset ownership from country of
residence of the investment vehicle to the nationality country of the ultimate investor, thereby correcting
for artificially inflated numbers pertaining to offshore tax havens. This is the source of our FDI data.
    Regarding portfolio investment, our main source is data from Coppola, Maggiori, Neiman, and Schreger
(2020). They use data from IMF's Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey (CPIS), and restate them
to account for the presence of shell companies in tax havens - often used to issue securities. To do so,
they use reallocation matrices based on fund holdings data from Morningstar. Using these reallocation
matrices, they converted international portfolio data from CPIS from a residency basis to a nationality
basis. Their Foreign Portfolio Investment (FPI) data is further broken down between debt and equity.
This is the source of our FPI data.8
    To obtain a measure of Total Foreign Assets (or Foreign Total Investment, FTI), we sum the FPI and
FDI series (both are in current international US Dollars). Further, we create a series of Foreign Equity
Investment by adding up FDI and the equity portion of FPI, and a series for Foreign Debt Investment by
isolating the debt portion of the FPI series.
    For both Foreign Debt Investment and Foreign Equity Investment, we base our econometric estimates
on panel data from 2009 to 2017 (the equity series starts in 2013). Figure 1 displays the corresponding
data for 2017, plotted against each other on a logarithmic scale. The plot reveals some interesting facts.
First, there is a great deal of variation in both foreign debt and equity investment across countries. These
two variables range from a few hundred thousand dollars to over a trillion dollars. This is the variation
we seek to explain. Second, the two variables correlate very strongly ( = 0.68), and line up neatly on
the 45 line, indicating that they are similar in size and tend to track each other closely. This suggests
   8
     Coppola et al. (2020) combine all European Monetary Union countries into a single entity. We use unrestated FPI data
from CPIS to break down aggregate EMU figures into investment data corresponding to each individual member country.


                                                           13
                                                           Figure 1: Foreign Equity and Debt Investment (2017)


                                                          1tln
              Foreign Equity Investment Positions (US$)



                                                          1bln




                                                          1mln




                                                           1k                                                      = 0.68
                                                                   45° line

                                                                 1thousand        1million          1billion          1trillion
                                                                         Foreign Debt Investment Positions (US$)

             Figure Notes: This figure plots restated Foreign Equity Investment against restated
             Foreign Debt Investment. Each observation is a country pair and all data refer to the
             year 2017. The unit of measurement is US dollars at current prices. Log scale on both
             axes.


that they might be driven by a similar set of underlying factors, an issue that our econometric analysis
will clarify. Similar observations hold for the distinction between FDI and FPI, which are considered as
alternative dependent variables in the Appendix.


3.3     Main Explanatory Variables

Barriers to global capital allocation are captured in our model by the distance metric d. We operationalize
these barriers by modeling them in a parsimonious way as the result of cultural distance and geographic
distance. Other impediments to global capital flows are considered in the counterfactual analysis (bilateral
taxes on foreign investment, political risk) as well as in the Appendix (currency risk, capital controls).


3.3.1    Cultural and Geographic Distance

Our vector of distances dij includes two distances: Cultural Distance and Geographic Distance.
   Our measure of Cultural Distance captures distance in contemporary values and beliefs, introduced by
Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). It is constructed using a set of 98 questions from the World Values Survey


                                                                                         14
1981- 2010 Integrated Questionnaire, reflecting the following question categories: a) perceptions of life;
b) environment; c) work; d) family; e) politics and society; f) religion and morale; g) national identity.
These questions are a subset of a broader set of 740 questions, where the subset was chosen to ensure that
the set of questions used to compute bilateral distances remains relatively similar across pairs. For each
question, the measure consists of the Euclidian distance in answers between country pairs. Distances are
then averaged over questions to obtain a summary index. Averages can be computed by question category,
but here we use the average over all underlying 98 questions. We re-scaled this index to span the [0, 3]
interval, so that the magnitude of its effect can be compared to that of Geographic Distance.
   We obtained country dyad-level data on physical distance from CEPII's GeoDist dataset (Mayer and
Zignago, 2011). Geographic Distance measures the geodesic distance between any two countries, based
on a population-weighted average of the distances between individual cities. As for Cultural Distance, we
have re-scaled this variable (whose maximum value is equal to half the earth's circumference) to the [0, 3]
interval, so that the magnitude of the two effects can be compared.


3.3.2   Foreign Investment Taxes and Political Risk

Our bilateral measure of taxation, ij captures two factors: actual taxation on capital income paid to
foreign entities, as well as political risk (i.e. probability of expropriation). Formally:

                                                   k
                                (1 - ij ) =    1 - ij (1 - i )       for i = j                         (3.4)

      k is foreign investment taxation and  is the rate of expropriation. We measure these two factors
where ij                                   ij

separately.
   Previous studies have used Dual Taxation Treaties (DTTs), also referred to as Dual Taxation Agree-
ments (DTAs), to predict cross-border investment positions and flows (Di Giovanni, 2005). Tax treaties
are expected to increase investment flows between contracting parties. For this study, we were able to
                                                       k . We measure it using withholding rates on
obtain a more direct measure of the bilateral tax rate ij
interests and dividend income disbursed to non-resident individuals, which we obtain from Tax Research
Platform of the International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation (IBFD). This platform estimates bilateral
withholding rates between countries taking into consideration double taxation agreements that are in force
between countries.
   The IBFD platform reports "domestic rates" (withholding rates that apply to interests and dividends
not covered by a tax treaty) as well as beneficiary country-specific "Treaty Rates". DTTs are generally
designed to impose a cap on the tax rates applied to interests and dividends paid out to non-resident
entities. It is therefore possible for domestic rates to be lower than treaty rates (in other words, treaty
rate caps may not necessarily bind). In such cases, the (lower) domestic withholding rate generally applies.
For this reason, when one domestic rate is reported and one treaty rate is reported for investors from some


                                                      15
country j , we take the lower of the two as our estimate for the tax rate applied to country j investors.
      One complication is that IBFD might report multiple domestic rates, as well as multiple treaty rates
for the same residency country and income type. Italy, for example, imposes a domestic withholding rate
on interest income (disbursed to non-residents) that may be 0%, 12.5% or 26% (depending on the source
of the income and other specificities). At the same time, it imposes a maximum treaty rate of 4%, 5%,
10% or 15% on interest income disbursed to Chilean investors as a consequence of the Italy-Chile tax
treaty.
      To compute a single estimate the applicable tax rate to each country (for either dividends or interests),
we consider every possible combination/pair of domestic and treaty rates (0% and 4%, 0% and 5%, and
so on and so forth). Within each pair, we take the lower between the domestic and the treaty rate, and
then take the median across all pairs. Finally, we average the withholding rate for interest income with
                                                            k.
that for dividend income. This yields our final estimate of ij
      To measure the rate of expropriation ij we use empirical estimates from Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and
Volosovych (2008, henceforth AKV), who measure the sensitivity of foreign investment inflows (in millions
of US$) per capita to a composite measure produced by the International Country Risk Group (ICRG).
This measure, which we obtain for every year in our dataset, ranges from zero (extreme political risk) to
ten (virtually no political risk).9
      To infer from their estimates a measure of political risk that we can input into our model, we use the
fact that, in our model, for a small country i:

                                                        log           j   aij
                                                                                 1                                     (3.5)
                                                        log (1 - i )

From the AKV's regression and summary statistics tables, we can compute:

                                log      j   aij            j   aij           1             j aij
                                                   =                  ·               /                                (3.6)
                                    PRi                    PRi            Populationi   Populationi
                                                                      AKV


where PRi is ICRG's measure of political risk and the term in parentheses (AKV ) is the regression
coefficient estimated by AKV, and the denominator on the right (foreign investment inflows per capita)
can be obtained from AKV's summary statistics table. Combining the two equations above, and assuming
that ij = 0 when PRi = 10, we then have the following estimate for the expropriation rate (1 - ij ):

                                                                                     Populationi
                                    (1 - i ) = exp AKV (PRi - 10)                                                      (3.7)
                                                                                         j aij


      AKV perform instrumental variable regressions using two different datasets in their analysis (IMF

  9
      The political risk index is missing for a handful of countries, for whom we input a political risk score of 5.



                                                                      16
and KLSV). For each of the two datasets, we use the AKV estimate that controls for the initial level of
GDP per capita. This leads to two different estimates for i . To calibrate our model, we take the simple
average of the two.
       Finally, we exclude from our computations domestic taxation (which, if applied uniformly to all foreign
income, does not affect capital allocation) and we assume that domestic investors are not subject to
expropriation risk, i.e. we set ij = 0 for i = j .


3.4      Instruments and Control Variables

We consider additional variables as direct determinants of capital flows, to be used either as instruments
or as control variables, depending on the specification under consideration.


3.4.1      Linguistic, Ancestral and Religious Distances

The first category of variables consists of measures of historical distinctiveness that are deep determi-
nants of contemporary cultural distances. We use measures of linguistic distance and religious distance
introduced in Fearon (2003), Mecham, Fearon, and Laitin (2006) and Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016). We
also use measures of ancestral distance initially developed by Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) and later
updated in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2018). As these contributions discuss in detail, linguistic distance, re-
ligious distance, and ancestral distance can all be interpreted as measures of historical relatedness between
populations.
       Consider first Linguistic Distance. Different contemporary languages have descended from common
ancestral languages over time. For instance, German, Italian and French all descend from a common
proto-Indoeuropean language. In turn, Italian and French descend from more recent common ancestral
languages (Romance languages stemming from Latin), while German does not. Thus, Italian and French
are more closely related to each other than either is to German. Intuitively, this is analogous to our
concept of relatedness between individuals: two siblings are more closely related to each other than they
are to their first cousins, because they share more recent common ancestors (their parents) with each
other, while they share more distant ancestors with their first cousins (their grandparents) and second
cousins (great-grandparents).10 Formally, our measures of linguistic distance are computed by counting
the number of different linguistic nodes separating any pair of languages, according to their classification
from Ethnologue.
       Religious Distance is also constructed considering number of nodes in historical trees. In this case, the
trees consist of religions grouped in related historical categories. For instance, Near Eastern monotheistic
religions are subdivided into Christianity, Islam and Judaism. These are further divided into finer levels

  10
    The analogy is not perfect because individuals have two parents, while languages typically evolve sequentially from
"ancestor" languages. For example, the ancestors of the Italian language, according to Ethnologue are, in order: Indo-
European, Italic, Romance, Italo-Western, and Italo-Dalmatian.


                                                          17
of disaggregation. The number of common nodes between religions is our metric of religious proximity.
Thus, Baptists are closer in religious space to Lutherans than they are to the Greek Orthodox.
      Ancestral Distance, like Linguistic Distance and Religious Distance, can be interpreted as a measure
of long-term historical separation times between groups. However, while linguistic distance captures how
far back one must go in order to find the common ancestral language from which two modern languages
descend, Ancestral Distance captures how far in the past one must go in order to find the common
ancestral population from which two contemporary populations descend. In this respect, the measure
is intuitively closer to the concept of relatedness between individuals, as applied to whole populations.
Ancestral Distance, here, is computed using a genomic dataset on human microsatellite variation from
Pemberton et al. (2013), covering 267 world populations. These populations were matched to 1,120 ethnic
groups from Alesina et al. (2003).
      Microsatellites are tracts of DNA in which specific sequences of base pairs are repeated. Microsatellites
tend to mutate rapidly and randomly - that is, microsatellite variation mostly captures neutral change that
is not subject to natural selection. Their variation provides no direct information about overall differences
in genetic endowments, so it would not be appropriate to interpret the effects of ancestral distance on
economic or societal outcomes as a direct causal effect of genetic factors. Rather, measures of distance
based on microsatellite variation provide information on historical relatedness between populations. This
neutral feature of Ancestral Distance is crucial for the interpretation of the relationship between historical
relatedness and contemporary cultural distance. As populations separate over time, they are more likely
to diverge in cultural traits that are transmitted randomly and with variation from one generation to
the next (Appendix A provides a formal treatment of this idea). Hence, we should expect a positive
relationship, on average, between ancestral distance and cultural or institutional distance, whereas there
is no reason to expect ancestral distance to directly affect financial flows. Consequently, we can use
ancestral distance as an instrument for the proximate determinants of financial flows.


3.4.2     Additional Variables

We use a variety of additional bilateral measures either as instruments or control variables. Among them
are several measures of geographic distance - contiguity, access to a common sea or ocean, latitudinal
distance, longitudinal distance, and whether the two countries in pair are on the same continent. Addi-
tionally, we consider the length of the diplomatic relationship between the two countries in a pair, as a
measure of the depth of their historical links. We also consider variables called Colonial Relationship -
capturing whether two countries in a pair were ever in a colonizer-colonized relationship, and Common
Colonizer, denoting whether the two countries in a pair ever had a common colonizer.11
      We obtain the control variable Currency Peg from the dataset of exchange rate arrangements con-

 11
      The data are from CEPII and can be obtained at http://www.cepii.fr/CEPII/fr/bdd_modele/presentation.asp?id=6



                                                         18
                                  Table 1: Summary Statistics
                           Panel A: Directed, Time-Varying Variables

                                              Observations      Mean     StDev     Min        Max
Foreign Assets (US$ mln, 2013-2017)                 13,551      34,093   590,000     0      35,100,000
Foreign Equity Assets (US$ mln, 2013-2017)          13,598      19,356   322,000     0      20,400,000
Foreign Debt Assets (US$ mln, 2009-2017)            29,807      12,732   264,000     0      21,000,000
Trade Costs (2009-2017)                             43,352      0.051     0.046      0        1.322


                           Panel B: Directed, Cross-Sectional Variables

                                              Directed Pairs    Mean     StDev     Min        Max
Currency Hedging Costs (ij )                        4,900       0.000     0.069    -0.209     0.209
Foreign Investment Tax (ij )                        4,900       0.100     0.068    0.000      0.523


                          Panel C: Undirected, Time-Varying Variables

                                             Undirected Pairs   Mean     StDev     Min        Max
Currency Peg (2009-2017)                            22,365      0.383     0.486    0.000      1.000
Investment Treaty (2009-2017)                       22,365      0.488     0.500    0.000      1.000


                          Panel D: Undirected, Cross-Sectional Variables

                                             Undirected Pairs   Mean     StDev     Min        Max
Cultural Distance                                   2,485       4.196     1.746    0.000     10.000
Geographic Distance                                 2,485       3.069     2.339    0.004      9.764
Ancestral Distance                                  2,346       0.021     0.016    0.000      0.074
Religious Distance                                  2,281       0.786     0.209    0.000      0.999
Border Contiguity                                   2,485       0.036     0.187    0.000      1.000
Colonial Relationship                               2,485       0.025     0.156    0.000      1.000
Common Colonizer                                    2,485       0.030     0.171    0.000      1.000
Common Legal Origin                                 2,485       0.357     0.479    0.000      1.000
Common Sea                                          2,415       0.110     0.313    0.000      1.000
Customs Union                                       2,485       0.173     0.379    0.000      1.000
Economic Integration Agreement                      2,485       0.272     0.445    0.000      1.000
Free Trade Area                                     2,485       0.377     0.485    0.000      1.000
Latitudinal Distance                                2,415       28.857   25.699    0.000     106.000
Linguistic Distance                                 2,281       0.935     0.193    0.000      1.000
Longitudinal Distance                               2,415       58.708   51.576    0.000     276.000


                                               19
structed by Ilzetzki, Reinhart, and Rogoff (2019). The dataset coverage ends in 2016. We extend the
data to 2017 by carrying over the last year of data. The variable Currency Peg captures the presence of
a currency peg as well as the presence of a common currency. We also obtained, from the World Bank's
International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), data on the presence of bilateral
investment treaties, which we code as the dummy variable Investment Treaty.12
         To control for trade policy, we obtain data on regional trade agreements (RTAs) and their member
countries from the WTO websites. We construct bilateral dummy variables representing joint memberships
in Customs Union, Free Trade Agreements, and Economic Integration Agreements as of 2017. Finally, we
control for a measure of Trade Costs, because trade costs can induce changes in international investment.
For instance, high trade costs can spur FDI in an effort to "jump" tariffs. Or, on the contrary there
may be complementarities between trade in capital and trade in goods: the return to investment in a
foreign country may be lower if exporting from the destination is costly, or if the investment requires
paying tariffs to import capital goods into the destination country. The source of the trade cost data is
the ESCAP-World Bank Trade Cost Database (2020), as initially developed in Novy (2013). This paper
derives time-varying bilateral trade costs from a gravity model, which is solved analytically so that trade
costs can be inferred using observed trade data. The ESCAP-World Bank Trade Cost Database13 updates
these calculations periodically, and estimates of trade costs are now available for a wide set of country
pairs over the 1995-2018 period.


3.5         Coverage and Summary Statistics

After merging all the variables above, we are left with a dataset of 70 countries, i.e. 70 × 70 = 4,900
directed country pairs-observations (including diagonal i-to-i pairs) or 2,415 undirected country pairs,
over the 2009-2017 period. The 70 countries in our dataset cover about 92% of the World GDP (based
on 2017 data from the Penn World Tables, version 9.1). Table 1 displays summary statistics for the data
described above.


4         Econometric Analysis

In this section, we estimate the parameter vector , the effect of geographic and cultural distances on log
foreign investment (two semi-elasticities). Our objective is not only to provide a quantitative assessment
of the statistical impact of cross-border investment frictions, but also to retrieve structural parameters for
the model of Section 2, in order to conduct counterfactual analysis.

    12
         https://icsid.worldbank.org/resources/publications/investment-treaty-series
    13
         https://www.unescap.org/resources/escap-world-bank-trade-cost-database




                                                                20
                                        Table 2: OLS Regressions

                                        (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

        Dep.variable in logs:         Assets      Equity        Debt      Assets      Equity       Debt

        Cultural Distance            -0.419**    -0.461**      -0.301**   -0.333**   -0.395**    -0.230**
                                      (0.038)     (0.047)       (0.033)    (0.041)    (0.050)     (0.033)

        Geographic Distance          -0.526**    -0.577**      -0.348**   -0.398**   -0.526**    -0.288**
                                      (0.031)     (0.038)       (0.025)    (0.076)    (0.094)     (0.058)
        Control Variables               No          No           No         Yes         Yes         Yes
        Observations                  12,542      12,014       22,386     11,157      10,746      19,899
        R-squared                      0.771       0.716        0.831      0.803       0.759       0.850
        Within R-squared               0.214       0.196        0.137      0.327       0.311       0.250

        Table Notes: This table reports OLS estimates of a linear regression of a linear regression of
        the log of the variable listed on the top row (Foreign Assets , Foreign Equity Assets , Foreign Debt
        Assets ) on the variables in the leftmost column, using data from 2013-2017 for columns 1, 2,
        4 and 5, and 2009-2017 for columns 3 and 6. Each observation is a directed country pair. All
        regressions include origin country × time (i, t) fixed effects and destination country × time (j, t)
        fixed effects. Additional controls in columns 4-6 are Border Contiguity, Common Sea, Latitudi-
        nal Distance, Longitudinal Distance, Colonial Relationship, Common Colonizer, Common Legal
        Origin, Linguistic Distance, Currency Peg, Customs Union, Economic Integration Agreement,
        Free-Trade Agreement, Foreign Investment Tax, Investment Treaty and Trade Costs . Standard
        errors (clustered by undirected country pair) in parentheses.  p < .05;  p < .01




4.1   Least Squares Analysis

We begin by performing an OLS regression of the log of foreign investment (debt, equity or total) on the
two main measures of distance. Table 2 reports the estimates. Column (1) presents estimation results with
for the log of total assets (i.e. Foreign Total Investment or FTI), as the dependent variable. We find that
Cultural Distance and Geographic Distance are both statistically and economically significant predictors
of FTI: the slope coefficients corresponding to these two variables are negative, sizable in magnitude (-
0.419 and -0.526 respectively) and statistically significant at the 99% confidence level. To get a notion
of relative magnitudes, the coefficients can be expressed as the effect of a one standard deviation change
in the independent variables in terms of a percentage change in FTI (%F T I =ex x - 1). We find
large effects of both barriers: a one standard deviation increase of geographic distance (2.339 units) is
associated with a 70.8% decrease in FTI, while a one standard deviation increase in cultural distance
(1.746 units) is associated with a 51.9% decrease in FTI.


                                                          21
   In Column (2) we present estimation results using log foreign equity investment as the dependent
variable. We find again that both barriers are statistically and economically significant: the standardized
effects as defined above are slightly larger than those for log FTI. Column (3) considers log foreign debt
investment as the dependent variable. We find smaller effects of geographic distance (a standardized effect
of -55.7%) and cultural distance (with a standardized effect of -40.9%), both statistically significant at
the 5% level.
   Finally, columns (4) through (6) repeat the analysis of the first three columns, but depart from our very
parsimonious specification by adding controls for a variety of measures of geographic distance (contiguity,
access to a common sea, latitudinal distance, longitudinal distance), common history variables (linguis-
tic distance, past colonial relationship, common colonizer, common legal origins), as well as variables
possibly capturing bilateral facilitators of capital exchange (currency peg, customs union, economic inte-
gration agreement, free-trade agreement, foreign investment tax, investment treaty and trade costs). The
coefficient estimates on cultural and geographic distances are somewhat reduced in magnitude: for FTI,
we find standardized effects of cultural distance and geographic distance equal, respectively, to -44.1%
and -60.6%. We again find that these two barriers have quantitatively larger effects on foreign equity
investments than foreign debt investment. In sum, adding control variables does not fundamentally alter
the inferences drawn from the more parsimonious specification.


4.2   Pseudo-Poisson Regressions

One shortcoming of the econometric model described by equation (3.3) is that, being written in logs, it
can only accommodate strictly positive capital positions (^
                                                          aij > 0). In order to incorporate country pairs
with zero investment, we can re-write the regression equation (3.3) as:


                            ^ijt = exp µit + jt + log (1 - ij ) + dij  + ijt
                            a                                                                          (4.1)


   thereby converting the log-linear specification into a Poisson regression. This type of model has been
applied to gravity models of trade by Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2006) and Correia, Guimaraes, and
Zylkin (2019). We apply the same statistical model to our model of financial positions. In order to
avoid using a highly-inefficient estimator (as a consequence of the high degree of heteroskedasticity that
is present in the residuals of this equation), we weigh observations by the inverse of the geometric mean
of the GDPs of countries i and j (un-weighted estimates, which have larger standard errors, are shown in
Appendix G). Including the zero investment pairs, the size of the sample rises substantially compared to
that in Table 2 (by over 30% for foreign debt investment and about 13% for equity, though the increase
is smaller for total investment, at about 8%).
   Table 3 displays the resulting estimates. In general, we find that the standardized magnitude of Poisson
estimates are slightly smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates, and the standardized effect of cultural


                                                    22
                                      Table 3: Pseudo-Poisson Regressions

                                            (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)

             Dependent variable:          Assets       Equity         Debt       Assets    Equity      Debt

             Cultural Distance           -0.420**     -0.346**       -0.480**   -0.181**   -0.151**   -0.287**
                                          (0.069)      (0.054)        (0.101)    (0.047)    (0.055)    (0.058)

             Geographic Distance         -0.265**     -0.262**       -0.384**   -0.299**   -0.365**   -0.196
                                          (0.046)      (0.043)        (0.066)    (0.296)    (0.312)   (0.293)
             Control Variables              No           No            No          Yes       Yes        Yes
             Observations                 13,547       13,594        29,737      12,076    12,118     26,110


            Table Notes: This table reports Iteratively-Reweighted Least Squares (IRLS) estimates of a
            Pseudo-Poisson regression of the variables listed on the topmost row (Foreign Assets , Foreign
            Equity Assets , Foreign Debt Assets ) on the variables in the leftmost column. Each observation
            is a directed country pair. All regressions include origin country × time (i, t) fixed effects and
            destination country × time (j, t) fixed effects. Additional controls in columns 4-6 are Border
            Contiguity, Common Sea, Latitudinal Distance, Longitudinal Distance, Colonial Relationship,
            Common Colonizer, Common Legal Origin, Linguistic Distance, Currency Peg, Customs Union,
            Economic Integration Agreement, Free-Trade Agreement, Foreign Investment Tax, Investment
            Treaty and Trade Costs . Observations are weighted by the inverse of the geometric average of
            destination and origin country GDP. Standard errors (clustered by undirected country pair) in
            parentheses.  p < .10;  p < .05;  p < .01




distance is now sometimes larger than that of geographic distance. For instance, in the specification of
column 1, the standardized effect of cultural distance is to reduce total foreign assets by 52.0% while that
of geographic distance is -46.2%. In contrast to the results that use only the intensive margin, we no longer
find smaller effects for debt compared to equity foreign investment. Broadly speaking, a consideration of
the extensive margin does not greatly affect our basic finding that both geographic and cultural barriers
exert quantitatively meaningful and statistically significant negative effects of foreign asset holdings - and
that their respective effects are commensurate with each other.


4.3      Instrumental Variables Regressions

A challenge in estimating the effect of cultural distance on bilateral investment positions is the potential
for reverse causality: it is conceivable that two countries may converge culturally (by adopting more
similar values and norms) as a consequence of more intense cross-border investment.14 In that case,

 14
      For obvious reasons, reverse causality is not an issue for geographic distance.




                                                                23
                                   Table 4: First-Stage Regressions

                                                                     (1)                    (2)

                                                             Cultural Distance     Cultural Distance

              Ancestral Distance                                 39.132**                25.771**
                                                                  (4.534)                 (3.538)

              Religious Distance                                  3.843**                2.962**
                                                                  (0.294)                (0.269)
              Control Variables                                      No                     Yes
              Observations                                         11,022                 11,022
              R - squared                                          0.653                   0.737
              Within R - squared                                   0.227                   0.412
              Cragg-McDonald Wald F statistic                    1067.358                793.211
              Kleibergen-Paap Wald F statistic                    100.663                 93.913
              Stock & Yogo Critical Value (r=10%)                  19.93                   19.93

           Table Notes: This table reports Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates of a linear re-
           gression of the variables listed on the topmost row on the variables in the leftmost column.
           These correspond to the first stage of the IV regressions (1) and (4) presented in Table 5.
           Each observation is an undirected country pair. All regressions include origin country ×
           time (i, t) fixed effects and destination country × time (j, t) fixed effects. All regressions
           control for Geographic Distance . Additional controls in columns 3 and 4 are Border Con-
           tiguity, Common Sea, Latitudinal Distance, Longitudinal Distance, Colonial Relationship,
           Common Colonizer, Common Legal Origin, Linguistic Distance, Currency Peg, Customs
           Union, Economic Integration Agreement, Free-Trade Agreement, Foreign Investment Tax,
           Investment Treaty and Trade Costs . Robust standard errors in parentheses.  p < .05;
           
              p < .01




the OLS estimates of the gravity equation (3.3) could not be interpreted as causal. To address this
issue, we turn to an IV strategy. We rely on the distinction between proximate and deep determinants
of foreign financial positions. We assume that historically-determined factors only influence financial
flows indirectly, through their effect on contemporary cultural distance. Consistent with this exclusion
restriction, we consider two instruments for cultural distance: Ancestral Distance and Religious Distance
(other measures of historical relatedness, like Linguistic Distance or Colonial Relationship, are used as
controls rather than instruments out of concern about their excludability from the second stage). A
stronger argument for excludability can be made for Ancestral Distance, because it is very plausible that
such a variable - capturing intergenerational relatedness and based on neutral genetic changes - might


                                                        24
only impact contemporary outcomes through its historical effects on the cultural transmission of traits and
beliefs, captured by our measure of Cultural Distance.15 A similar argument can be made for Religious
Distance, which is also constructed using a branching tree, tracing the historical splits of different religious
denominations. Thus, it is plausible that the contemporary effects of such splits on our dependent variable
should operate (mainly or exclusively) through contemporary differences in values and beliefs (including,
but not limited to, religious beliefs), measured by Cultural Distance.
       Table 4 presents estimation results for the first-stage regressions. We present results for the parsi-
monious specification (column 1), and for the specification with additional controls (column 2). First
stage regressions lead to interesting results. Consistent with findings in Spolaore and Wacziarg (2016),
ancestral and religious distances are both positively and significantly correlated with cultural distance:
the instruments are strongly predictive of the endogenous variable in the first stage, as shown by the two
first stage F-statistics presented on Table 4.
       Results for the second stage appear in Table 5. As before, there are 6 columns, corresponding to three
dependent variables (log total foreign assets, log foreign equity investment and log debt investment) and to
whether we include additional controls or not. Cultural Distance is treated as endogenous. Compared to
the OLS results of Table 2, we find that the magnitude of the effect of cultural distance rises significantly.16
Take for instance the effect of cultural distance on log FTI (column 1). The effect of a one standard
deviation increase in Cultural Distance was -51.9% under OLS, and it rises in magnitude to -79.7%
under IV. Similar differences are seen across specifications. On the other hand, across specifications the
standardized magnitude of the effect of geographic distance is roughly unchanged compared to OLS (in
column 1, it is -67.2% versus -70.8% under OLS, for instance).
       The bottom line from the IV results is that both distance metrics continue to remain statistically and
economically significant, with a larger effects of cultural distance compared to OLS. These findings do not
depend greatly on whether we control for additional determinants of foreign investment, and is robust for
log total foreign assets, log foreign debt assets and log foreign equity assets. Since the IV results feature
usually larger magnitudes than OLS results, out of an abundance of caution we will rely on the latter for
the counterfactual analysis conducted in Section 5.

  15
       A theoretical formalization of the relationship between Ancestral Distance and Cultural Distance is provided in Appendix
A.
  16
    Finding IV estimates on the instrumented variables that are larger in magnitude than OLS estimates is quite common in
the literature, even in cases (like ours) where we expect reverse causality to bias OLS estimates away from zero. A common
explanation is that IV estimation helps address attenuation bias coming from measurement error, if error in measurement
of the instrumental variables is uncorrelated with error in measurement of the instrumented (endogenous) regressor.




                                                               25
                           Table 5: Instrumental Variables Regressions

                                          (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)

      Dep.variable in logs:             Assets      Equity      Debt        Assets     Equity       Debt

      Cultural Distance                -0.912**    -1.018**    -0.536**   -0.711**    -0.793**    -0.338**
                                        (0.104)     (0.128)     (0.077)    (0.122)     (0.151)     (0.087)

      Geographic Distance              -0.477**    -0.532**    -0.350**   -0.411**    -0.537**    -0.302**
                                        (0.034)     (0.042)     (0.027)    (0.084)     (0.098)     (0.060)
      Control Variables                   No          No          No         Yes         Yes         Yes
      Observations                      11,022      10,611      19,704      11,022     10,611      19,704
      Within R-squared                  0.177       0.167       0.140       0.305       0.295       0.245
      Kleibergen-Paap  P-value          0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000       0.000
      Sargan-Hansen J P-value           0.548       0.654       0.088       0.304       0.276       0.786


     Table Notes: This table reports Instrumental Variable (IV) estimates of a linear regression of the
     log of the variable listed on the top row (Foreign Assets , Foreign Equity Assets , Foreign Debt As-
     sets ) on the variables in the leftmost column. Cultural Distance is the endogenous regressor and the
     excluded instruments are Ancestral Distance and Religious Distance. Each observation is a directed
     country pair. All regressions include origin country × time (i, t) fixed effects and destination country
     × time (j, t) fixed effects. The additional controls in columns 4-6 are Border Contiguity, Common
     Sea, Latitudinal Distance, Longitudinal Distance, Colonial Relationship, Common Colonizer, Common
     Legal Origin, Linguistic Distance, Currency Peg, Customs Union, Economic Integration Agreement,
     Free-Trade Agreement, Foreign Investment Tax, Investment Treaty and Trade Costs . Standard errors
     (clustered by undirected country pair) in parentheses.  p < .05;  p < .01




5    Counterfactual Analysis: Global Capital Misallocation

In this section, we calibrate the model of Section 2 using the econometric estimates of Section 4, to
provide a quantitative assessment of the welfare impact of barriers to international investment. If we
could hypothetically set to zero all intermediation costs associated with geographic and cultural distances
between countries, and let market forces reallocate capital, how would the sum and the cross-country
distribution of output change? It is important to note that, in our counterfactual exercise, we are not
assuming that all distances themselves would disappear. Societal differences in locations, values, beliefs,
norms, and other cultural traits, may continue to matter indirectly through their effects on productivities
and other variables that differ across countries (empirically, such effects will continue to be captured
by country fixed effects). Rather, our counterfactual assumption is that the world can now have access
to new "intermediation technologies", affecting factors such as transportation, communication, cultural


                                                       26
translation, international cooperation, and so on, which would completely eliminate all intermediation
costs associated with geographic and cultural distances. Thus, we will look at a world where geopolitical
and cultural differences between countries persist, but they no longer act as barriers to global capital
allocation.
    Two reasons motivate this exercise. The first is to provide a deeper understanding of the quantitative
implications of the model. The second reason is related to policy. Of course, policy-makers cannot directly
eliminate geographic distance. And, even if they could directly affect cultural distance, they probably
should not for ethical, political, and economic reasons - including, for instance, the fact that geographic and
cultural diversity across societies may have a positive impact on potential gains from trade, growth, and
innovation. However, there can exist policies that reduce the effect of geographic and cultural distances
on intermediation costs - for example, policies that facilitate travel, communication, and inter-cultural
exchanges. The counterfactual exercise can be interpreted as capturing the potential benefits from such
barrier-reducing policies.


5.1    Model Mapping and Calibration

Three country-level macroeconomic variables are required to take our model to the data. The first is output
(yi ). We measure this as GDP in current PPP US dollars. This series is obtained from the International
Monetary Fund's World Economic Outlook database (IMF-WEO). The second is labor input ( i ). We
measure this as total employment, which we obtain the Penn World Tables (PWT, version 9.1). From the
Penn-World tables we also obtain a measure of capital-output ratio (ki /yi ), which we combine with IMF
GDP to obtain a measure of the capital stock at current prices, used for model validation purposes. The
last data ingredient is the output-capital elasticity i . We measure this as one minus the labor income
share of GDP, for which we obtain country-level estimates from the International Labor Office (ILO),
Department of Statistics. Finally, we calibrate  = 1/2.17
    Our regression estimates for  vary somewhat depending on the estimator. As noted earlier, IV
estimates tend to be larger for Cultural Distance. On the basis of the range of specifications we estimated
and ­ in order to be conservative ­ we calibrate the investment to-distance semi-elasticities ( ) using the
estimates of column 4 of Table 2 (which includes the full set of controls): -0.333 for Cultural Distance,
and -0.398 for Geographic Distance. We also use data on ij , composed of both investment taxes and risk
of expropriation, as described in Section 3.3.2.
    The model components that remain to be identified are the matrix of portfolio shares , the vector
of (destination country) capital stocks k, the vector of savings s and total factor productivities i . These
objects are identified given the previously-measured variables and parameters: the matrix  is identified
given y and  (equation (2.32)). The vector of savings s is identified by equation (2.9). k is then
   17
      The parametrization of  is inconsequential from an economic standpoint (it does not affect any of our counterfactuals):
all it does is to scale the overall level of capital across all countries).


                                                             27
                                                Figure 2: Empirical Performance of the Gravity Model


                                                          1tln

                      Foreign Investment - Actual (US$)



                                                          1bln




                                                                 45° line
                                                          1mln



                                                                                                               = 0.59

                                                           1k
                                                                  1million                    1billion                  1trillion
                                                                    Foreign Investment Position (aij ) Gravity Model (US$)

                    Figure Notes: This figure plots the log of Foreign Total Investment against the
                    log of predicted international investment from the gravity model (aij ). The data
                    are for 2017.




obtained as s. Finally, the Cobb-Douglas production function pins down total factor productivity i
given ki ,   i   and yi .


5.2    Empirical Performance of the Gravity Equation

The first question is how well the gravity equation actually fits the restated data on cross-border investment
positions. After calibrating the model, we can use the gravity equation (2.22) to predict international
investment by origin and destination-country.
    The model-implied foreign investment positions are shown in Figure 2 against the actual data on
Foreign Total Investment. Model-implied values are not fitted values from the regressions in Section 4.
The difference between the two lies in the fixed effects: while in the econometric model they are fitted, in
the model they are computed as a function of model parameters and observables.
    The gravity equation performs satisfactorily: the actual and fitted values line up neatly along the 45
line, and their correlation is 0.6, which is high considering that the equation above is not fitted using fixed
effects. Hence, we conclude that the calibrated gravity equation predicts cross-sectional variation in total


                                                                                         28
                          Figure 3: Model Fit: Capital Stock per Employee




                 Figure Notes: This figure plots the log of capital stock per employee (ki / i ) from
                 the against the corresponding model estimate. Both measures are in differences
                 from the mean. Each observation is a country and data refer to the year 2017.




investment quite well.


5.3      Model Fit: Country-Level Capital Stocks

We now consider another way to validate our model empirically. When taking the model to the data, we
have not used any domestic capital data. To further validate our model, we can compare capital stock
per employee from the Penn World Tables to our model-based estimates of the same variable. We take
these two variables in logs, subtract the mean, and then plot the two series in a scatter plot in in Figure
3.18
       The graph shows that our model-based estimates correlate very strongly with their counterparts from
Penn World Tables (the correlation is 0.9), and line up tightly around the 45-degree line. Thus, our model

  18
    The OLG model does not differentiate between investment and capital stock, hence the level is not comparable. This
is not important, since the model is isomorphic to scaling up or down all capital stocks (productivity i adjusts to preserve
the level of GDP).



                                                            29
performs well in terms of predicting the cross-section of capital stocks across the 70 countries we are able
to cover. Repeating the exercise without dividing by employment ( i ) yields a stronger correlation (0.97).


5.4      Rates of Return

An key endogenous variable in our model is the objective rate of return on capital (ri ). As described
in sub-section (2.4), the cross-country dispersion in rates of returns arises as a consequence of capital
market imperfections (variation in d  and ij ), and can be related to the resulting GDP loss. As already
shown in subsection 2.4, if we set  = 0 and T = 0, rates of return would be equalized and capital
would be efficiently allocated across countries. It is therefore useful, in order to evaluate the empirical
performance of the model, to investigate how the rates of returns produced by our model compare to
those independently estimated by other researchers.
       In a recent paper, David, Henriksen, and Simonovska (2014, henceforth DHS) produce estimates of the
return on capital for 144 countries.19 Of these, 65 overlap with countries in our dataset. As a validation
exercise, we compare the (country-level) relative rate of returns on capital from our model to DHS's
estimates. By "relative", we mean that we normalize each of the two estimates by their respective median
values (the levels are not comparable, because in our model there is no capital depreciation).
       In Figure 4 (upper panel) we produce a scatter plot of the rates of returns estimated by DHS against
those implied by our gravity model. We find that the two series are strongly correlated ( = 0.57). We
argue that this correlation should be considered high because, again, the cross-country variation in rates
returns generated by our model is driven entirely by bilateral metrics of investment taxes as well as
geographic and cultural distances. If we were to set  = 0 and ij = 1 for all (i, j ), the upper panel of
Figure 4 would display a vertical line. Hence, the observed correlation between our model-implied values
and DHS's estimates arises exclusively from our four explanatory variables.
       Another desirable property of the capital returns generated by our model is that they are consistent
with a stylized fact, previously documented by DHS: rates of returns on capital correlate negatively, at
the country level, with the level of economic development. We document this in the lower panel of Figure
4, where we plot the relationship between the rates of return from our model against the log of GDP per
employee. The correlation between these two variables is -0.76. This is consistent with the observation
that rates of return are much higher in developing countries. Therefore, if differentials in such rates were
the only driver of international investment, one should expect large flows of capital from richer to poorer
country. This raises the important question, originally emphasized by Lucas (1990) and later studied in

  19
    DHS's measurement of returns to aggregate capital builds on those of (Caselli and Feyrer, 2007) and Gomme, Ravikumar,
and Rupert (2011). In their seminal paper, Caselli and Feyrer found that, after accounting for differences in the the relative
price of investment goods and after adjusting capital shares for land and other natural resources, capital returns were
approximately equal across countries in the year they considered (1996). DHS have confirmed such finding for that specific
year, but found large return differentials over longer periods. Similar differences between returns in developed and developing
markets have been found by Daly (2010) for the period 1981-2008.



                                                              30
            Figure 4: Model-Implied Rates of Return on Capital




Figure Notes: This figure plots the model-implied rate of return on capital, as a ratio to
its median value, against the corresponding estimate from David, Henriksen, and Simonovska
(2014, upper panel) and against the log of GDP per employee (lower panel). Each observation
is a country and the data are for 2017.



                                            31
depth by Alfaro, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2008), of why we do not observe such flows in the data.
The effect of the barriers to global capital allocation, which are at the center of our empirical analysis,
can help explain the absence of large movements of capital towards developing countries, thus shedding
light on Lucas's question.20


5.5       Home Bias

Finally, we consider the out-of-sample performance of the model. As measured in the data, the matrix
of investment portfolio shares  has a significant number of missing observations, which can be filled
in using our gravity equation. Among the missing values are the entire diagonal of , which represents
domestic investment. Based on the literature on home bias, we can predict that these diagonal elements
should be large relative to non-diagonal elements. Hence, one of the strictest tests of our gravity model
would be its ability to predict, out-of-sample, a significant home bias.
       Table 6 displays the matrix of portfolio shares , based on restated IMF data, with missing values
imputed using our gravity model. To avoid having to display 70 countries, the table includes only the
G20 plus the rest of the world. Two features of this matrix are of note. The first is the dominance of
the United States as a receiving country, which is consistent with its role as a "financial supermarket",
previously documented by Martin and Rey (2004). The second striking pattern is the prominence of the
diagonal elements, whose average value is over 50%, pointing to very significant home bias.
       Given that our gravity equation loads negatively on measures of cultural and geographic distance, the
fact that it predicts at least some degree of home bias is not entirely surprising. What is unexpected is
the large size of the home bias predicted by our model: hence, another strength of our structural gravity
model is its ability to predict, out-of-sample, a significant domestic bias.
       The magnitudes of the home bias we calculate are comparable to those documented by French and
Poterba (1991) and (more recently) Coeurdacier and Rey (2013), albeit it should be noted that the
measurement approaches are not directly comparable: we focus on a wider range of assets and our data
are more recent.21 Moreover, our data come from a different source.
       Another stylized fact that our model is able to account for is that home bias correlates positively with
rates of return. This fact was robustly documented by Lau, Ng, and Zhang (2010) who used, as a measure
of home bias for country i, the share of domestic fund holdings in i's stock market capitalization divided
by their i's world-market capitalization weight, expressed in logs.

  20
    DHS also develop a model to explain this stylized fact. In their theoretical framework, capital yields higher returns in
emerging economies due to risk and diversification (emerging assets are a worse hedge for global risk). In our framework,
returns to capital are higher in emerging markets due to asset market frictions. It is not possible to judge the relative
importance of these two factors based on our two models in isolation. A more general model ­ incorporating both risk and
asset market frictions ­ would be needed. Also, a systematic methodology to measure asset return variances and covariances
would likely be required. This is a promising avenue for future research.
  21
       Coeurdacier and Rey (2013) document that home bias is slowly weakening.



                                                            32
                                                         Table 6: Matrix of G20 countries Investment Shares (based on Gravity Model)

                                                                                                       Country of Origin -   j

                               Group           Country      Code   AUS CAN USA       IND   RUS TUR ZAF         ARG BRA MEX DEU FRA GBR ITA                     CHN IDN     JPN KOR RoW

                                 1     Australia            AUS    44%   0%    0%    0%    0%    0%      1%     1%     0%        0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%

                                 1     Canada               CAN    1%    9%    5%    0%    0%    0%      1%     2%     1%        3%    1%    1%    2%    1%    0%    0%    0%    0%    1%

                                 1     United States        USA    12%   71%   82%   1%    3%    4%      6%    15%     9%        36%   6%    6%    15%   8%    1%    1%    3%    2%    9%

                                 2     India                IND    3%    0%    0%    70%   5%    10%     14%    1%     1%        1%    1%    1%    1%    3%    2%    10%   2%    5%    6%

                                 2     Russia               RUS    1%    1%    0%    2%    46%   4%      2%     1%     1%        1%    3%    3%    2%    3%    1%    1%    1%    2%    4%
                                 2     Turkey               TUR    0%    0%    0%    2%    2%    41%     2%     1%     1%        0%    1%    1%    1%    2%    0%    1%    0%    0%    3%

                                 2     South Africa         ZAF    1%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%      27%    1%     1%        0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    1%

                                 3     Argentina            ARG    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%      1%    30%     3%        1%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    1%
                                 3     Brazil               BRA    1%    1%    1%    0%    0%    1%      5%    17%    61%        3%    0%    1%    0%    1%    0%    0%    0%    0%    2%




33
                                 3     Mexico               MEX    1%    3%    3%    0%    1%    0%      1%     6%     5%        44%   1%    1%    1%    1%    0%    0%    0%    0%    2%

                                 4     Germany              DEU    1%    2%    1%    1%    4%    3%      2%     2%     1%        1%    37%   11%   11%   11%   0%    0%    1%    1%    8%




     Destination Country - i
                                 4     France               FRA    1%    1%    1%    0%    2%    2%      2%     2%     2%        1%    6%    28%   8%    6%    0%    0%    0%    0%    5%

                                 4     United Kingdom       GBR    2%    4%    2%    1%    2%    2%      3%     2%     1%        1%    9%    11%   26%   8%    0%    0%    1%    1%    6%

                                 4     Italy                ITA    1%    1%    1%    1%    2%    4%      4%     3%     2%        1%    6%    7%    6%    22%   0%    0%    0%    1%    6%

                                 5     China                CHN    12%   1%    1%    9%    10%   4%      5%     1%     1%        1%    3%    2%    2%    3%    89%   8%    20%   37%   7%

                                 5     Indonesia            IDN    3%    0%    0%    2%    0%    1%      2%     0%     0%        0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    0%    69%   1%    1%    1%

                                 5     Japan                JPN    7%    1%    1%    1%    2%    1%      1%     0%     0%        1%    2%    1%    1%    1%    3%    2%    62%   16%   1%

                                 5     South Korea          KOR    2%    0%    0%    1%    1%    1%      1%     0%     0%        0%    1%    0%    0%    1%    2%    1%    5%    27%   1%
                                 6     Rest of the World RoW       9%    6%    4%    9%    20%   23%     22%   18%    11%        6%    24%   26%   24%   30%   2%    6%    3%    6%    38%


             Table Notes: This table presents, for G20 countries (except Saudi Arabia, for which we do not have data) matrix of investment shares  = [ij ],
             based on the gravity model of Section 2.  lists, for every country pair (i, j ), the share of capital owned by j that is invested in country i. G20 countries
             are officially sorted in 5 groups which are loosely based on country locations. We group countries in this matrix based on their official G20 group
             membership, and impute missing shares based on the gravity model we estimate in Section 4. All of the diagonal elements are imputed.
                            Figure 5: Rates of Return and Home Bias




              Figure Notes: This figure plots the model-implied rate of return on capital, as
              a ratio to its median value, against a measure of home bias - the ratio of the
              shares of country i investment in country i portfolio and in the World Portfolio
               log ii - log k
                            K . Each observation is a country and data refer to the year 2017.
                             i




   To show that our general equilibrium model is capable of reproducing this correlation, we compute
our own model-consistent version of this measure:

                                                  def                   ki
                                    Home Biasi     =     log ii - log                               (5.1)
                                                                        K

and plot it against the model-implied return to capital (ri ) in Figure 5. As visible from the graph, the
two correlate strongly and positively.


5.6   Counterfactual Analysis

We now move to the core of this section: the counterfactual analysis. Counterfactuals allow us to gain a
sense of the economic impact of the barriers. In our setting, simulating a counterfactuals means changing
the vector  (the semi-elasticity of investment with respect to the distance vector) and/or the matrix
of investment taxes (T), and studying how all other variables (as well as statistics of interest) change
in equilibrium as a result. For each of the counterfactuals, we compute the corresponding World GDP.
We also compute the percentage difference between the counterfactual and an undistorted (zero-gravity )

                                                    34
equilibrium in terms of three statistics: World GDP, the standard deviation of the log of capital per
employee and the standard deviation of log of output per employee.
       Table 7 presents the main results from the counterfactual analysis. In column (1), we present the
observed, distorted equilibrium, with investment taxes, geographic distance and cultural distance as ob-
served. In column (2), we present the zero-gravity equilibrium, from which all distortions ­ except those
at the level of the individual investors ­ have been removed ( = 0, T = 0). In column (3) to (5), we
consider equilibria in which the effect of Cultural Distance, Geographic Distance and investment taxes are
respectively re-introduced in isolation (that is, all other distortions except the one indicated are removed).
These three counterfactuals allow to gain a sense of the marginal impact of each individual distortion.
       The upper panel shows results of our counterfactual, computed under the assumption that the supply
of capital is inelastic (that is, the vector of savings s cannot react to the removal of the distortions). This
set of results is meant to isolate the effect of capital misallocation, and reflects a "one-period" change in
our model economy following the addition or removal of distortions. The lower panel shows results based
on the assumption that the supply of capital can adjust in response to the removal of the distortions.
These results reflect instead how the steady state equilibrium changes: they account for the fact that,
when capital is reallocated away from some countries and towards some other countries, the total capital
stock may need to adjust in order for steady-state conditions to be satisfied.
       We find that barriers to the global allocation of capital have quantitatively important effects on the
level of output produced globally. World GDP in the observed equilibrium of our model is measured
at 111.3 US$ billion. That is 6.9% lower than in the zero-gravity counterfactual (column 2) under the
assumption of an inelastic capital supply, and 7% lower when we assume that the supply of capital can
respond.
       We also find that the three distortions have quantitatively meaningful effects on World GDP when
considered in isolation. When all distortions except those due to Cultural Distance are removed, GDP is
3.5% lower than in the Zero-Gravity scenario; this figure becomes 2.6% if capital is allowed to respond.
When Geographic Distance alone is considered, the GDP losses are 1.5% (inelastic capital) and 2% (elastic
capital). Investment taxes have a more muted impact when considered in isolation: they reduce World
GDP by 0.5% when capital supply is inelastic.22
       One common theme of these counterfactual is that GDP losses appear slightly smaller when we allow
the capital stock to react. A potential explanation for this finding is that we allow countries to vary in
their capital income shares (i ). When distortions are removed, capital generally tends to be reallocated
to countries with higher capital shares, and country savings (si ) are smaller for countries with a larger
capital share. Hence, with an elastic capital supply, aggregate saving tends to be slightly lower in the
zero-gravity counterfactual due to compositional effects.

  22
    When we allow capital supply to adjust, we find that the removal of this friction in isolation leads to a slight increase
in world GDP. This is explained by a reallocation of economic activity towards countries with lower savings rates.


                                                             35
                                                     Table 7: Counterfactuals (2017)



                                                                                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                                      xe




                                                                                                                                                        nce
                                                                                                                                                                                   Ta




                                                                                                                                                        a




                                                                                                                                   nce
                                                                                                                                                                             &




                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                                                                    ist




                                                                                                                                   a




                                                                                                                 ity



                                                                                             s)
                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                    D
                                                                                                                                                                              sk




                                                                                                                               ist



                                                                                                               ers




                                                                                         ier
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                                           Ri




                                                                                                                               D




                                                                                       r
                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                              hic




                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                                                         l




                                                                                   a
                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                                                                                       a




                                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                                                                      c




                                                                                                                           ral




                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                           u



                                                                                                     o B Grav




                                                                              l l B ve
                                                                                                                                                                 liti




                                                                                                                                            ogr




                                                                                                    Ze
                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                       ult



                                                                                                   N




                                                                            (A bser
                                                                                                  ( ro-
                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                         G
                                                                                                                                                              Po



            Welfare Statistics (Fixed Capital Stock)                           (1)                    (2)                   (3)               (4)                     (5)

                       World GDP (US$ trillions)                             111.3                  119.6                  115.5             117.8                  119.0

        World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity                     -6.9%                    0%                   -3.5%             -1.5%                  -0.5%

       St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity             +78.6%                    0%               +36.5%              +35.8%                +14.9%




36
       St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity             +44.0%                    0%               +18.8%              +15.1%                 +8.9%


        Welfare Statistics (Endogenous Capital Stock)

                       World GDP (US$ trillions)                             111.3                  119.6                  116.5             117.2                  120.4

        World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity                     -7.0%                    0%                   -2.6%             -2.0%                +0.7%

       St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity             +78.5%                    0%               +31.5%              +39.2%                +15.2%

       St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity             +44.0%                    0%               +16.0%              +15.3%                 +8.9%


     Table Notes: This table presents welfare statistics for four counterfactuals of the model described in Section 2. Each of columns (2)-(5)
     is a counterfactual, and the rows represent different welfare statistics of interest. Observed is the equilibrium allocation with all measured
     barriers. Zero-Gravity is the counterfactual in which all three barriers (Cultural Distance , Geographic Distance and Political Risk &
     Taxes ) have been removed. Columns (3)-(5) illustrate three counterfactuals from which only the corresponding distortion is in place.
     (ki / i ) is the capital stock per employee, while (yi / i ) is output (GDP) per employee. Actual World PPP$ GDP (including countries
     not in the model) in 2017 was $121 trillion.
        Figure 6: Distribution of Capital and Output per Employee




Figure Notes: This figure fits the probability density function of a stable distribution (a
4-parameter family of distributions with flexible skewness and fat tails) to country-level capital
stock per employee (upper panel) and GDP per employee (bottom panel). In each panel, the
lighter area is the distribution in the observed, distorted equilibrium. The dotted black line
is the distribution in a counterfactual scenario in which all measured distortions to capital
movement (geographic and cultural distances, as well as investment taxes) have been removed.


                                               37
   While the overall effects of these three distortions on allocative efficiency and World GDP appear
substantial, their effect on cross-country inequality is even more sizable. We can gain a sense of country
heterogeneity by looking at how much these distortions change the distribution of capital and output per
employee. When capital misallocation resulting from barriers to international investment are removed, we
observe a significant decrease in dispersion of both capital and output per employee. When moving from
the zero-gravity equilibrium to the observed (distorted) equilibrium, the standard deviation of (log) capital
per employee increases by 78.6%%, while the standard deviation of log output per employee increases by
44%. These numbers are not sensitive to whether capital supply is assumed to be inelastic.
   When Cultural Distance alone is maintained, dispersion in log capital per employee is 31.5%-36.5%
higher than in the zero-gravity benchmark (depending on whether capital supply is elastic or not). The
dispersion of log output per employee is 16%-18.8% higher. For Geographic Distance, the magnitudes are
commensurate with these numbers. Finally, we find that maintaining only investment taxes, dispersion in
log capital per employee is about 15% higher compared to the zero-gravity benchmark, while dispersion
in log output per employee is 8.9% higher. In other words, cultural distance appears to have the largest
marginal effect, followed by geographic distance. Investment taxes have smaller, but still sizable effects
on cross-country inequality.
   Figure 6 provides a graphical representation of the effect of removing barriers to international in-
vestment on cross-country inequality. It shows how the (fitted) cross-country distribution of capital per
employee and output per employee changes in response to the removal of the barriers. For both variables,
we observe a significant reduction in dispersion, but also in skewness (the left tail becomes thinner). We
also can notice a general rightward shift, reflecting an increase of capital and income per employee for the
median country.
   What lies beyond this reduction in inequality under zero-gravity? When capital distortions are re-
moved, capital tends to be reallocated to countries that had higher rates of returns on capital in the
distorted equilibrium. As discussed previously, these tend to be countries with lower capital stock per
employee and lower output per employee. Figure 7 illustrates this effect: it is a scatter plot of the baseline
level of GDP per employee (horizontal axis) against the log change in GDP per employee from moving to
a zero-gravity world (vertical axis). The latter number can also be read, on the right axis scale, as the log
change in capital per employee. As can be seen from the graph, there are significant "winners" and "losers"
among the countries in our dataset ­ albeit on average most countries experience an increase in capital and
output per capita. The strong negative correlation between the country-level gains and the initial level of
output per employee implies that the removal of barriers leads to a substantial reduction in cross-country
inequality. In other words, poorer countries benefit disproportionately from capital reallocation. Some of
them, such as Zimbabwe or Uganda, see capital per employee more than double, and their income per
employee jump by over half.
   Finally, we consider a comparison of net foreign asset positions (defined here as the difference between

                                                     38
                        Figure 7: Capital Reallocation Gains by Country




               Figure Notes: This figure displays the baseline level of log output per capita
               (horizontal axis), against the log change in capital stock per employee (left axis)
               following the removal of all measured barriers to global capital allocation. Each
               observation is a country, and the data are from 2017.


country i's supply of physical capital ki and the total financial capital supplied by country i to all other
countries), under the observed equilibrium and the zero-gravity equilibrium (i.e. when we set  = 0 and
ij = 1 for all (i, j )) . Figure 8 displays scatterplots of the resulting net foreign assets against log GDP per
employee. Under the observed equilibrium, there exists a weak negative relationship between net foreign
assets (si - ki ) and the level of development: this is consistent with Lucas's observation that capital
appears to flow from poor to rich countries. When frictions are removed (bottom panel), the relationship
turns positive and becomes stronger in magnitude, as the absolute value of the correlation between net
foreign assets and the level of development doubles. In the zero-gravity equilibrium, capital indeed flows
from rich to poor countries. The presence of international barriers to capital flow (geographic, cultural
and tax-based) can help explain the lack of a positive correlation, in the data, between a country's net
asset positions and its level of development.
   In summary, using counterfactual analysis, we find that misallocation of capital across countries ­ in-
duced by investment taxes as well as geographic and cultural distances ­ imposes quantitatively important
output losses for the majority of countries, and in general for World GDP, and can potentially account
for a significant share of the observed cross-country dispersion in capital/employee.



                                                       39
               Figure 8: Net Foreign Assets and Development




Figure Notes: the figure above plots the model-implied Net Foreign Assets (si - ki ) as a
share of GDP (yi ), against the log of GDP per employee. The top panel plots NFA/GDP in
the observed distorted equilibrium, while the bottom panel plots NFA/GDP in the Zero-Gravity
counterfactual, in which all barriers are removed.


                                            40
6     Robustness Checks and Extensions

6.1   Coefficients Stability

How stable are the coefficient estimates on Cultural Distance and Geographic Distance over time? Ap-
pendix B, Figure B.1 plots coefficient estimates from a variation of our baseline regression specification
(Table 2, column 1). The dependent variables is still the log of foreign total investment, but the right hand
side variables (Cultural Distance, Geographic Distance ) are interacted with year fixed effects to produce
time-varying coefficients. The 95% confidence interval is plotted together with the calibrated coefficients
(dotted line). The dotted line always falls within the confidence interval, and close to its center for both
variables. This time-stability of the main regression estimates of interest provides evidence that our choice
of calibrated effects of cultural and geographic distance is well-founded.


6.2   Alternative Breakdown of Foreign Investment Statistics

In our main estimation, we broke down FTI into debt and equity components. Here we consider instead
another conventional breakdown of capital flows: between Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Foreign
Portfolio Investment (FPI). Appendix C, Table C.1 presents the results, using the same specification as
that of Table 2. We find that cultural and geographic distances exert negative, statistically significant
and economically meaningful negative effects on FDI and FPI, whether one does not include additional
controls (columns 2 and 3) or whether one includes them (columns 5 and 6).


6.3   Restated vs. Un-restated Data

In our main estimation exercise, we use foreign investment data that are restated to account for the effect
of tax havens. Appendix D, Table D.1 replicates the regressions of Table 2 using non-restated (residency-
based) data on foreign total investment, foreign debt investment and foreign equity investment. The
sample involves a substantially larger number of observations, especially when no control variables are
added (columns 1-3). Nonetheless, the standardized magnitudes of the estimates are very close to those
obtained from Table 2. Across the six specifications, with non-restated data the effect of cultural distance
is slightly smaller, while that of geographic distance is slightly larger than when using data that are
restated on a nationality basis.


6.4   Capital Controls

One type of barrier that we have deliberately omitted from our model is capital account policy restric-
tions. We did so because our model is not designed to address questions of macro-prudential policy, i.e.
short-term considerations about macroeconomic stability (we focus instead on a long-run steady-state).




                                                     41
Nonetheless, capital controls are enacted in order to affect capital flows, and thus we worry whether their
effect may interact with that of our variables in a way that might change our results in a meaningful way.
   A simple way to theoretically model the effect of capital controls is to amend the equation describing
the subjective (x, z ) return R as follows:

                                               def
                                 R (x, z )         =   ij · (1 - ij ) · ri · e-(x,z )                     (6.1)

ij is defined over the interval [0, 1]: it captures the degree of capital account openness (the lack of capital
controls) facing j -investors seeking to invest in country i. ij = 1 implies that investment from j to i
is unrestricted. For domestic investors (i = j ) ij is always 1 by definition. This leads to the following
modified equation for the portfolio shares:

                                              ij · (1 - ij ) · ri ki · exp dij 
                               ij =                                                                       (6.2)
                                             n
                                             c=1   cj · (1 - cj ) · rc kc · exp dcj 

   Turning to the empirical implementation, we measure the degree of de jure capital account openness
between country i and country j using data from Jahan and Wang (2016), which is based on qualita-
tive information from the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions
(AREAER). Their dataset consists in a set of dummy variables that encode the presence of inflow or
outflow capital account restrictions on specific types of investments. We use data for the most recent year
in their dataset, 2013.
   For each country in their dataset, we use the following set of ten dummy variables. The first two
dummies represent, respectively, restrictions on inflowing and outflowing direct investment. The next
set of four dummies represent restrictions on equity portfolio investment: two represent restrictions on
(respectively) the sale and purchase of domestic equity by non-residents, while the other two represent
restrictions on (respectively) the sale and purchase of foreign equity by residents. The third and last set
of four dummies covers restrictions on debt portfolio investment: two reflect, respectively, restrictions on
sale and purchase of domestic debt securities by non-residents; the other two represent restrictions on sale
and purchase of foreign debt securities by residents.
   To estimate ij , we consider the five inflow restrictions dummies for country i (1 for FDI, 2 for
portfolio equity and 2 for debt) as well as the five outflow restrictions dummies for country i (1 for FDI,
2 for portfolio equity and 2 for debt). We model each restriction as a (shadow) tax on foreign investment.
To be conservative in our analysis, we assume that these taxes take on large values. In particular, we
assume that both dummies corresponding to FDI investment restrictions are equivalent to a tax of 50%,
while each of the four dummy variables corresponding to FPI restrictions is equivalent to a tax of 25%.
We first compute the total tax (compounding both i inflow restrictions and j outflow restrictions) at the
asset class level (FDI, equity portfolio and debt), and then take the simple average across the three asset


                                                           42
classes. Formally:

                               1
                     ij =        (1 - 50%)NFDI + (1 - 25%)NEquity FPI + (1 - 25%)NDebt                  (6.3)
                               3

where N indicates the number of dummy variables in AREAER for each asset class/country pair (two,
four and four respectively).
   In Appendix E, Table E.1 we repeat our counterfactual analysis for the extended model with capital
controls. To make the exercise symmetric to the baseline one, capital controls remain in place in each of
the five scenarios being studied ­ that is, we do not remove the effect of capital controls in any of the
estimated counterfactuals, not even when we move to "zero-gravity". The percentage world GDP losses is
unchanged with respect to our baseline exercise when the capital stock is fixed (6.9%). When the world
capital stock is endogenous the world GDP loss 6.6% ­ very close to our baseline estimate of 7%. The
marginal effects of the individual frictions are also very similar to the one found in the baseline exercise.


6.5   Currency Hedging Costs and Risk Premia

Another aspect of international investment that we have left out of the model is currency risk. In our basic
model, there is no explicit notion of money. However, there is a tractable way to incorporate currency risk
in our framework. We start from the observation that the vast majority of international investors hedge
currency risk. Sialm and Zhu (2020) find that over 90% of US-based international fixed income funds
hedge currency risk with derivatives. A similar stylized fact holds for equity investments. According to
the EU-EFIGE survey (a survey of 15,000 manufacturing firms from the EU and the UK), about two-
thirds of the firms engaging in foreign direct investment are hedged against currency risk, either through
derivatives or because the foreign subsidiaries invoices in the same currencies as their parent company.
This percentage rises to 85% when responses are weighted by firm employment size.
   Based on these facts, a parsimonious way to incorporate currencies in our theory is to model the
currency hedging cost directly. An agent investing from country j to country i that hedges with forward
contracts will exchange j currency for i currency at a spot exchange rate, and will then repatriate their
investment return at the forward rate. This implies that the investor is subjected to a multiplicative cost
(or gain) equal to the forward premium on the j/i exchange rate.
   Thus, a simple way to introduce this hedging cost in our model (without modeling currency risk
explicitly) is to add an additional component in the international investment fee  (x, z ) paid to the
intermediating agent based in j 's domestic country:


                                     (x, z ) = dij | | + ij -  (x, z ) - Gj                             (6.4)


Here ij represents the currency hedging cost, which we estimate using exchange rate forward premia.


                                                      43
Let r
    ¯ij be the country i objective return, hedged in country j currency:

                                                    def
                                                 ¯ij = ri · e-ij
                                                 r                                                        (6.5)


We then have the following amended gravity equation for the (i, j ) portfolio share:

                                            (1 - ij ) · r
                                                        ¯ij ki · exp dij 
                                    ij =                                                                  (6.6)
                                           n
                                           c=1   (1 - cj ) · r
                                                             ¯cj kc · exp dcj 

   An intuitive aspect of re-defining country returns this way is that r can also be thought of as a
risk-adjusted return. This is because, if covered interest parity holds, the forward premium is given by
the risk-free return differential between in country i and j . This is in turn related, by the fundamental
exchange rate valuation equation (Campbell and Clarida, 1987; Froot and Ramadorai, 2005), to the risk
premium on i's currency from the point of view of a j investor. In other words, the cost of hedging a
high-yielding currency is equal to the forgone currency risk premium, and this allows us to interpret r
                                                                                                      ¯ij
as the foreign investment return, adjusted for currency risk.
   In order to incorporate currency hedging costs in our model, we use forward premia on exchange
rates. We download, from Bloomberg, spot as well as 1-year forward rates against the US dollar for the
currencies of the countries covered in our foreign investment data. We use the earliest available data for
the year 2017. We then compute cross-rates for all available currency pairs. For currency pairs where
data is unavailable or unreliable, we estimate forward premia using the covered interest rate parity. We
use 1-year interbank rate differentials where available, and central bank rates differentials as a last resort.
Interest rate data (for January 2017) is sourced from TradingEconomics.com. Finally, we fill the data
for the remaining currency pairs (which are missing because the forward premia were estimated using
different methodologies) using a linear regression of log forward premia on i and j fixed effects. For
pegged currency pairs, we assume that the currency hedging cost is zero.
   In Appendix E, Table E.2 we repeat our counterfactual analysis for the extended model with currency
hedging costs. As in the previous robustness exercise with capital controls, currency hedging costs remain
in place throughout the four scenarios. The world GDP loss that we find according to this extended
model is larger, but only slightly: -7.2% when the capital stock is fixed and -7.5% when the capital stock
is endogenous. As for the capital controls extension, the marginal effect of the three set of barriers remains
very close to the baseline level.


6.6   Risky Country Returns

A third factor ignored thus far is the intrinsic riskiness of the investment (both domestic and foreign)
undertaken. Our third extension aims to tractably introduce a notion of risk in our otherwise non-



                                                          44
stochastic model. To do that, we introduce risk in the conversion of final good at time t into productive
capital at time t + 1. In particular, each unit of final good saved by z becomes exp  (x, z ) units of
productive capital in the next period. The shock  , unlike  , is not known in advance to the investors, and
                                                     2 /2 and standard deviation v , so that there is no
is assumed to be conditionally Gaussian, with mean -vi                            i

change in the average to the capital supply in the destination country. Moreover, because investors are
atomistic, shocks average out and there is no aggregate uncertainty. Next period consumption nonetheless
stochastic from the point of view of investor z , whose lifetime utility is now amended to be:


                                 U (z ) = (1 - ) · log ct (z ) +  · E [log ct+1 (z )]                          (6.7)


   Because agent z holds log sub-utility, they choose the plant with the highest expected log return,
which can be written as:

                                                 def                                   1 2
                        E [log Rt+1 (z )]        =     (1 - ij ) · ri · exp - (x, z ) - vi                     (6.8)
                                                                                       2

We can then re-write z 's portfolio optimization problem as:

                                                                           2
                                                                          vi (x)
               x (z ) = argmax         log 1 - ij (x,z ) + log ri(x) -             + dij (x,z )  +  (x, z )    (6.9)
                             x                                              2

This leads to the following amended expression for the portfolio shares:

                                                (1 - ij ) · i yi · exp dij  - 1  2
                                                                              2 vi
                                  ij =      n                                                                 (6.10)
                                                                               1 2
                                                 (1 - cj ) · c yi · exp dcj  - 2 vi
                                          c=1


   This treatment of investment risk is simplified, in that the consumer's discount factor is non-stochastic,
there is no aggregate risk, and hedging motives are assumed away. However, an advantage of this sim-
plification is that it only requires us to find an estimate of vi . To estimate the country-level variance of
                   2 , we download country equity volatility indices from FRED (the original source of
the asset returns vi
the data is Bloomberg). For the few (emerging) countries for which this is unavailable, we use the CBOE
Emerging Markets ETF Volatility Index as a proxy.
   In Appendix E, Table E.3 we repeat our counterfactual analysis for the extended model with risky
investment. As for the previous robustness exercises with capital controls and currency hedging costs, the
effect of risk on portfolio allocations remains in place in all four scenarios being considered. Our results
are virtually unchanged when we account for risky returns.




                                                            45
6.7   Sensitivity Analysis on Coefficient Estimates

It is reasonable to ask how the results of our counterfactual analysis would change if we were to utilize our
Pseudo-Poisson estimates, or our Instrumental Variables (IV) estimates, to calibrate  - the semi-elasticity
of foreign investment with respect to cultural and geographic distance.
    We address this question in Appendix F, Tables F.1-F.2. There we present the analysis of Table 7,
using these alternative estimates for  . We find that the GDP loss induced by capital misallocation would
be 4.6% if we were to use the Pseudo-Poisson coefficients, and 9.2% if we were to use the IV estimates.
The variable whose marginal effect is most sensitive to this choice is Cultural Distance. We continue to
find that the removal of barriers would result in significant reductions in world inequality under both
Poisson and IV estimates.


7     Conclusion

In this paper, we focused on how barriers to international financial flows affect the efficiency of capital
allocation across countries. To study such barriers, we developed a novel multi-country overlapping-
generations general equilibrium model of international capital allocation that yields a gravity equation for
foreign assets demand as an equilibrium outcome. The model features atomistic agents with objective and
subjective returns to investing in various markets. The returns depend crucially on factors that hinder the
flows of information across societies and affect intermediation costs, reducing the return from investing in
distant markets. These costs result from geographic and cultural barriers to capital allocation.
    We estimated our gravity model empirically, using foreign investment data that have been restated from
a residency to a nationality basis, in order to account for the presence of offshore investment and financing
vehicles (Coppola et al., 2020; Damgaard et al., 2019). Using a variety of estimation approached (OLS,
Poisson, IV), we found that geographic and cultural barriers have substantial effects on the allocation
of capital across different societies. The estimated effects are large in magnitude, suggesting that the
removal of barriers to international capital allocation could have important effects on output, welfare
and inequality across countries. Our parsimonious implementation of the model - based on cultural and
geographic barriers, foreign investment taxes and political risk - explains a significant share of the observed
variation in foreign investment.
    Our model reproduces several features of international asset markets. First, it produces large and
meaningful variation in rates of returns across countries. These rates of returns correlate negatively
with the level of economic development, a realistic feature of the model. Second, our model produces,
out-of-sample, a large home bias in a multi-country setting. While previous research has emphasized di-
versification and hedging as crucial to understanding these patterns, our analysis suggests that geographic
and cultural factors are also likely to play an important role.
    To quantify the influence of these factors on the international allocation of capital and their real

                                                      46
impact, we performed a number of counterfactual exercises using our model. We studied how World
GDP and the cross-country distribution of capital and output per worker would change if the effects
of geographic and cultural distances on foreign investment were zeroed out. This quantitative exercise
suggests that capital misallocation associated with barriers to the global allocation of capital has a sizable
impact on the distribution of capital across countries, in terms of efficiency as well as inequality. World
GDP is 7% lower than it would be if the effect of these barriers could be neutralized. The cross-country
standard deviation of capital per employee is 80% higher, while the dispersion of output per employee is
42% higher. Conversely, the hypothetical removal of frictions would lead to substantial economic gains
and reductions in cross-country inequality, by reallocating capital from richer countries (where the rate of
return on capital is lower) to poorer countries (where the rate of return is higher). At the same time, in
our estimation, some countries "lose out" (output and capital per employee drop), following the removal
of international capital distortions.
   Our study contributes to the literature on open economy financial macroeconomics, by making theo-
retical as well as empirical progress in modeling international asset markets in a multi-country, general-
equilibrium setting. It also connects to the macroeconomics literature on resource misallocation, by
studying the real effects of international asset market frictions.
   We end by suggesting directions for future research. Our work departs significantly from the existing
small open economy macro-financial literature: it focuses on geo-cultural and policy frictions, as opposed
to diversification and hedging, as potential drivers of international capital allocation. A potential goal of
future research could be to produce a unified theory of international investment, which incorporates asset
market imperfections as well as currency and risk considerations in a multi-country environment.
   A second, interesting potential direction for future research is to incorporate a richer specification of
the goods sector, which we deliberately chose to keep simple in our model. A fully-integrated model for
international trade and investment would make it possible to study the combined effect of asset market
imperfections and of goods markets distortions, accounting for possible ways in which the two interact
with each other.
   Finally, another direction for future research would be to enrich the model along the dimension of
consumer/investor heterogeneity. In our framework, all agents have the same saving rate. An interesting
question, which could be investigated with a richer household sector, is how financial globalization might
affect within-country income inequality.
   In 1990, Robert Lucas asked: "Why doesn't capital flow from rich to poor countries?". This paper
sheds new light on this question. Geographic, cultural and policy barriers are important determinants
of cross-country investment positions. They have major effects on efficiency and distribution, including
hindering the flow of capital from richer to poorer societies.




                                                     47
                                           References
Alesina, A., A. Devleeschauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2003): "Frac-
 tionalization," Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 155­194.

Alfaro, L. and J. Chauvin (2020): Encyclopedia of International Economics and Global Trade, Vol.
 1: Foreign Direct Investment and the Multinational Enterprise, World Scientific, chap. Foreign Direct
 Investment, Finance and Economic Development, 231­258.

Alfaro, L., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and V. Volosovych (2008): "Why doesn't capital flow from rich to
 poor countries? An empirical investigation," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90, 347­368.

Anderson, J. E. and E. Van Wincoop (2003): "Gravity with gravitas: A solution to the border
 puzzle," American Economic Review, 93, 170­192.

Arkolakis, C., N. Ramondo, A. Rodríguez-Clare, and S. Yeaple (2018): "Innovation and
 production in the global economy," American Economic Review, 108, 2128­73.

Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2020): "Productivity and misallocation in general equilibrium," The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135, 105­163.

Blanchard, O. and J. Acalin (2016): "What Does Measured FDI Actually Measure?" Peterson
 Institute for International Economics Policy Brief.

Blonigen, B. A. and J. Piger (2014): "Determinants of foreign direct investment," Canadian Journal
 of Economics/Revue canadienne d'économique, 47, 775­812.

Bove, V. and G. Gokmen (2018): "Genetic distance, trade, and the diffusion of development," Journal
 of Applied Econometrics, 33, 617­623.

Broner, F. and J. Ventura (2016): "Rethinking the Effects of Financial Globalization," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 131, 1497­1542.

Burchardi, K. B., T. Chaney, and T. A. Hassan (2019): "Migrants, ancestors, and foreign invest-
 ments," The Review of Economic Studies, 86, 1448­1486.

Campbell, J. Y. and R. H. Clarida (1987): "The dollar and real interest rates," in Carnegie-Rochester
 Conference Series on Public Policy, Elsevier, vol. 27, 103­139.

Caselli, F. and J. Feyrer (2007): "The Marginal Product of Capital," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 122, 535­568.

Coeurdacier, N. and H. Rey (2013): "Home bias in open economy financial macroeconomics," Journal
 of Economic Literature, 51, 63­115.

Colacito, R. and M. M. Croce (2010): "The short and long run benefits of financial integration,"
 American Economic Review, 100, 527­31.

Coppola, A., M. Maggiori, B. Neiman, and J. Schreger (2020): "Redrawing the map of global
 capital flows: The role of cross-border financing and tax havens," Available at SSRN 3525169.


                                                 48
Correia, S., P. Guimaraes, and T. Zylkin (2019): "PPMLHDFE: Stata module for Poisson pseudo-
 likelihood regression with multiple levels of fixed effects," .

Damgaard, J., T. Elkjaer, and N. Johannesen (2019): "What Is Real and What Is Not in the
 Global FDI Network?" International Monetary Fund Working Papers.

David, J. M., E. Henriksen, and I. Simonovska (2014): "The risky capital of emerging markets,"
 Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

David, J. M. and V. Venkateswaran (2019): "The Sources of Capital Misallocation," American
 Economic Review, 109, 2531­2567.

De Ménil, G. (1999): "Real capital market integration in the EU: How far has it gone? What will the
 effect of the euro be?" Economic Policy, 14, 166­201.

Di Giovanni, J. (2005): "What drives capital flows? The case of cross-border M&A activity and financial
  deepening," Journal of International Economics, 1, 127­149.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002): "Technology, geography, and trade," Econometrica, 70, 1741­1779.

Eichengreen, B. and P. Luengnaruemitchai (2008): "Bond markets as conduits for capital flows:
  how does Asia compare?" in International Financial Issues in the Pacific Rim: Global Imbalances,
  Financial Liberalization, and Exchange Rate Policy (NBER-EASE Volume 17), University of Chicago
  Press, 267­313.

Fearon, J. (2003): "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country," Journal of Economic Growth, 8, 195­222.

Felbermayr, G. J. and F. Toubal (2010): "Cultural proximity and trade," European Economic
  Review, 54, 279­293.

Fensore, I., S. Legge, and L. Schmid (2017): "Human barriers to international trade," University of
  St. Gallen Discussion Paper.

French, K. R. and J. M. Poterba (1991): "Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets,"
 American Economic Review, 81, 222­226.

Froot, K. A. and T. Ramadorai (2005): "Currency returns, intrinsic value, and institutional-investor
  flows," The Journal of Finance, 60, 1535­1566.

Ghosh, S. and H. Wolf (1999): "The geography of capital flows," Capital Inflows to Emerging Markets,
 University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011): "The return to capital and the business cycle,"
 Review of Economic Dynamics, 14, 262­278.

Gopinath, G., . Kalemli-Özcan, L. Karabarbounis, and C. Villegas-Sanchez (2017): "Capi-
 tal allocation and productivity in South Europe," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132, 1915­1967.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and O. Jeanne (2006): "The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integra-
 tion," The Review of Economic Studies, 73, 715­741.


                                                  49
------ (2013): "Capital flows to developing countries: The allocation puzzle," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 80, 1484­1515.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2009): "Cultural biases in economic exchange," The Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 124, 1095­1131.

Hall, R. E. and C. I. Jones (1999): "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output per
 Worker Than Others?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 83­116.

Head, K. and J. Ries (2008): "FDI as an outcome of the market for corporate control: Theory and
 evidence," Journal of International Economics, 74, 2­20.

Helpman, E., M. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008): "Estimating trade flows: Trading partners and
 trading volumes," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123, 441­487.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (2014): "Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review," Annual Review
 of Economics, 6, 735­770.

Hoxha, I., S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and D. Vollrath (2013): "How big are the gains from international
 financial integration?" Journal of Development Economics, 103, 90­98.

Ilzetzki, E., C. M. Reinhart, and K. S. Rogoff (2019): "Exchange arrangements entering the
  twenty-first century: Which anchor will hold?" The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 134, 599­646.

Jahan, M. S. and D. Wang (2016): "Capital account openness in low-income developing countries:
  Evidence from a new database," International Monetary Fund Working Papers.

Jin, K. (2012): "Industrial Structure and Capital Flows," American Economic Review, 102, 2111­2146.

Lane, P. R. and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti (2008): "International investment patterns," The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 90, 538­549.

------ (2018): "The external wealth of nations revisited: international financial integration in the after-
  math of the global financial crisis," IMF Economic Review, 66, 189­222.

Lau, S. T., L. Ng, and B. Zhang (2010): "The world price of home bias," Journal of Financial
  Economics, 97, 191­217.

Leblang, D. (2010): "Familiarity breeds investment: Diaspora networks and international investment,"
  American Political Science Review, 104, 584­600.

Lucas, R. E. (1990): "Why doesn't capital flow from rich to poor countries?" American Economic
  Review, 80, 92­96.

Martin, P. and H. Rey (2004): "Financial super-markets: size matters for asset trade," Journal of
 International Economics, 64, 335­361.

Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2011): "Notes on CEPII's distances measures: The GeoDist database," .

McFadden, D. (1973): "Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior," Frontiers in Econo-
 metrics, 105­142.

                                                    50
McGrattan, E. R. and J. A. Schmitz Jr (1999): "Explaining cross-country income differences,"
 Handbook of Macroeconomics, 1, 669­737.

Mecham, R. Q., J. Fearon, and D. Laitin (2006): "Religious classification and data on shares of
 major world religions," unpublished, Stanford University, 1, 18.

Mendoza, E. G., V. Quadrini, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2009): "Financial integration, financial devel-
 opment, and global imbalances," Journal of Political economy, 117, 371­416.

Novy, D. (2013): "Gravity redux: measuring international trade costs with panel data," Economic
 Inquiry, 51, 101­121.

Okawa, Y. and E. Van Wincoop (2012): "Gravity in international finance," Journal of International
 Economics, 87, 205­215.

Pemberton, T. J., M. DeGiorgio, and N. A. Rosenberg (2013): "Population Structure in a Com-
 prehensive Genomic Data Set on Human Microsatellite Variation," G3: Genes, Genomes, Genetics, 3,
 891­907.

Portes, R. and H. Rey (2005): "The determinants of cross-border equity flows," Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics, 65, 269­296.

Ramondo, N. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2013): "Trade, Multinational Production, and the Gains
 from Openness," Journal of Political Economy, 121, 273­322.

Rose, A. K. and M. M. Spiegel (2009): "Noneconomic engagement and international exchange: The
 case of environmental treaties," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 41, 337­363.

Santos Silva, J. M. and S. Tenreyro (2006): "The log of gravity," The Review of Economics and
  Statistics, 88, 641­658.

Sellin, P. and I. M. Werner (1993): "International investment barriers in general equilibrium," Jour-
  nal of International Economics, 34, 137­151.

Sialm, C. and Q. Zhu (2020): "Currency Management by International Fixed Income Mutual Funds,"
  Available at SSRN.

Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009): "The Diffusion of Development," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 124, 469­529.

------ (2012): Long-Term Barriers to the International Diffusion of Innovations, University of Chicago
  Press, chap. Chapter 1, 11­46.

------ (2016): "Ancestry, Language and Culture," in The Palgrave Handbook of Economics and Language,
  Springer, 174­211.

------ (2018): "Ancestry and Development: New Evidence," Journal of Applied Econometrics, 33, 748­
  762.

Tintelnot, F. (2016): "Global Production with Export Platforms*," The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 132, 157­209.

                                                 51
           Barriers to Global Capital Allocation - Online Appendix
                       Bruno Pellegrino, Enrico Spolaore, Romain Wacziarg

A        A Model of Ancestral and Cultural Distance

As documented in our empirical analysis, we observe a strong positive relation between Ancestral Distance
and Cultural Distance (Table 4). In this Appendix, we present a simple analytical framework that formally
illustrates how such relation would naturally emerge in a setting where: 1) ancestral distance measures
the time since two populations have been separated (that is, they are no longer the same population),
and 2) cultural change takes place as the result of random shocks. The framework builds on Spolaore and
Wacziarg (2009, 2012) and Becker, Enke and Falk (2020).
       Assume that at time 0 there exists only one population, with cultural traits denoted by a real number
C 0.   At time 1, the population splits into P 1 > 1 populations. Each new population i = 1, 2, ..., P 1 inherits
the cultural traits of its ancestral population plus a shock              1   , so that
                                                                          i


                                                     Ci1 = C 0 +      1
                                                                      i                                       (A.1)


       We assume that the shocks are non-degenerate integrable random variables, independent and identi-
cally distributed across time and space. This assumption is a useful benchmark simplification, consistent
with the view of cultural change as mainly due to random drift. This assumption is sufficient to obtain our
main result (for discussions of more general assumptions, see Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2009 and Becker,
Enke and Falk, 2020).
       At time 2, populations split into P 2 > P 1 populations. Again, each new population i = 1, 2, ..., P 2
inherits the culture of its parental population the previous period plus a random shock             2.   Let amt (i)
                                                                                                    i
denote the ancestral population, living at time m, from which a population iliving at time t descended.,
where att (i) = i . Therefore, at time 2 we have:


                                               Ci2 = C 0 +      1
                                                                a12 (i)   +    2
                                                                               i                              (A.2)


       In general, at time t, the cultural traits of each population i = 1, 2, ..., P t are equal to the sum of all
previous shocks experienced by population i's ancestral populations plus the new shock:

                                                                 t
                                               Cit      0
                                                     =C +             m
                                                                      amt (i)                                 (A.3)
                                                                m=1


Let dt            t    t
     C (i, j )  |Ci - Cj | denote the cultural distance between population iand population j at time t. Let
dt
 A (i, j )| denote the ancestral distance between between population iand population j , which is defined



                                                            I
as the number of periods N (i, j ) in which population iand population j have different ancestors - that is,
the number of periods when am (i) = am (j ). Assuming that the shocks are independent and identically
distributed random variables, it follows that two populations at a larger ancestral distance from each other
can also be expected to be at a higher cultural distance from each other. That is


                               dt            t             t                t
                                A (i, j ) > dA (k, l)  E [dC (i, j )] > E [dC (k, l)]                   (A.4)

      This relation is formally analogous to Proposition 1 in Becker, Enke and Falk (2020, online appendix,
Section 3), and a formal derivation can be obtained along similar lines. Specifically, let nij be the number
of periods up to time T when population iand population j were separated, and nkl be the number of
periods up to time T when population k and population l. Then, we can re-write the above preposition
as:


                                nij > nkl  E [|CiT - Cj
                                                      T          T
                                                        |] > E [Ck - ClT |]                             (A.5)

      By definition:

                                                             T
                                  CiT - Cj
                                         T
                                           =                          (   m
                                                                          amt (i)   -   m
                                                                                        amt (i) )       (A.6)
                                                amT (i)=amT (j )

      where the sum of shocks is taken for all periods m = 1, 2, ...T where the two populations do not share
a common ancestral population. By defining 1, ...T , 1, ...T as i.i.d. random variables having the same
distribution as the shocks above, implying:

                                                                      nij
                                      E [|CiT   -    T
                                                    Cj |]    = E [|          (q - q )|]                 (A.7)
                                                                      q =1

      By the same token, we have:

                                                                      nkl
                                           T
                                      E [|Ck    -   ClT |]   = E [|          (q - q )|]                 (A.8)
                                                                      q =1

      Thus, our claim follows if we can show that:

                                                    nij                             nkl
                             nij > nkl  E [|               (q - q )|] > E [|               (q - q )|]   (A.9)
                                                    q =1                            q =1

      The right-hand side of this equivalence is formally identical to equation (1) in Becker, Enke and Falk
(2020), online appendix, Section 3, page 10, and can be derived in the same way, using their Lemma 1
(the details are available upon request).




                                                                 II
B   Regression Coefficients Stability


                                      Figure B.1: Coefficients Stability over Time

                                 0
                                                                  Cultural Distance




                                -.1
          Cultural Distance



                                -.2

                                -.3

                                -.4

                                -.5

                                -.6

                                -.7
                                  2013         2014         2015                        2016        2017
                                 0
                                                                 Geographic Distance




                                -.1
          Geographic Distance




                                -.2

                                -.3

                                -.4

                                -.5

                                -.6

                                -.7
                                  2013         2014         2015                        2016        2017

                                                95% c.i.                               Calibrated




                                                           III
C   Robustness Check: alternative Breakdown of Foreign Investment


    Table C.1: OLS Regressions using FDI/FPI breakdown instead of Equity/Debt


                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

      Dep.variable in logs:   Assets       FDI          FPI      Assets       FDI        FPI

      Cultural Distance       -0.419**   -0.456**     -0.295**   -0.333**   -0.304**   -0.216**
                               (0.038)    (0.037)      (0.034)    (0.041)    (0.044)    (0.035)

      Geographic Distance     -0.526**   -0.589**     -0.383**   -0.398**   -0.579**   -0.299**
                               (0.031)    (0.035)      (0.027)    (0.076)    (0.098)    (0.059)
      Control Variables         No         No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes
      Observations            12,542     13,230       23,499     11,157     11,964     20,988
      R-squared                0.771      0.710        0.826      0.803      0.748      0.847
      Within R-squared         0.214      0.222        0.135      0.327      0.301      0.256




                                                 IV
D   Robustness Check: Residency-Based Foreign Investment Data


                    Table D.1: OLS Regressions using un-restated data

                               (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

     Dep.variable in logs:    Assets    Equity        Debt      Assets     Equity      Debt

     Cultural Distance       -0.397**   -0.432**     -0.424**   -0.283**   -0.299**   -0.309**
                              (0.038)    (0.042)      (0.036)    (0.042)    (0.046)    (0.037)

     Geographic Distance     -0.616**   -0.620**     -0.408**   -0.597**   -0.604**   -0.460**
                              (0.031)    (0.032)      (0.026)    (0.089)    (0.091)    (0.077)
     Control Variables         No         No           No         Yes        Yes        Yes
     Observations             20,254    19,687       18,068     11,157     11,964     20,988
     R-squared                0.761      0.728        0.777      0.803      0.748      0.847
     Within R-squared         0.218      0.202        0.182      0.327      0.301      0.256




                                                 V
     E    Counterfactual Analysis using Model Extensions
     The following tables replicate Table 7 for the three model extensions presented in Section 6: Capital Controls, Currency Hedging Costs, and
     Risky Asset Returns.


                                          Table E.1: Counterfactuals with Capital Controls (2017)




                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                           xe
                                                                                                                                   nce




                                                                                                                                                        Ta
                                                                                                                  ce




                                                                                                                                  sta




                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                      arr ity
                                                                                         s)




                                                                                                              s)




                                                                                                                                Di
                                                                                                            sta
                                                                                  arr d




                                                                                                                                                   sk
                                                                                                 o B rav
                                                                                     ier




                                                                                                          ier
                                                                             l l B ve




                                                                                                                                                Ri
                                                                                                         Di




                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                           (A bser




                                                                                              (N ro-G




                                                                                                                           ph




                                                                                                                                          cal
                                                                                                     ral




                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                O




                                                                                                                         ogr




                                                                                                                                         liti
                                                                                                 ltu
                                                                                                Ze




                                                                                              Cu




                                                                                                                       Ge




                                                                                                                                         Po
                    Welfare Statistics (Fixed Capital Stock)                 (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)                (5)
VI




                             World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              119.6       114.5          116.6               118.2

                World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -6.9%                0%         -4.2%          -2.5%           -1.1%

                St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +53.8%               0%        +27.5%         +24.1%           +13.4%

                St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +36.3%               0%        +17.3%         +13.2%           +8.3%


                Welfare Statistics (Endogenous Capital Stock)

                             World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              119.2       115.5          116.9               119.6

                World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -6.6%                0%         -3.1%          -2.0%           +0.3%

                St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +52.0%               0%        +25.5%         +28.3%           +13.2%

                St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +35.2%               0%        +16.4%         +14.5%           +8.2%
                           Table E.2: Counterfactuals with Currency Hedging Costs (2017)




                                                                                                                                                 s
                                                                                                                                                 xe
                                                                                                                         nce




                                                                                                                                              Ta
                                                                                                        ce




                                                                                                                        sta




                                                                                                                                           &
                                                                                                      n
                                                                                            arr ity
                                                                               s)




                                                                                                    s)




                                                                                                                      Di
                                                                                                  sta
                                                                        arr d




                                                                                                                                         sk
                                                                                       o B rav
                                                                           ier




                                                                                                ier
                                                                   l l B ve




                                                                                                                                      Ri
                                                                                               Di




                                                                                                                  ic
                                                                 (A bser




                                                                                    (N ro-G




                                                                                                                 ph




                                                                                                                                cal
                                                                                           ral




                                                                                                                  a
                                                                      O




                                                                                                               ogr




                                                                                                                               liti
                                                                                       ltu
                                                                                      Ze




                                                                                    Cu




                                                                                                             Ge




                                                                                                                               Po
          Welfare Statistics (Fixed Capital Stock)                 (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)                (5)

                   World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              120.0       115.7          118.0               119.1
VII




      World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -7.2%                0%         -3.6%          -1.6%           -0.7%

      St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +78.2%               0%        +36.2%         +36.4%           +15.8%

      St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +43.5%               0%        +18.5%         +15.2%           +8.9%


      Welfare Statistics (Endogenous Capital Stock)

                   World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              120.3       117.0          117.8               120.8

      World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -7.5%                0%         -2.8%          -2.1%           +0.4%

      St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +78.2%               0%        +31.3%         +40.3%           +16.0%

      St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +43.5%               0%        +15.7%         +15.5%           +8.9%
                               Table E.3: Counterfactuals with Risky Asset Returns (2017)




                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                  xe
                                                                                                                          nce




                                                                                                                                               Ta
                                                                                                         ce




                                                                                                                         sta




                                                                                                                                            &
                                                                                                       n
                                                                                             arr ity
                                                                                s)




                                                                                                     s)




                                                                                                                       Di
                                                                                                   sta
                                                                         arr d




                                                                                                                                          sk
                                                                                        o B rav
                                                                            ier




                                                                                                 ier
                                                                    l l B ve




                                                                                                                                       Ri
                                                                                                Di




                                                                                                                   ic
                                                                  (A bser




                                                                                     (N ro-G




                                                                                                                  ph




                                                                                                                                 cal
                                                                                            ral




                                                                                                                   a
                                                                       O




                                                                                                                ogr




                                                                                                                                liti
                                                                                        ltu
                                                                                       Ze




                                                                                     Cu




                                                                                                              Ge




                                                                                                                                Po
           Welfare Statistics (Fixed Capital Stock)                 (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)                (5)

                    World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              119.6       115.4          117.8               119.0
VIII




       World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -6.9%                0%         -3.5%          -1.5%           -0.6%

       St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +78.3%               0%        +36.4%         +35.8%           +15.0%

       St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +44.0%               0%        +18.8%         +15.1%           +8.9%


       Welfare Statistics (Endogenous Capital Stock)

                    World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              119.7       116.5          117.3               120.4

       World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -7.0%                0%         -2.7%          -2.0%           +0.6%

       St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +78.3%               0%        +31.5%         +39.3%           +15.2%

       St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +44.0%               0%        +16.0%         +15.3%           +8.9%
     F    Counterfactual Analysis with Alternate Coefficient Estimates
     The following tables replicates Table 7, using alternative estimates instead of the baseline OLS estimates for the investment-distance semi-
     elasticities ( ). Table F.2 uses IV estimates, while Table F.1 uses Poisson regression estimates.


                                  Table F.1: Counterfactuals using Poisson regression Estimates (2017)




                                                                                                                                                           s
                                                                                                                                                           xe
                                                                                                                                   nce




                                                                                                                                                        Ta
                                                                                                                  ce




                                                                                                                                  sta




                                                                                                                                                     &
                                                                                                                n
                                                                                                      arr ity
                                                                                         s)




                                                                                                              s)




                                                                                                                                Di
                                                                                                            sta
                                                                                  arr d




                                                                                                                                                   sk
                                                                                                 o B rav
                                                                                     ier




                                                                                                          ier
                                                                             l l B ve




                                                                                                                                                Ri
                                                                                                         Di




                                                                                                                            ic
                                                                           (A bser




                                                                                              (N ro-G




                                                                                                                           ph




                                                                                                                                          cal
                                                                                                     ral




                                                                                                                            a
                                                                                O




                                                                                                                         ogr




                                                                                                                                         liti
                                                                                                 ltu
                                                                                                Ze




                                                                                              Cu




                                                                                                                       Ge




                                                                                                                                         Po
                    Welfare Statistics (Fixed Capital Stock)                 (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)                (5)
IX




                             World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              116.6       115.4          115.0               116.1

                World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity            -4.6%               0%         -1.1%          -1.4%           -0.5%

                St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +75.6%               0%        +21.0%         +35.1%           +19.5%

                St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +40.3%               0%        +11.8%         +13.8%           +10.8%


                Welfare Statistics (Endogenous Capital Stock)

                             World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              116.5       116.2          114.3               117.1

                World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity            -4.5%               0%         -0.3%          -1.9%           +0.5%

                St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +75.6%               0%        +17.8%         +34.8%           +19.5%

                St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +40.3%               0%        +9.8%          +12.5%           +10.6%
                                Table F.2: Counterfactuals using IV Estimates (2017)




                                                                                                                                               s
                                                                                                                                               xe
                                                                                                                       nce




                                                                                                                                            Ta
                                                                                                      ce




                                                                                                                      sta




                                                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                    n
                                                                                          arr ity
                                                                             s)




                                                                                                  s)




                                                                                                                    Di
                                                                                                sta
                                                                      arr d




                                                                                                                                       sk
                                                                                     o B rav
                                                                         ier




                                                                                              ier
                                                                 l l B ve




                                                                                                                                    Ri
                                                                                             Di




                                                                                                                ic
                                                               (A bser




                                                                                  (N ro-G




                                                                                                               ph




                                                                                                                              cal
                                                                                         ral




                                                                                                                a
                                                                    O




                                                                                                             ogr




                                                                                                                             liti
                                                                                     ltu
                                                                                    Ze




                                                                                  Cu




                                                                                                           Ge




                                                                                                                             Po
        Welfare Statistics (Fixed Capital Stock)                 (1)                (2)         (3)             (4)                (5)

                 World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              122.6       112.6          120.6               121.9
X




    World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -9.2%                0%         -8.2%          -1.6%           -0.6%

    St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +53.7%               0%        +53.6%         +33.3%           +10.5%

    St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +26.9%               0%        +26.1%         +15.3%           +6.7%


    Welfare Statistics (Endogenous Capital Stock)

                 World GDP (US$ trillions)                      111.3              121.6       109.7          119.5               122.7

    World GDP, % Difference in GDP from Zero-Gravity           -8.4%                0%         -9.7%          -1.7%           +0.9%

    St.Dev. of log (ki / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +54.0%               0%        +82.7%         +41.9%           +11.4%

    St.Dev. of log (yi / i ), % Difference from Zero-Gravity   +27.1%               0%        +43.4%         +18.6%           +7.2%
G    Unweighted Poisson Regressions

In this Appendix, we replicate Table 3 without applying weights to the observations.


                                 Table G.1: Poisson Regressions

                                   (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

         var                     Assets    Equity          Debt      Assets     Equity      Debt

         Cultural Distance      -0.263**   -0.229**       -0.293*    -0.121*    -0.098     -0.198**
                                 (0.086)    (0.063)       (0.131)    (0.051)    (0.060)     (0.046)

         Geographic Distance    -0.285**   -0.251**       -0.387**   -0.365**   -0.444**    -0.177
                                 (0.042)    (0.032)        (0.062)    (0.080)    (0.080)   (0.108)
         Controls                  No        No             No         Yes        Yes        Yes
         Observations            13,547     13,594        29,737     12,076     12,118     26,110




                                                     XI
