                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DO INTERMEDIARIES MATTER FOR AGGREGATE ASSET PRICES?

                                      Valentin Haddad
                                        Tyler Muir

                                     Working Paper 28692
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28692


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We gratefully acknowledge the useful comments and suggestions of Stefan Nagel, an Associate
Editor, two anonymous referees, Markus Brunnermeier, Mike Chernov, Itamar Drechsler, Andrea
Eisfeldt, Zhiguo He, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Francis Longstaff, Erik Loualiche, Adrien Matray,
Alan Moreira, Matthew Plosser, Shrihari Santosh, Matthew Spiegel, Pietro Veronesi, two
anonymous referees, and participants at UCLA, the NBER, the Utah Winter Finance Conference,
the Wharton Conference on Liquidity and Financial Fragility, the ASU Sonoran Winter
Conference, the LBS AQR Asset Management Conference, FIRS, NBER meeting, the Texas
Finance Festival, AFA, LSE, NYU, the San Francisco Fed, the New York Federal Reserve,
Columbia, Harvard, and Maryland for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Valentin Haddad and Tyler Muir. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Intermediaries Matter for Aggregate Asset Prices?
Valentin Haddad and Tyler Muir
NBER Working Paper No. 28692
April 2021
JEL No. G0,G01,G12

                                          ABSTRACT

Poor financial health of intermediaries coincides with low asset prices and high risk premiums. Is
this because intermediaries matter for asset prices, or simply because their health correlates with
economy-wide risk aversion? In the first case, return predictability should be more pronounced
for asset classes in which households are less active. We provide evidence supporting this
prediction, suggesting that a quantitatively sizable fraction of risk premium variation in several
large asset classes such as credit or MBS is due to intermediaries. Movements in economy-wide
risk aversion create the opposite pattern, and we find this channel also matters.


Valentin Haddad
University of California, Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
Office C4.19
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
vhaddad@ad.ucla.edu

Tyler Muir
University of California at Los Angeles
Anderson School of Management
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90024
and NBER
tyler.muir@anderson.ucla.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28692
Periods of poor financial health of financial intermediaries such as investment
banks, commercial banks or hedge funds coincide with low aggregate asset
prices and high risk premia.1 This correlation suggests the health of the
financial sector matters for aggregate asset prices.2 But, this evidence alone
does not rule out the view that intermediaries reflect or are correlated with
other frictionless factors driving asset prices. For example, consider the 2008
financial crisis where risk premia rose substantially. While there was indeed a
drop in intermediary risk-bearing capacity, household risk aversion likely also
rose; hence it is unclear to what extent the fall in intermediation mattered
for aggregate asset prices.3 The goal of this paper is to quantify how much
variation in aggregate risk premia can be ascribed to intermediaries rather
than to households.
    We answer this question by comparing variations in risk premia across
more and less intermediated asset classes. We start by regressing the re-
turn of each asset class on a proxy for the effective risk-bearing capacity of
intermediaries. Specifically, we estimate the predictive regressions


               ri,t+1 = ai + bi I,t + i,t+1 ,    i = 1, ..., N, t = 1, ..., T         (1)


where I,t is an empirical proxy for intermediary risk-appetite and ri,t+1 is the

   1
       E.g., Adrian et al. (2014), Hu et al. (2013), Haddad and Sraer (2020), Muir (2017),
He et al. (2017).
   2
       He and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) provide models
for how the financial sector can impact asset prices.
   3
       Santos and Veronesi (2016) discuss a frictionless model that generates some of the
empirical patterns associated with intermediation, leverage, and asset prices.


                                             2
excess return on asset class i. We then compare the degree of predictability
across these asset classes, measured by the R2 of the predictive regression,
the percentage change in risk premium relative to its mean (bi /E[ri ]), or the
change in risk premium relative to the volatility of the asset class (bi / (ri )).
We find relatively more predictability for asset classes that are more in-
termediated (e.g., MBS, CDS, currencies, commodities) and relatively less
predictability for asset classes that are less intermediated (e.g., stocks). We
argue that these differences in the predictability of more versus less inter-
mediated asset classes provide a lower bound for how much intermediaries
matter in each asset class.
    We clarify our argument in a simple model. When either intermediaries
or households are less willing to bear risk, risk premia increase. Because vari-
ables that proxy for intermediary risk aversion are likely positively correlated
with household or economy-wide risk aversion, the evidence of a predictive
relation alone (positive bi ) does not uncover how much variation in risk pre-
mia we can ascribe to intermediaries. Comparing across asset classes with
different ease of access to households overcomes this challenge. To capture
this distinction, we assume households face costs to invest directly in some
asset classes relative to investing indirectly through an intermediary.4 For

    4
        Our model is related in spirit to He and Krishnamurthy (2013), Brunnermeier and
Sannikov (2014) but includes many assets, and does not assume households are unable to
invest directly in the assets (this is equivalent to an infinite cost in our setting). Relatedly,
Koijen and Yogo (2015) study how institutional demand affects individual stock prices
but their framework does not model the substitution of households' direct versus indirect
holdings.




                                               3
example, this cost is high for CDS and low for stocks. In asset classes with
easy direct access, a drop in intermediary risk-bearing capacity does not have
a large impact on premia since households can easily substitute or "step in"
to these markets. With a high cost of direct investment, households cannot
absorb the intermediary positions through direct holdings, so risk premia ex-
perience a large increase. Therefore, the predictive relation will be stronger in
more intermediated asset classes. Changes in household risk aversion gener-
ate the opposite prediction: a more substantial impact on less intermediated
assets and a smaller impact on more intermediated assets.
   We then make empirical choices to implement our test: we measure a
proxy of intermediary risk-bearing capacity (I,t ), asset class returns, and
the degree to which intermediaries are active in each asset class. To mea-
sure risk-bearing capacity, we rely on the existing literature on intermediary
asset pricing, which provides foundations for how risk appetite should be
measured empirically. Our main specification uses a standardized average of
the broker-dealer book leverage variable from Adrian et al. (2014), and the
market equity of primary dealers measure from He et al. (2017). We show
robustness to alternative proxies for intermediary risk appetite as well. It
is worth emphasizing that our exercise does not rely on exactly measuring
intermediary risk appetite. We do not model the drivers of intermediary
risk-bearing capacity in a micro-founded way as in He and Krishnamurthy
(2013) or Adrian and Shin (2014) (i.e., we do not offer a theory of interme-
diary risk-bearing capacity).5 We also embrace that variation in our proxy

   5
       See also Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009), Danielsson et al. (2011), Duffie (2010)
among many others.


                                            4
is unlikely to be "exogenous."6 We overcome these identification challenges
by studying a novel dimension of the aggregate data.
    We use the following asset classes, ranked from least to most interme-
diated: stocks, bonds, options, sovereign bonds, commodities, foreign ex-
change, mortgage-backed securities, and credit (measured using CDS con-
tracts).7 We use three methods to arrive at this ranking. First, quantity and
position data from Flow of Funds and the BIS measure the relative holdings
of households and institutions. Second, we gather asset class risk exposure
from Value-at-Risk measures taken from intermediary 10-K filings. Third,
ETF expense ratios help us gauge households' cost of direct exposure to the
asset classes. We also extend our analysis to an alternative set of return
series. We compare the predictability of hedge fund returns for strategies of
various complexity -- convertible-bond arbitrage and fixed-income arbitrage
at one extreme, the overall stock market at the other one.8
    We then compare the degree of predictability across asset classes. The
raw predictive coefficient bi is not an adequate metric, and we need to nor-
malize returns appropriately into the same "units" to draw comparisons. To

   6
       In fact, in most theories the health of the financial sector is a state variable that
responds endogenously to more fundamental shocks.
   7
       Some of our assets are in zero net supply. This is fine as long as the asset return is
positively correlated with risk intermediaries are exposed to ­ e.g., intermediaries on net
will be positively exposed to credit risk hence the CDS premium will reflect that credit
risk is positive on net. This positive exposure is strongly supported empirically (He et al.,
2017). We discuss the issue of asset supply further in the empirical section.
   8
       Mitchell et al. (2007) and Hu et al. (2013) provide arguments and evidence as to why
intermediary capital matters for the returns of these strategies.


                                              5
see why, suppose that one asset class is just a levered version of another as-
set class. Then any variable which predicts returns in the original asset class
will mechanically have a larger coefficient on the levered asset class. Dividing
the regression coefficient by return volatility (bi / (ri )) deals with this effect.
It also provides an intuitive interpretation of the coefficient as the degree of
predictability relative to the asset's volatility (closely related to the R2 in the
predictive regression). Scaling by unconditional returns (bi /E(ri )) also deals
with this issue. Our model suggests that this second approach of focusing
on the elasticity of risk premium to intermediary risk aversion constitutes a
better way to capture other dimensions of the differences across asset classes
(e.g., differences in unconditional betas). While we prefer this normalization
economically, there is an empirical tradeoff because average returns are much
harder to estimate than standard deviations. We consider both scalings in
our empirical analysis and document a robust pattern of stronger predictabil-
ity for more intermediated asset classes. An important aspect of statistical
inference in the case of elasticities is to account for uncertainty in mean re-
turns estimates, which we divide by. We propose a Bayesian approach to
do so and show sharp statistical conclusions in this case under reasonable
assumptions. One can either impose that risk premiums of these broad as-
set classes are not negative or shrink estimates of mean returns toward the
assumption of constant unconditional Sharpe ratios across asset classes. We
provide economic and empirical arguments in favor of these assumptions.
   Our main argument does not rely on any household risk aversion controls,
because we need do not need to take a firm stand on the behavior of this
quantity. However, having a proxy for household risk aversion allows us to dig

                                         6
deeper and quantify the role of households for prices. In our framework, risk
premia respond with an opposite pattern across asset classes to households'
willingness to bear risk relative to intermediaries. We confirm this observa-
tion in the data, which strengthens our mechanism, by using the cay measure
from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001) and the habit measure of Campbell and
Cochrane (1999). In particular, we find substantially less predictability from
these measures in more intermediated asset classes. This observation also
confirms that our main result is not mechanical: not all return predictors ex-
hibit an increasing pattern as one moves to more intermediated asset classes.
   We combine these measured differences in predictability across asset
classes to quantify bounds on the role of the two types of investors for risk
premia. Our first set of results provides a lower bound on how much interme-
diaries matter. Predictions with proxies for the risk aversion of households
give a lower bound for their role as well. We decompose the variation in risk
premium attributable to intermediaries and households for each asset class.
For example, we find that we can attribute about 60% of the variation in
risk premium in CDS to intermediaries. Similarly, we can attribute about
40% of the variation in risk premium of stocks to households. There is still a
remaining fraction of variation for each asset class we cannot assign to either
based on our lower bounds.
   Finally, we discuss the limitations of the assumptions behind our study
and explore other possibilities that could explain our results. Most impor-
tantly, our framework thus far considers variation in intermediary and house-
hold risk aversions. We allow for (1) arbitrary unobserved time-variation in
effective risk aversion (i.e., we do not tie household risk aversion to a specific

                                        7
model but leave it to move around freely), (2) arbitrary unconditional co-
variances of asset classes with household marginal utility (that is, we do not
take a stand on unconditional betas, nor do we tie them to covariance with
observables like consumption growth), (3) arbitrary time-varying volatility
of the household pricing kernel. However, other factors that drive risk pre-
mia may also change. For example, the covariance of asset payoffs might
change and be correlated with the other variables. We show that our results
are robust to including proxies for changing covariances in the predictive re-
gressions (e.g., time-varying volatilities and betas) or to the possibility that
intermediary risk aversion proxies for time-varying loadings on standard risk
factors using the framework of Shanken (1990). Further, while we predict
differential changes in risk premia across the asset classes, we do not predict
differential changes in risk. More broadly, these time-varying covariances
would also have to have a unique factor structure to line up perfectly with
our results. In particular, it has the be that risk increases more for interme-
diated asset classes when intermediary risk aversion rises. Across of variety
of risk measures, we find no evidence of such a relationship.
   Our findings are related to a broader literature studying the link between
intermediary balance sheets and asset prices (Adrian et al., 2014; Hu et al.,
2013; Haddad and Sraer, 2020; He et al., 2017). Closely related to our work,
He et al. (2017) show that an intermediary factor helps explain the cross-
section of returns for many asset classes. The main difference is that this
literature typically studies intermediary Euler equations, which test for op-
timality of decisions that link intermediary marginal utility to asset returns,
but do not quantify whether intermediaries matter for risk premia. We il-

                                       8
lustrate this point in our model. Our paper also relates to more "micro"
evidence, which provides sharp evidence that intermediaries matter for par-
ticular individual asset prices at particular points in time. Du et al. (2017)
document stronger violations of covered interest parity at end-of-quarter fi-
nancial reporting dates, when regulatory constraints are more binding. Some
other examples are Siriwardane (2016), Fleckenstein et al. (2014), Lewis et al.
(2017), Krishnamurthy (2010), Mitchell et al. (2007).9 While these studies
are important in documenting detailed price deviations related to interme-
diary risk-bearing capacity in specific periods, it is often unclear what these
results imply for the broad behavior of aggregate asset prices.
     Section I presents our framework and the model, Section II describes the
data, Section III presents the main empirical results. Section IV provides
additional analysis, including the results using hedge fund returns. Section
V takes stock of our results in the context of the literature on intermediary
asset pricing.



I.         Separating the Role of Intermediaries and
                 Households for Asset Prices

     We introduce our test for the role of intermediaries for risk premia. We
first present the basic ideas behind our empirical strategy before moving on
to a more formal model. This simple theory guides our empirical implemen-
tation, but also helps understand potential limitations to the interpretation

     9
         Duffie (2010), Mitchell and Pulvino (2012), and He and Krishnamurthy (forthcoming)
offer thorough discussions of this literature.



                                                 9
of the existing evidence on intermediary asset pricing.


A.       The Test

Economic Question. We are interested in whether the health of the financial
sector affects conditional risk premia. The challenge in establishing this
link is that intermediaries are not the only ones that can affect risk premia.
Households, through changes in how they perceive risk or their risk aversion
can also affect risk premia. In terms of a regression equation, this corresponds
to the following:


                         r
                         ~i,t+1 = ai + i,H H,t + i,I I,t + i,t+1 ,                       (2)


where i indexes assets and t time10 and r
                                        ~ denotes the realized excess return
on asset i divided on by an asset-specific normalization constant such as
the sample average or standard deviation of excess returns. Scaling returns
before the regression is identical to regressing unscaled returns and scaling the
coefficient and serves to make results comparable across assets. H,t captures
the effective risk aversion of households and I,t that of intermediaries. We
refer to effective risk aversion to generally include anything that effects the
willingness to bear risk -- for intermediaries this could include losses in net
worth, constraints on leverage, and so on (we return to these interpretations
later) -- and we refer to the negative of effective risk aversion as risk appetite.
Naturally, one expects both the coefficients i,H and i,I to be non-negative.

   10
        To see that this equation defines risk premia dynamics, take the conditional expecta-
tion: Et [~
          ri,t+1 ] = ai + i,H H,t + i,I I,t .


                                                10
We want to test if i,I is strictly positive and quantify it.
Measurement Challenge. If one can perfectly measure the two risk appetites,
then running this simple predictive regression immediately provides estimates
of these coefficients. However, this is in general not possible, because risk
appetite is imprecisely measured. What is available to econometricians are
proxies for these variables, which we denote ^I,t and ^H,t . It is reasonable
to assume we have valid proxies, i.e. that these variables are positively
correlated with their actual counterparts. But, because the risk appetite
of households and intermediaries are likely positively correlated, it is natural
to expect these proxies to also positively correlate with the risk appetite of
the other group. In short, we have: cov(^                       I,t , H,t )  0.
                                        I,t , I,t ) > 0 and cov(^
An implication of these properties is that the reduced-form estimate bi,I in
the regression:


                          r
                          ~i,t+1 = ai + bi,I ^I,t + i,t+1                   (3)


is positively influenced by both i,H and i,I . In other words, measures of
intermediary health can forecast returns because the health of intermediaries
matter for expected returns (i,I > 0) or because it proxies for households'
risk appetite and this appetite matters for expected returns (i,H > 0). The
example of the 2008 financial crisis is useful: while risk premia did spike
substantially, and the financial sector was in poor shape, it is also reasonable
that aggregate risk aversion increased in the same period. Hence, it is unclear
whether the changes in risk premia were due to the collapse in intermediation
or not.


                                        11
Using the Cross-Section. A simple remark allows us to overcome this chal-
lenge: the effects of intermediaries and households across asset classes should
vary in opposite directions. This assumption is intuitively appealing. When
an asset is more specialized or more difficult to access directly for house-
holds, households play a weaker role for its risk premium (low i,H ), and
intermediaries play a larger role (high i,I ). The behavior of the estimate
bi,I across asset classes combines these opposite patterns. Therefore, if bi,I
increases as one moves to more intermediated asset classes, we can conclude
that intermediaries affect prices. In addition, the strength of this relation
offers a lower bound on their importance. Indeed, if the proxy for intermedi-
ary risk appetite captures household risk aversion, this will lead to a smaller
slope across asset classes than the actual effect of intermediaries. Internet
Appendix Section IA.I.A derives these conclusions formally.
     We now turn to a simple model which serves three different purposes.
First, it establishes a clear economic motivation behind the structural relation
of equation (2). Second, it provides a justification for our assumption of the
pattern of predictive coefficients across asset classes. An important ingredient
of this comparison is how to appropriately make returns comparable across
asset classes ­ the tilde in our return regressions. Third, we also use the
model to understand the limitations to the interpretation of the existing
evidence of intermediary asset pricing.


B.     An Asset Pricing Model with Intermediaries and House-
       holds



                                      12
                                    1. Setup

      There are two periods, 0 and 1, and a representative household. There is
a risk-free saving technology with return 1, and n risky assets with supply
given by the vector S . Investment decisions are made at date 0 and payoffs
are realized at date 1. The payoffs of the risky assets are jointly normally
distributed, with mean µ and definite positive variance-covariance matrix .
The household has exponential utility with constant absolute risk aversion
coefficient H . We write p to denote the vector of equilibrium prices of the
assets and assume that all decisions take prices as given.
      The household can invest in the assets in two ways. First, the household
can buy the assets directly, but at some cost. We assume the household faces
a quadratic cost per unit of risk parametrized by the diagonal non-negative
matrix C to invest in the various risky assets. This corresponds to a cost
1
2
  D   diag CD of investing in a vector D of the risky assets, with diag a matrix
containing the diagonal elements of . A simple motivation for this feature
is that it is difficult for households to access some risky asset markets, for
instance for complex financial products. Existing models of intermediation
such as He and Krishnamurthy (2013) typically assume that households can-
not invest at all in risky assets, C = . A slightly different version is that
there is a discretely lower value to risky assets when in the hands of house-
holds, for instance in Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014). Households might
also be less able to manage portfolios of risky assets, making them effectively
more risky as in Eisfeldt et al. (2017). It might also be that households
are only imperfectly informed about the trades that intermediaries do, and



                                       13
therefore do not completely undo changes in their balance sheets through
direct trading. More generally, households might have preferences for some
asset classes over others for reasons beyond risk and reward. These inter-
pretations highlight that the cost is a stand in for willingness or ability to
directly invest in an asset class.
    Second, the household can invest through an intermediary which it owns.
The intermediary can access markets at no cost, and pass through the pay-
offs to the household. However, the household cannot completely control the
intermediary's investment decisions. We model this distinction by assuming
the intermediary invests as if it has exponential utility with risk aversion pa-
rameter I . We assume that I  H , that is intermediaries are not willing
to bear all the risks households want in the first place.11 In practice, there
can be many reasons for why the risk-taking decisions of intermediaries differ
from those of households. Managers of financial institutions might have dif-
ferent preferences from their investors and limits to contracting prevent going
around this difference. This approach is pursued, for example, in He and Kr-
ishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) (see also He and
Krishnamurthy (forthcoming)). Financial institutions also face regulations
explicitly limiting their risk-taking. For example the Basel agreements spec-
ify limits on risk-weighted capital, measured by pre-specified risk weights or
Value-at-Risk. Adrian and Shin (2014) explore this channel.
    These two assumptions are voluntarily stylized, and we discuss them in

  11
       This assumption is distinct from the assumption in many models that the relative
risk aversion of intermediaries is lower than that of households. The two assumptions can
coexist as long as the intermediary sector is not too large.


                                            14
more detail in Internet Appendix Section IA.I.D. Figure 1 summarizes this
setup.



                     [Insert Figure 1 about here.]



   Because of exponential utility, initial endowments do not affect the de-
mand for risky assets, so we ignore them hereafter. The intermediary problem
determining its demand DI for the risky assets is therefore

                                          I
                       max DI (µ - p) -     D DI .                        (4)
                        DI                2 I

The household takes as given the investment decision of the intermediary
when making her choice of direct holding DH :

                             H                         1
 max (DH + DI ) (µ - p) -      (DH + DI )  (DH + DI ) - DH diag CDH .
 DH                          2                         2
                                                                          (5)

                                                                       
An equilibrium of the economy is a set of prices p and demands DI and DH
so that the intermediary and household decisions are optimal, and risky asset
                                                         
market clears. The first two conditions are that DI and DH solve problems
(4) and (5) respectively. The market-clearing condition is


                               DH + DI = S.                               (6)




                                     15
                    2. Equilibrium Portfolios and Prices

   We now characterize the equilibrium. The intermediary demand follows
the classic Markowitz result:


                                    1 -1
                             DI =      (µ - p) .                             (7)
                                    I

It invests in the the mean-variance efficient portfolio: the product of the
inverse of the variance -1 , and the expected returns (µ - p). The position
is more or less aggressive depending on the risk aversion I .
   In contrast the household demand is:


        
       DH = (H  + diag C )-1 (µ - p) - (H  + diag C )-1 (H )DI .             (8)


   The first term of this expression reflects the optimal demand absent any
intermediary demand. It balances the expected returns with the quadratic
risk and investment costs of buying the assets. The second term represents an
adjustment for the fact that the household already owns some assets through
the intermediary. Importantly, an asset held through the intermediary does
not have the same value as an asset held directly as it avoids the trading costs,
and therefore the substitution between direct and intermediated investment




                                       16
is in general not one-to-one.12 Rather, it is given by

                               
                              DH
                          -      = (H  + diag C )-1 (H ).                                 (9)
                              DI

The role of the investment cost for this substitution is clear in this expression.
Without investment costs, C = 0, assets in and out have the same value, so
this substitution is the identity. As the investment cost gets larger, the
substitution rate converges to 0. If investing directly in the asset is too
expensive, the household does not offset the decisions of the intermediary.
    We obtain an expression for prices clearing the market by combining the
demand from the household and the intermediary:

                                                    -1
                                       1                       1
                µ - p = H   +            diag C           +      diag C S                (10)
                                       I                       H

This relation is the nonlinear counterpart to equation (2), which posited a
role for intermediary and household risk appetites, I and H on risk premia.
It is interesting to compare these risk premia to those obtained in an economy
without any friction. In this case, one would obtain µ - p = H S . The
prices in our economy are distorted relative to this benchmark by a factor
                     -1
          1                     1
 +           C
          I diag
                          +        C
                                H diag
                                            . This distortion encodes the potential
effect of the intermediary on asset prices, through the impact of the parameter
I . The following proposition highlights conditions under which a meaningful

  12
       This distinction can also have implications for the price of the financial institutions
holding the assets, see for example Garleanu and Pedersen (2011) or Chodorow-Reich et al.
(2021).




                                              17
notion of "intermediary asset pricing" arises.

PROPOSITION 1: The intermediary matters for asset prices, that is  (µ -
p)/I = 0, if and only if


                                 I = H and         C=0                       (11)


     The combination of the two frictions of the model is necessary to obtain
a role for intermediaries. The first condition captures the idea that, at least
in part, intermediary decisions must not exactly reflect the desires of the
household. In our simple model, this discrepancy is captured by a distinct
investment goal, I = H . But this condition is not sufficient for intermedi-
aries to matter. It must also be that households are limited in their ability
to reach their investment objectives on their own. Our model materializes
this limitation by a non-zero investment cost C . More generally, the key
feature of investment policies to obtain this limitation is that households do
                                                  
not exactly offset decisions of intermediaries, -DH /DI = I .13
     Now that we have clarified the importance of our two frictions for the
notion of intermediary asset pricing, we derive empirical implications of this
framework, including the assumption behind the test of Section I.A.


C.      Empirical Implications

     We have already discussed how linearizing the model leads to a structure
like equation (2): higher values of either intermediary or household risk aver-

  13
       See Internet Appendix Section IA.I.C for a more general discussion.




                                            18
sion yield higher risk premia. The following proposition goes one step further
and shows that the pattern of predictability across asset classes arises in our
model, and therefore validates our test. To simplify, we assume that  is
diagonal. We index assets by i and denote ci the elements of C .

PROPOSITION 2: The elasticity of risk premium to intermediary risk aver-
sion I is increasing in the cost of direct holding ci , strictly if the intermedi-
ary matters for asset prices. The elasticity to household risk aversion H is
decreasing in the cost of direct holding.

   To understand this proposition, consider the elasticity of the risk premium
to changes in risk aversion:

                                1  (µi - pi )     ci
                      i,I =                   =         ,                     (12)
                             µi - pi  log(I )   I + c i
                                1  (µi - pi )    H
                     i,H   =                  =           .                   (13)
                             µi - pi  log(H )   H + c i

Both of these elasticities are positive, with a role for intermediary risk aver-
sion if and only if there is a non-zero cost of direct investment ci > 0. How-
ever, the elasticity is increasing in the cost ci for intermediary risk aversion
while it is decreasing for household risk aversion, and flat if there are no
frictions (e.g., C = 0). It is increasing for intermediaries because households
offset their trades less in asset classes that are harder to invest in directly. In
contrast, the opposite is true for changes in household risk aversion. Figure
2 illustrates this comparison.



                       [Insert Figure 2 about here.]


                                        19
   Focusing on elasticities rather than simply the derivative of the risk pre-
mium with respect to the risk appetite quantities is a useful scaling. Indeed,
assets in higher supply or with higher risk have higher risk premium, and
therefore will tend to move more in absolute magnitude with risk appetite.
Scaling by a baseline level of risk premium cleans out this effect to focus on
the role of the financial frictions. Internet Appendix Section IA.I.B discusses
a few mechanical properties of this elasticity.
   This empirical implication contrasts with other work on intermediaries
and predictability which typically focuses on a single asset class or does
not explicitly consider relative predictability (e.g., Haddad and Sraer (2020),
Diep et al. (Forthcoming), Chen et al. (2019), He et al. (2017), and Muir
(2017), among others). It also differs from the Euler equation approach of
linking intermediaries marginal value of wealth to the cross-section of risk
premiums (e.g., Adrian et al. (2014) and He et al. (2017)). We discuss this
issue in more depth in Section V, but note in our model that the intermediary
Euler equation always holds, because they hold the mean-variance efficient
portfolio -- equation (7). This holds true regardless of whether intermediaries
matter.



          II.    Data and Empirical Approach

   We now turn to empirical measurement of asset returns, cost rankings
across asset classes in terms of more vs less intermediated assets, and mea-
surement of proxies for intermediary health.




                                      20
A.      Returns

     We use asset returns and intermediary state variables that are common
in the literature. We use excess returns on the market, commodities, credit
(CDS), options, sovereign bonds, Treasury bonds, the currency carry trade,
and MBS, where we take excess returns over the 3 month T-bill where appro-
priate. These choices are motivated by looking at many large markets where
we think intermediation may matter. We start by using these asset returns
provided by He et al. (2017), and refer to that paper for a thorough descrip-
tion of these series. For CDS, options, sovereigns, and commodities we take
the equal weighted average in each asset class. Treasury bonds are longer
term Treasury bond returns over the 3 month T-bill rate. The credit return
is an average across maturities and credit risk. MBS is the Barclay's hedged
MBS return index.14 We use the hedged return to remove exposure to inter-
est rate risk, just as CDS isolates credit risk exposure. Commodities are the
equal weighted average across all commodities available in the HKM dataset.
The carry trade data are from Adrien Verdelhan. Some of the assets are in
zero net supply. This is not an issue as long as the asset return is positively
correlated with risk intermediaries are exposed to (e.g., intermediaries on net
will be positively exposed to credit risk hence the CDS premium will reflect
that credit risk is positive on net). In general, our assumption is that the in-
termediary sector has positive exposure to the asset returns in question such
that if their effective risk aversion increases they will be less willing to bear

  14
       We thank Peter Diep for help with this data. This series is also available on Bloomberg
LUMSER.




                                              21
this risk unless the premium also rises. This positive exposure is strongly
supported empirically because betas for these assets classes with respect to
the intermediary sector are positive and align with their risk premiums (He
et al., 2017).15 For credit, we favor CDSs over corporate bonds because they
provide a pure exposure to credit risk, and contribute to more variation in
intermediation cost across asset classes.16 Table I gives summary statistics
for the asset class returns including means, standard deviations, and Sharpe
ratios. All units are quarterly.


                           [Insert Table I about here.]




B.       Intermediary Health

     Next, we use variables in the literature that are argued to proxy for
intermediary distress or risk-bearing capacity. That is, we want variables
that we believe are correlated with I in our framework. We use two primary
measures; the broker-dealer leverage factor from Adrian et al. (2014) (AEM)
and the intermediary equity measure by He et al. (2017) (HKM), each of
which has been argued, theoretically and empirically, to capture intermediary
   15
        One can also accommodate a fixed demand from outside investors in our model to
generate the supply that the intermediaries are exposed to. That is, suppose some investors
want to hedge oil prices or some other risk. Then this demand creates effectively positive
supply. Thus, even though there is zero net supply the intermediaries' risk exposure is
positive.
   16
        Internet Appendix Section IA.V repeats the analysis for corporate bonds and we
return to this comparison later in the text.

                                               22
distress and each of which is linked to risk premiums. We take annual log
changes of each state variable. In our main results, we standardize each of
the AEM and HKM measures and take the average, so as to take the average
of the risk bearing capacity measures used in the literature. We refer to
this measure as risk bearing capacity, and the negative of this measure to be
effective risk aversion. Again, we emphasize that we do not provide a deep
theory for what determines intermediary distress or risk bearing capacity,
though these variables are motivated in such a way elsewhere. Our goal
instead is to take off-the-shelf measures from the literature to test our main
hypothesis.
   Finally, we also include variables we think may capture aggregate or
household risk aversion, such as the consumption-wealth ratio proxy of Let-
tau and Ludvigson (2001) and the habit measure (surplus consumption) of
Campbell and Cochrane (1999). Specifically, Lettau and Ludvigson (2001)
construct the variable cay using a combination of aggregate consumption,
labor income, and asset wealth. This last component in particular relies on
valuations, and therefore would naturally also capture aggregate fluctuations
in the willingness to invest in risky assets. We do not take a strong stand on
these variables in terms of corresponding perfectly to household risk aversion,
though we consider whether including them in our regressions affects our re-
sults. This is useful because our theory does have a differential prediction
about how household risk aversion shocks should interact with risk premia
so this provides a nice additional test of the model.
   Figure 3 plots the time-series behavior of the intermediary effective risk
aversion proxy (green line), as well as the effective household risk aversion

                                      23
series from the surplus consumption measure (red line). According to these
measures, periods of high intermediary risk aversion often coincide with pe-
riods of high household risk aversion, the financial crisis of 2008 being a
striking example. The two series also exhibit some amount of independent
variation which we will exploit later on in the paper.



                       [Insert Figure 3 about here.]




C.     Ranking of Assets by Degree of Intermediation

     Our empirical tests require us to rank assets by the willingness of house-
holds to hold them. Dispersion in this dimension is important for our empir-
ical design because we exploit that assets that are more specialized (held by
intermediaries) will respond more to intermediary health. We take a multi-
pronged approach to identifying which assets are more intermediated: we
look at holdings data, volume of trade accounted for by institutions (par-
ticularly focusing on dealers), and we also consider directly the costs faced
by households (we use the fees charged by ETFs by asset class and we also
discuss other physical costs households would face in each market).
     Importantly, all of these approaches yield roughly similar rankings of
which asset classes are more or less intermediated. We report our ranking in
Table II. Stocks always appear least intermediated. On the other extreme,
credit default swaps appear most intermediated. This makes sense: one needs
an ISDA master swap agreement to trade CDS which a household would find



                                       24
close to impossible. The remainder of the ordering, from less to more inter-
mediated, is roughly government bonds, options, sovereign bonds (emerging
market), commodities, foreign exchange, MBS, and CDS. We emphasize that
we take a data-driven approach to conduct these rankings, though we do not
take an overly strong stance on the exact ordering (e.g., one could swap some
of the adjacent pairs) and we return to this issue in our empirical tests.



                           [Insert Table II about here.]




                             1. Holdings and volume data

    By revealed preferences, relative holdings of assets directly by households
and through intermediaries offer a proxy for the cost of intermediation. For
                                                  DI,i       ci +H
example, in our simple model, we obtain           DH,i
                                                         =   I -H
                                                                   ,   which is increasing
in the cost ci . We first study holdings data in 2016 from the Flow of Funds
(FoF), though we find similar results using the Survey of Consumer Finance
(SCF).17 In FoF we take holdings of stocks, Treasuries, foreign and corporate
bonds, and mortgage-backed securities as a percentage of total assets for
households and non-profits (HH) as well as for broker-dealers and commercial
banks. We compare relative fractions of each of these asset classes, that

   17
        The SCF data gives an alternative way to measure households, and provides some
advantages. First, we can focus on higher income households which participate more
actively in asset markets. Second, FoF lumps households with non-profits, some of which
have significant assets, which SCF does not do. However, SCF is a survey, so is subject to
other issues.



                                           25
is the ratio of HH holdings of stocks relative to either broker dealers or
banks and likewise for the other assets. Households hold far more equities
relative to intermediaries, while households hold fewer Treasuries and far
fewer corporate and foreign bonds and MBS. However, this does not give us
holdings of more specialized asset classes such as CDS. A limitation of this
exercise is that FoF computes household holdings as a residual from other
sectors. In particular, this measure includes the holdings of hedge funds,
which fit more as intermediaries in our approach.
   Our next source of data is the BIS data on derivatives semiannual re-
port.18 We use data from the end of 2016. The data provide total gross no-
tional positions in each market, the total gross positions by reporting dealers,
other financial institutions, and non-financial institutions. We use the sum
of reporting dealers and other financial institutions relative to totals; we ob-
tain similar results when using reporting dealers as a fraction of total. These
positions are available for commodities, CDS, foreign exchange, and equity
derivatives which we use to proxy for equity index options in our sample. Our
ranking suggests equity options, commodities, foreign exchange, and CDS as
least to most intermediated.


                                  2. Value-at-risk data

   One issue with the previous rankings is that they may not capture true
"exposure" to the various asset classes, which is what the theory dictates.
For example, if households held very low risk stocks, and intermediaries held

  18
       See https://www.bis.org/statistics/derstats.htm.




                                            26
very high risk or high beta stocks, perhaps the fractions above would miss
this. In the model, we want relative wealth betas to each asset class which
we call exposures.
   For intermediaries, we can get a window into exposures by looking at
large primary dealers who report value-at-risk across four asset classes on
their annual 10Ks. We have this data for the largest dealer banks and we
use data from 2016 for our analysis.19 The 10Ks report value-at-risk for
commodities, equities, interest rates, and foreign exchange, giving us the
effective relative dollar exposures to each asset class. Value-at-risk reports
tail risk ­ for example, it provides a dollar amount which losses would not be
expected to exceed 99% of the time. We convert this number to exposures by
assuming a normal distribution for each asset class and normalizing by the
standard deviation of the asset class returns from our sample. This gives us
relative exposure. We then normalize each asset class by a measure of total
supply. For equities and bonds we use the relative sizes of the equity and fixed
income markets in the US, roughly 15 trillion and 50 trillion respectively. For
bonds our numbers are unchanged if we use only US Treasuries outstanding.
For commodities and FX we use the gross market value numbers from the
BIS to normalize exposures. We again find consistent results: relative to the
sizes of the markets, dealer exposures are smallest for equities, then bonds,
then commodities, and then FX. The absolute exposures are largest for fixed
income, but importantly this market is quite large and much of this risk is
born by other investors so that it is not as large relative to total quantity of

  19
       Internet Appendix Section IA.II lists these banks.




                                             27
bonds outstanding. This ranking thus gives similar results to just using the
position data above.


                              3. Direct Measures of Costs

    We next study household ease of access to asset classes by analyzing fees
for ETFs in terms of expense ratios from ETF database.20 While these prod-
ucts would not have been available to households over much of our sample,
looking at ETF expense ratios helps gauge the current cost of households
investing in these asset classes, and it is likely that they reflect the historical
difficulty of investing as well. Another caveat is that this takes the physical
cost of accessing asset classes more literally. In reality households may not
invest in some assets due to complexity or other features not captured by
physical costs.
    We take the average expense ratio by asset class: Stocks, Government
Bonds, Emerging Markets Bonds (our best proxy for the sovereign bonds),
Currency, Commodities, Volatility, and MBS. We use volatility to proxy
for our option straddle strategy which is a bet on volatility.21 There is no
category for CDS, since there are very few ETFs trading CDS, though we
supplement this by studying two ETFs that specialize in CDS.22

   20
        http://etfdb.com/etfdb-categories/
   21
        We note much of the Volatility ETFs are trading VIX futures directly, and these
strategies are different though they are exposed to the same underlying risks (Dew-Becker
et al., 2017).
   22
        ProShares North American high yield CDS. ProShares offers both a long and short
ETF for this product (e.g., you can effectively buy or sell protection). These were launched



                                             28
   We need to normalize the expense ratios in each asset class, just like we
do in our simple model. For example, government bond ETFs are safer, lower
return funds and hence a high expense ratio here means post fee returns are
likely to be particularly low. This is less critical for equity ETFs. We choose
to normalize expense ratios by standard deviation of returns in each asset
class. Another option is to normalize by the mean return in each asset class,
this gives similar results though is subject to the issue that means are much
less precisely estimated than standard deviations.
   Our approach based on ETF data implies the following ordering, from
easier to hardest to access: stocks, Treasuries, sovereign bonds, currencies,
commodities, options, MBS, and CDS. This is largely consistent with our
main ranking.


                   4. Other Differences Across Asset Classes

   One should not forget that, while we focus on heterogeneity in ease of
access by households, these asset classes differ on other dimensions. For
example some of the more intermediated asset classes such as MBS and
CDS are less liquid than the stock market or currency markets, with for
example larger transaction costs. To the extent that liquidity risk is reflected
in expected return, this heterogeneity would manifest itself in the return
data. Intermediaries would still play a central role in this mechanism, but
for different reasons than in our theory. More broadly, the various asset
classes also trade different sources of economic risk.

in 2014 as the first CDS ETFs.




                                      29
     The presence of heterogeneity across asset classes beyond the cost of direct
access is not a challenge for our empirical strategy in itself. These other forces
could confound our results only if they change disproportionately for the
harder-to-access asset classes in times of high intermediary risk aversion. For
example it would have to be that not only liquidity risk is more pronounced
for the more intermediated asset classes, but also that it increases more
in periods of high intermediary risk aversion for these asset classes. We
empirically address the possibility of such patterns in Section IV.A.



                    III.      Empirical Results

A.     Intermediary Health Forecasts Returns

                                 1. Methodology

     We estimate the following linear equation using quarterly data for each
asset class:
                           
                          ri,t +1 = ai + bi × ~I,t +   i,t+1 .               (14)

                                                                 
~I,t is our standardized measure of intermediary risk aversion. ri,t +1 is the

excess return of asset class i between quarter t and t + 1, divided by its
full-sample volatility. As we have discussed, this scaling makes predictive
coefficients comparable across asset classes. We would ideally prefer to nor-
malize returns by their unconditional risk premium. However, this approach
poses additional statistical challenges, which we come back to in the next sec-
tion. Notice that while scaling returns by a constant affects the magnitude
of coefficient estimates, it does not influence t-stats and R2 s.

                                         30
    We use the reverse regression approach of Hodrick (1992) to compute
standard errors for our coefficient estimates. Additionally, we account for
potential small sample bias, such as the Stambaugh (1999) bias, by com-
puting p-values for the predictive coefficient from a parametric bootstrap
procedure. Precisely, we first estimate a restricted VAR for quarterly excess
returns and intermediary health under the null of no return predictability by
intermediary health .23 We assume the joint distribution of innovations in the
VAR corresponds to their empirical distribution. Then, we draw 5,000 sam-
ples from this estimated process to obtain a distribution of reverse regression
t-statistics. We report the p-value of our estimated t-statistic relative to this
bootstrapped distribution. Both the asymptotic standard error and the p-
value are informative: the asymptotic standard error is robust to the specifics
of the data-generating process, while the p-value handles finite-sample issues
conditional on a parameterized data-generating process.24


                           2. Main Predictive Regressions

    Table III gives our predictability results. First, we note that intermediary
effective risk aversion generally positively predicts risk premiums across these
asset classes. When intermediary health is poor, and their effective risk

  23
       When we add additional controls to the regression, such as in Internet Appendix
Table IAXV, we allow these other variables to predict returns in the VAR estimation.
  24
       We report in Internet Appendix Table IAIII estimates of equation (14) using Newey-
West standard errors allowing for eight quarter lags and show statistical significance is
generally stronger with this approach. However, this procedure has been found to over-
reject the null hypothesis in small samples (see, e.g., Ang and Bekaert (2006)).



                                            31
aversion is high, risk premia going forward are generally higher.25 Since
we normalize by asset class volatility, and because our predictor variable is
standardized to have unit variance, the coefficients indicate the increase ­ in
Sharpe ratio units ­ to a one standard deviation increase in the intermediary
risk aversion measure. Sharpe ratios for the asset classes are fairly similar
and typically around 0.25 quarterly. Therefore, the typical coefficient of 0.2
implies a bit less than a doubling of Sharpe ratios, which is economically
large.



                           [Insert Table III about here.]



   Second, the degree of predictability, measured either by the coefficient,
significance level, or (adjusted) R2 generally increases as we go from left to
right, that is, as we go from less to more intermediated asset classes. There is
relatively less predictive power for stocks (coefficient of 0.12, R2 of 0.8%), and
relatively more predictive power for more intermediated asset classes such as
MBS (coefficient 0.30, R2 of 7.8%) or credit (coefficient of 0.57, R-square of
31.6%). Of the eight asset classes, six of the slope coefficients are significant
at conventional levels, and all of these six are the more intermediated asset
classes. Further, the magnitude of the coefficients of all these six asset classes
are larger than that of stocks or Treasuries. Figure 4 shows the increasing
pattern of slope coefficients bi in a scatter plot where the x-axis is our ranking
of less vs more intermediated asset classes. Panel B of Figure 5 illustrates a
similar increasing pattern for the R2 of the regression. This is not surprising:
  25
       He et al. (2017) also provide evidence of common predictability across asset classes.

                                             32
because the volatility of returns is one with our normalization, and the inter-
mediation measure is standardized, the (unadjusted) R-square is the square
of the predictive coefficient.26


                              [Insert Figure 4 about here.]


    The last row of Table III reports the elasticity of the risk premium to
a one-standard deviation increase in intermediary risk aversion, given by
       
bi /E(ri ) -- Panel A of Figure 5 plots the elasticities.27 Here again, we observe
a strong increase of elasticities as we move from less to more intermediated
assets. We revisit this pattern of increasing predictability and its statistical
properties after discussing robustness of the predictive regressions.


                              [Insert Figure 5 about here.]




                                3. Robustness of Predictability

    We assess the robustness of the predictive regressions on several dimen-
sions. To save space, we describe these results in the text but leave the
tables to the Internet Appendix. First, one concern is whether our partic-
ular sample drives the results. We explore this by dropping the financial
   26
        Formally, R2 = var(bi             
                              ~I,t )/var(ri,t         2
                                              +1 ) = bi .

   27
        Note that it is irrelevant that we first normalize returns by their volatility when
computing this elasticity. That is, the elasticity can be equivalently measured as the
coefficient br                           r    r
             i in ri,t+1 /E [ri,t+1 ] = ai + bi × ~I,t +    i,t+1   where ri,t+1 is the raw excess
return.

                                                  33
crisis (2007-2009) and find similar patterns (Internet Appendix Table IAIV).
This alleviates the concern that this one period of more severe intermediary
distress drives our findings. We also show results using only data after 1990
(Internet Appendix Table IAV). Doing so reduces the heterogeneity in sample
length across our asset classes. Finally, we also ask whether the predictabil-
ity changes during periods of low intermediary health by estimating different
coefficients for values of ~I above and below its mean (Internet Appendix
Table IAVI). Splitting the sample in half results in limited statistical power
and no firm result emerges across periods of high or low intermediary health.
   Next, another concern relates to our choice of intermediary health mea-
sures. Our baseline uses an average of the HKM and AEM intermediary
factors in our main results without taking a strong stand on the drivers, and
measurement, of intermediary health. We show that several other ways of
measuring intermediary health lead to similar conclusions in the pattern of
coefficients. Internet Appendix Figures IA3 and IA4 show results when we
split our intermediary health measure into the HKM and AEM components
separately -- Internet Appendix Tables IAVII and IAVIII report the regres-
sions. We find that, generally, both measures contribute to our main result
though results are stronger for the AEM measure. Internet Appendix Figure
IA5 uses the log levels of the AEM and HKM factors rather than annual
log changes (we still average the two after standardizing them). In Inter-
net Appendix Figure IA2 we show the pattern of predictability when we use
the GZ spread of Gilchrist and Zakrajek (2012) to proxy for intermediary
risk aversion instead of the AEM or HKM measures. Gilchrist and Zakrajek
(2012) argue that this spread captures the health of the financial sector and

                                     34
show it closely follows dealer CDS spreads in their sample.
     Finally, in Internet Appendix Section IA.V, we discuss corporate bond
returns as a an alternative measure of credit returns to CDS. We find strong
return predictability for corporate bonds, albeit somewhat lower in magni-
tude than for CDS -- see Internet Appendix Table IAI. This makes sense in
part because corporate bonds contain both credit and duration risk.


B.      Do Intermediaries Matter?

                1. Interpretation of the Pattern across Asset Classes

     Figures 4 and 5 consistently show an increasing pattern of predictabil-
ity: more intermediated asset classes are more predictable by intermediary
health. Fitting a regression through these estimates -- the red line -- im-
plies that the most intermediated asset classes have a predictive coefficient
about 0.25 greater than the least intermediated asset classes.28 In Internet
Appendix Table IAII we show that capturing the degree of predictability
across asset classes in a panel regression with an interaction term for more
intermediated asset classes gives the same estimate for this slope. Elasticities
experience an increase of a comparable order of magnitude (remember that
the typical normalized return mean is about 0.25, so elasticities should be
about 4 times larger than the predictive coefficients). Finally, it could be
that this increasing pattern is driven by a single asset class with an extreme
value. Internet Appendix Figure IA6 shows this is not the case: the result

  28
       This slope across asset classes is the coefficient B in a regression as bi = A + B × ci + ui ,
where ci grows linearly from 0 to 1.



                                                 35
holds even if we remove any single asset class.
   This consistent increase in predictability is our main empirical result.
This observation supports the view that intermediaries matter for risk pre-
mia, in particular for the most intermediated asset classes. If the predictabil-
ity we measure reflected changes in household risk aversion, we would observe
instead less predictability for more intermediated asset class. Importantly,
our estimates do not rule out that intermediary health partially proxies for
household risk aversion and that this variation also matters for asset prices.
Rather, they tell us that the increasing effect of intermediaries on risk pre-
mia as we move from least to more intermediated asset classes dominates the
decreasing effect from households. In this way, we are not only rejecting the
null hypothesis that intermediaries do not matter, but offering a quantitative
lower bound on their effect. It is tempting to go one step further and use
equation (12) to recover intermediation costs, but we actually only recover
bounds on the elasticity to actual intermediary risk appetite up to a mul-
tiplicative constant. This limitation arises because we only know that our
proxy for intermediary health is positively related to the actual intermediary
risk appetite I , but not the strength of this relation.


         2. Statistical Properties of our Test: a Bayesian Approach

   Naturally, this bound comes with standard errors. We turn to assessing
the statistical properties of this increasing pattern of predictability. We ask
with which degree of statistical confidence we can conclude that more in-
termediated asset classes are more predictable by intermediary health. The
main issue we deal with is uncertainty associated with estimating the mean

                                      36
returns.
    We take a Bayesian approach to this question; Internet Appendix Section
IA.III provides technical details. We start by the counterpart to equation
(14) where excess returns are not scaled:


                               ri,t+1 = ai + bi × ~I,t +    i,t+1 .                      (15)


We choose a prior on the set of coefficients {(ai , bi )}i=1,...,N in this regres-
sion, and consider various properties of their posterior distribution given our
sample. Specifically, the joint distribution of these coefficients implies a joint
distributions of the elasticities bi /ai .29 We ask what is the posterior probabil-
ity that the slope across elasticities ­ the red line in our figures ­ is positive, or
that the average elasticity for more intermediated asset classes is large than
for less intermediated asset classes. For this second type of comparison, we
consider the case of Stocks and Treasuries relative to CDS and MBS, Stocks
and Treasuries relative to all other asset classes, and Stocks, Treasuries and
Options relative to all other asset classes.
    We assume that the errors            i,t+1   are normally distributed, uncorrelated
over time and have a known cross-sectional variance-covariance matrix 
given by the variance-covariance matrix of OLS residuals.30 These assump-

   29
        We demean ~I,t for the sample of each asset class so that the coefficient ai estimates
the unconditional mean return. Demeaning the right-hand-side of the regression does not
affect statistical inference in the Bayesian approach below, as well as in the frequentist
view; therefore doing so is without loss of generality.
   30
        In Internet Appendix Section IA.III.C, we show that uncertainty about this variance-
covariance matrix does not play a quantitatively meaningful role in our exercise.


                                                 37
tions correspond to the Seemingly Unrelated Regression framework of Zellner
(1962). We focus on truncated multivariate normal priors, which are con-
jugate with our assumptions on residuals. For the vectors a = (a1 , ..., aN )
and b = (b1 , ..., bN ), we assume means of a
                                            ¯           diag ( ) and ¯
                                                                     b diag ( ) , and
          2
variances a      2
             and b          ¯, ¯
                    , where a  b, a and b are scalar. Finally, we assume
that the vectors a and b are independent from each other. Intuitively this
prior is expressed in units of Sharpe ratio.31 For the unconditional mean a,
P´
 astor (2000), P´
                astor and Stambaugh (2000) and Kozak et al. (2020) show
that this choice of prior -- scaled by the variance of realized returns -- en-
sures reasonable properties of returns.32 The arguments in Haddad et al.
(2020) show that these ideas extend to the case of predictability, justifying
the use of this prior for b as well. In the absence of truncation, and when
a and b are large, the Bayesian posterior has mean and variance which
correspond to the point estimate and standard errors of the frequentist ap-
proach. Throughout, we assume the prior is centered around a quarterly
Sharpe ratio of 0.25 (corresponding to 0.5 annually) and no predictability:
¯
b = 0, a
       ¯ = 0.25. We choose a loose b = 1 and impose no truncation for bi .
These assumptions are mild and imply that the answer to our questions on
the pattern of elasticities is always 50% for the prior: we are never building
in an increasing pattern of predictability through the choice of prior. We now
turn to two sets of more meaningful assumptions for statistical inference.
   First, we impose a positive lower bound on the ai . The computation of

  31
       A small distinction with our previous analysis is that these scaling are in terms of the
average conditional Sharpe ratio rather than the unconditional Sharpe ratio.
  32
       For example, the expected Sharpe ratio will be bounded above irrespective of  .


                                               38
elasticities involves dividing by the unconditional mean ai . If the distribution
of ai goes through 0, this will yield arbitrarily large positive and negative val-
ues of the elasticity.33 It therefore appears necessary to bound ai away from
0 to obtain reasonable statistical properties. We do so by imposing a lower
bound a        diag ( ), with a a scalar, for these coefficients. This assumption
corresponds to a lower bound a on the average Sharpe ratio for each of the
asset classes. Naturally, it is important to ask what such an assumption
means economically. There are three ways to interpret this bound. First,
it is an economic restriction: broad asset classes are all likely to receive a
positive risk premium because they capture aggregate risk.34 Second, it is an
empirically motivated assumption: across many samples, an extensive litera-
ture has documented positive premia for these asset classes. We discuss this
evidence in Internet Appendix Section IA.IV. Third, the doubtful reader can
also stress that our conclusions are part of a joint hypothesis framework: we
draw economic conclusions under the assumption that unconditional Sharpe
ratios have a lower bound.
    Figure 6 reports the answer to our questions as a function of the trunca-
tion level for the quarterly Sharpe ratio. The thick black line is the posterior
probability that the slope across elasticities is negative; lower values favor our
theory, in the spirit of a p-value for the null of no pattern. Without getting

   33
        Besides, if the distribution of ai is non-zero and continuous at the point 0, the pos-
terior mean of the elasticity does not exist.
   34
        Campbell and Thompson (2008) argues for this type of restrictions. Our approach
is less stringent: they bound conditional expected returns at each point in time, while we
only impose a bound on unconditional expected returns.



                                                39
rid of negative Sharpe ratios, in particular the values close to 0, the inference
about this slope is rather imprecise, with probabilities around 11%. However,
as soon as one imposes a positive bound on the Sharpe ratio, the probability
drops sharply, with values under the 5% threshold. For example, a reasonable
lower bound of 0.05 give posterior probabilities of around 3%. The pattern
for our other three questions is similar. Comparing the extremes of Stocks
and Treasuries with Credit and MBS, the solid black line, yields even tighter
conclusions, while comparing Stocks, Treasuries and Options with the rest
of the sample, the dashed line, gives slightly higher probabilities. The only
noticeably large values, while still around 10%, occur when comparing Stocks
and Treasuries with the remainder of asset classes. In summary, we conclude
with a high degree of confidence that more intermediated asset classes are
more predictable by intermediary health.



                          [Insert Figure 6 about here.]



   One might want to go further in terms of statistical regularization. Even
abstracting from the issue of dividing by 0, uncertainty about unconditional
means contributes to the uncertainty about patterns of predictability. This
phenomenon is amplified by the fact that we estimate means for multiple
asset classes. To regularize our estimates, a natural approach is to impose
some form of shrinkage towards a common value. We follow this approach
and shrink Sharpe ratios of all of our asset classes towards a common value.35

  35
       P´
        astor (2000) and P´
                          astor and Stambaugh (2000) follow this approach. Kozak et al.
(2020) assume that Sharpe ratios are proportional to variances in order to impose the


                                           40
In our Bayesian framework, this corresponds to tightening the priors on av-
erage Sharpe ratios around a common value, our mean a
                                                    ¯ = 0.25. Why 0.25?
This number corresponds to the well-known estimate of an annual Sharpe
ratio of 0.5 for the equity market, is roughly the average Sharpe ratio across
asset classes in our sample, and is justified by an extensive body of empirical
work studying long historical samples for these asset classes. For example
Gorton and Rouwenhorst (2006) find that commodities have Sharpe ratio
similar to that of stocks, or Asvanunt and Richardson (2016) stress the com-
parable Sharpe ratios of stocks, Treasuries, and credit; see Internet Appendix
Section IA.IV for more discussion. We also note this specific choice of value
for a
    ¯ is not critical for our results. Shrinking all the way to any common value
corresponds to comparing directly predictive coefficients scaled by volatility
bi /      ,ii in terms of the pattern of predictability across asset classes.36 This
extreme provides an economic interpretation to the "model-free" comparison
of coefficients we were reporting in the previous section: we are comparing
elasticities under the assumption that all asset classes have the same uncon-
ditional Sharpe ratio.



                            [Insert Figure 7 about here.]

absence of near-arbitrage across the thousands of available stocks. Our setting is different:
we focus on a small set of asset class index returns, which could all have sizable Sharpe
ratios.
   36
        Relative to our earlier results, the shrunken estimates just multiply all predictive
coefficients by the constant 1/a
                               ¯ so that all coefficients are four times larger, but does not
change the relative pattern across asset classes.



                                              41
   Figure 7 illustrates what happens when we implement the shrinkage by
bringing a towards 0. Panel A reports the median as well as 5th, 10th, 90th,
and 95th percentiles for the posterior of the cross-sectional slope of elastici-
ties. First, one can observe the phenomenon of shrinkage. For large values of
a , the estimate corresponds to what one obtains using the OLS estimates of
bi and ai . As a goes to 0, the median estimate is brought down to a lower
value, which corresponds to the slope when replacing ai , by 0.25       ,ii . In
this case we estimate a slope of around 1, which is about four times larger
than the slope in Figure 4 since we divide coefficients by a
                                                           ¯ = 0.25. Second,
this approach brings regularization because shrinkage reduces the uncertainty
caused by estimation of mean returns. The distribution of the slope estimate
tightens. As a byproduct, inference about patterns of predictability will be
much stronger when using some shrinkage. Panel B confirms this view, by
reporting posterior probability for our measures of increasing slope. If we
assume that all Sharpe ratios are equal to 0.25, then the probabilities of neg-
ative slope are all well below 1%. Of course, this case is an extreme form
of prior, but imposing weaker assumptions already achieves meaningful reg-
ularization. For example, assuming a = 0.05, that is that Sharpe ratios
mostly lie between 0.15 and 0.35, already bring posterior probabilities of a
negative slope to very low values. In summary, we find that if one is will-
ing to impose views on unconditional Sharpe ratios to regularize elasticity
estimates, the conclusions on patterns of predictability are reinforced. It is
important to repeat that these stronger views are not building in the pat-
tern of predictability in any way, but rather bring in extraneous plausible
economic assumptions on unconditional properties of returns.

                                      42
C.     The Role of Households

     Our main argument also makes predictions about proxies for household
risk aversion in influencing risk premia. Specifically, when intermediaries
matter, an increase in household risk aversion should, if anything, have larger
effect in assets that are more easily accessed and more directly held by house-
holds. While we emphasize that our main tests do not require us to take a
stand on the behavior of household risk aversion, we explore this hypoth-
esis using two proxies for household willingness to bear risk often used in
the literature: the aggregate consumption-wealth ratio, cay from Lettau and
Ludvigson (2001), and the habit measure of Campbell and Cochrane (1999).


                      [Insert Figure 8 about here.]


     Figure 8 plots predictive coefficient on intermediary risk aversion and
household risk aversion, measured using cay ; we report the regressions in
Table IV. Panel A illustrates that controlling for household risk aversion
does not affect the strongly increasing pattern of predictability by interme-
diary health as we move towards asset classes which are more difficult to
access. In Panel B, we see that the coefficients on household risk aversion
if anything exhibit the opposite pattern. They are mildly decreasing as we
move from assets that are more to less directly held by households. As an
aside, this result suggests there is nothing inherently mechanical in finding
stronger predictability as we move along our ranking. Internet Appendix
Figure IA7 shows the pattern of coefficients in our predictive regressions
when we include the habit measure in our predictive regressions; Internet

                                      43
Appendix Table IAXI reports the regressions. Again, we observe a distinctly
decreasing pattern of predictability. Finally, we consider the dividend-price
ratio on the CRSP value-weighted stock portfolio. While less directly related
to aggregate household conditions, this measure offers an alternative proxy
for valuations in the more frictionless asset class, stocks. A similar pattern
emerges: a strongly increasing response to intermediary risk aversion, and a
mild decrease in response to this proxy for household risk aversion; Internet
Appendix Figure IA8 and Internet Appendix Table IAXII report the results.



                     [Insert Table IV about here.]



   These results suggest that households also matter in influencing risk pre-
miums, but in a way that is distinct from the role of intermediaries. Here
again, it is worth pointing out that our proxies are imperfect: this household
variation might be affected by changes in intermediary health, in the same
way that the intermediary variation was potentially affected by changes in
household risk aversion. It is nevertheless comforting that aggregate risk
aversion proxies do indeed appear to line up with risk premiums as predicted
by the model. The independent variation we have between the two types
of proxy allows us to tease out the distinction between the two sides of our
mechanism. And, this pattern highlights two distinct components of risk
premium cycles.




                                     44
D.     Decomposing Variations in Expected Returns

     We use these results to decompose variation in risk premiums into parts
due to intermediaries and due to households. For each asset class, the pre-
dictive regression provides a baseline estimate of risk premium variation.
Then, we use the lower bound implied by coefficient comparison across as-
set classes to quantify separately the role of intermediaries and households.
These bounds, even when combined, do not explain all the variation in risk
premium: there is some remaining measured variation in risk premium that
we cannot trace specifically to one of these two sources.
     We implement the decomposition as follows. We start from the predictive
regression estimates coefficients bi,I and bi,H for each asset class -- the points
in Figure 8. To take into account of the patterns across asset classes, we fit
linear slopes across these coefficients:


                          bi,I = AI + BI × ci + uI,i                         (16)

                         bi,H = AH + BH × ci + uH,i ,                        (17)


where ci increases linearly from 0 to 1. This linear fit corresponds to the
red lines in Figure 8; statistical significance for the pattern of coefficients
on intermediary risk aversion across assets was established in Section III.B.
Using this linear model, we obtain an estimate of the total variance of risk




                                       45
premium for each asset class:


  2         2                 2
  T otal =    Et (ri,t +1 ) =  ((AI + BI × ci ) ~I,t + (AH + BH × ci ) ~H,t ) ,
                                                                             (18)


where we compute the variance of the right-hand-side quantity in our sample.
Of course, this regression might include an incomplete set of predictors, and
there might be more overall variation in risk premia in these asset classes.
That said, we are reluctant to include more variables, because their choice
would be somewhat arbitrary, and might artificially inflate risk premium
variation through overfitting. In addition the high R2 s we obtain suggest it is
unlikely that much more predictability is out there. Alternatively, one should
just interpret our decomposition as the fraction of our measured variation in
risk premium that can be traced back to intermediaries or households.
   We then quantify how much variation we can attribute to intermediaries.
In the framework of Section I.A, the lower bound on the role of intermediaries
holds even if we have an imperfect proxy and comes from the stronger pre-
dictability of the more intermediated asset classes -- see also the derivation in
Internet Appendix Section IA.I.A. This pattern is driven by the positive slope
                                    2
BI of the fit across asset classes: Intermediaries   2 ((BI × ci ) ~I,t ). Con-
versely, the role of households is driven by the decreasing predictability across
                                    2
asset classes, the negative of BH : Households   2 ((-BH × (1 - ci )) ~H,t ).
For example, we cannot identify any variation due to intermediaries in the
least intermediated asset class with ci = 0, Stocks. Conversely we cannot
identify any variation due to households in the most intermediated asset



                                       46
class, with ci = 1, Credit.
   Figure 9 presents the results.      The red bars indicate the fraction of
variation in risk premia for each asset class attributable to households
2           2
Households /T otal , the blue is that which is attributable to intermediaries

2               2
Intermediaries /T otal , and the gray region indicates variation we cannot confi-

dently ascribe to either. This decomposition suggests that we can attribute
at least 60% of the variation in CDS risk premia to intermediaries, and
this declines by asset class but is still substantial for FX, commodities, and
sovereign bonds. For households, we can attribute at least 40% of risk pre-
mia variation in stocks, and this declines as we move to more intermediated
asset classes. Again, we stress that these are lower bounds: the gray area
in the middle is not necessarily the sign of a third force, just variation not
attributable to either category using our empirical strategy.



                       [Insert Figure 9 about here.]



   Internet Appendix Figure IA9 repeats this exercise using elasticities
rather than the predictive coefficients normalized by volatility. The decom-
position is similar, with a somewhat larger role for intermediaries. Internet
Appendix Figure IA10, assesses the sensitivity of our inference to the assump-
tion of a linear structure across ci . We use a local regression, a quadratic
specification, and a cubic specification. The pattern and magnitude of vari-
ation in the fitted curves does not change much, with a stronger increase for
intermediary risk aversion than for household risk aversion; these estimates
lead to variance decomposition similar to our linear baseline. Finally, while

                                       47
the decomposition we have reported is based on our best estimates of the
lower bound, one ought to remember these estimates come with uncertainty.
Internet Appendix Table IAXIII builds on the approach of Section III.B to
measure this uncertainty. The strong role of intermediaries comes with a
relatively high precision, with for example an interquartile range for Credit
between about 45% and 90%. In contrast the effect of households, in addition
to be weaker, is also more imprecise.
     Finally, note that we implement an unconditional decomposition: our
empirical model assumes that predictive coefficients and the variance of pre-
dictors is constant over time. With more data -- recall our sample did not
allow us to detect variation in the predictive coefficient -- or by imposing
a more structural view one can imagine entertaining variation over time in
these quantities. For example, periods of poor financial health of interme-
diaries, ~I > 0, experience about 60% more standard deviation in ~I than
periods of good health, while the standard deviation of ~H decreases by about
10%. This suggests a larger role of intermediaries in variations in risk pre-
mium during episodes of poor financial health of the financial sector, in line
for example with the model of He and Krishnamurthy (2019).



                 IV.      Additional Evidence

A.     The Role of Variations in Risk

     So far we only consider movements in intermediary and household risk
aversion (and use the data to separate these two) but other determinants
of returns may also change. One salient possibility is that risks vary over

                                        48
time, and this may be a particular concern for some of the assets we study
with non-linear payoffs (e.g., options or credit). For example, in our model,
the covariance matrix of asset payoffs might fluctuate. Variation in risk is a
concern if more intermediated asset classes become riskier when intermediary
distress increases. We explore this possibility in several ways empirically, by
studying the behavior of various notions of risk including volatility, skewness,
or time varying betas on standard asset pricing factors that include market
risk and liquidity risk among others.
   First, we ask whether intermediary health predicts future risk in a way
that lines up with the pattern of risk premia. To do so, we run the same pre-
dictive regressions as our main table (Table III) but instead of putting future
excess returns on the left-hand-side we use squared future returns. A positive
coefficient indicates higher expected variance when intermediary risk aver-
sion is high. Table V Panel A reports the coefficients from this regression
to assess how intermediary health predicts risk; Internet Appendix Figure
IA11 plots their values. Most importantly, these coefficients do not exhibit
an increasing pattern. The more intermediated asset classes do not appear
relatively riskier in times of high intermediary distress, so future risk does not
qualitatively explain the increasing pattern of risk premiums that constitute
our main result. In addition, the coefficients are, on average, slightly positive
but much smaller in magnitude than the elasticities documented earlier. In
particular, in response to a one-standard deviation increase in intermediary
risk aversion, variance increases by about 20% while the risk premium in-
creases by close to 100%. This implies that changes in risk cannot account
for the increase in the average risk premium. Measures of risk beyond vari-

                                        49
ance could be relevant to risk premia; we explore some of these possibilities.
In Internet Appendix Figure IA13, we study downside risk and skewness in
addition to variance. We find no support for the idea that crash risk or left
skewness increases for the more intermediated asset returns when intermedi-
ary risk aversion is high. If anything, the results go slightly in the opposite
direction, though are not large quantitatively.



                          [Insert Table V about here.]



    Our assets might exhibit nonlinear exposures to other aggregate risk fac-
tors that variance and skewness do not capture. This would imply variation
in conditional betas, and therefore expected returns, even absent variation in
total risk. To assess whether such a behavior is driving our results, one must
take a stand on what the relevant economic risk factors are. Indeed, without
such a stance, one could just reverse engineer the stochastic discount fac-
tor that prices these 8 asset classes and seemingly explain risk premia, even
though this would be a mechanical result.37 Rather, the interesting question
is whether changes in exposure to some economic sources of risk is the reason
expected returns are changing. One such risk could be captured by the ag-
gregate stock market return. For example, because stocks are the asset class
with the lowest cost, their return might reveal frictionless economic risk. In
Panel B of Table V, we ask whether intermediary risk aversion predicts the

  37
       See for example Kozak, Nagel, and Santosh (2018) for a discussion of the lack of
interpretability of reduced-form factor models.




                                           50
covariance of returns with the market.38 While the covariance with the mar-
ket appears to increase somewhat across the asset classes in times of high
intermediary risk aversion, the magnitudes are small relative to the change in
expected returns we have documented. And more importantly, the increases
are less pronounced for more intermediated asset classes, ruling out these
variations as an explanation for our main results. In Panel C, we consider
the exposure to the liquidity factor of Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). As
we have discussed earlier, differential exposures to liquidity could be an al-
ternative mechanism by which intermediaries affect risk premia. However,
the changes in exposure to liquidity are tiny and do not exhibit an increas-
ing pattern. So time-varying exposure to liquidity risk does not appear to
explain our findings.
    An alternative way to assess whether time-varying exposures are behind
our findings is to absorb these variations in the predictive regression of re-
turns. This approach allows to consider multiple sources of conditional risk
simultaneously. We do so following the framework in Shanken (1990) where
we explicitly allow intermediary risk aversion I,t to proxy for time-varying
loadings on pre-specified standard risk factors.39 Specifically, we estimate
the following specification:


             ri,t+1 = ai + bI,i × ~I,t +        (0,i,k + 1,i,k ~I,t )fk,t+1 +   i,t+1 ,   (19)
                                            k

   38
        This approach does not rule out richer variation in risk exposure uncorrelated to ~I .
Rather, it just asks if there is variation in the risk exposure correlated with ~I .
   39
        See also Kelly et al. (2019).




                                                51
with a set of returns on K risk factors fk,t+1 , k = 1, ..., K . If time-varying
exposure to these risk factors is not driving our main results, then the inclu-
sion of the interaction ~I,t × fk,t+1 (that is, entertaining the possibility that
1,i,k = 0) will not affect the estimates of bI,i .40 In Internet Appendix Ta-
ble IAXIV, we compare these specifications for various sets of factors to our
baseline. In addition to the market and the liquidity factor, we include the
value and size factors of Fama and French (1993), the momentum factor, and
the short-term reversal factor which has been argued to proxy for liquidity
provision (Nagel (2012)). While the connection of all these factors to specific
sources of economic risk is not always well-established, they have been used
extensively in the reduced-form literature to capture variation in expected
returns. We find that none of these specifications meaningfully affect the
coefficients bi,I and in particular the cross-sectional slope across regression
coefficient moves very little across specifications. Taken together, these re-
sults do not support an explanation of the increasing pattern of predictive
coefficients based on time-varying quantities of risk.
    Finally, controlling for ex-ante (rather than ex-post) measures of risks
in the predictive regressions has little effect on the results. Specifically, we
include time-varying volatilities and market betas in our regressions con-
structed using rolling 5-year regressions for each asset class. Internet Ap-
pendix Table IAXV reports the estimates. The pattern in coefficients on
intermediary health is similar to before, or if anything slightly stronger and
more significant due to the addition of controls. Internet Appendix Figure

   40
        Including the factors in themselves could affect bi,I within our model if they capture
a sizable fraction of shocks to returns.


                                               52
IA12 confirms this result visually, plotting the predictive coefficients and
elasticities.
     Taken together, these results suggest that fluctuations in the quantity of
risk do not drive out the role of intermediary health. We acknowledge that
a time-varying risk story can never be completely ruled out ­ for example
if risk is captured by some other unobserved time-varying covariances we
cannot measure. However, across a large variety of typical risk measures
we find no evidence that time-varying risk goes in the right direction to
qualitatively explain our results.


B.     Evidence from Hedge Fund Returns

     As an alternative to comparing predictability by intermediary health
across asset classes, we compare the properties of more or less complex strate-
gies. We use indices of hedge fund returns from Dow Jones Credit Suisse.
Hedge fund returns are the returns of specialized strategies and asset classes.
We argue that they should respond more to intermediary health than other
assets, more so for more complex strategies. We run our predictive regres-
sions again with stocks on the left of our ranking and various hedge fund
return strategies on the right. We consider long short equity, equity market
neutral, an overall hedge fund index from DJCS of all funds, event driven,
convertible bond arbitrage funds, and fixed income arbitrage funds. While
we acknowledge a detailed ranking of strategies as we pursued earlier across
asset classes is not available, we use guidance from the previous literature
on the complexity of these strategies and the degree sophisticated interme-
diaries are involved in each. We argue that equity strategies are likely more

                                       53
accessible to households. For example, some quant strategies in equities like
value and momentum could be implemented by households though at likely
higher costs. On the other hand, convertible bond arbitrage and fixed income
arbitrage are likely the most difficult for households to engage in. Indeed,
intermediary capital effects have been argued to play an important role in
both of these strategies. Mitchell and Pulvino (2012) state that hedge funds
and arbitrageurs make up 75% of the convertible bond market and docu-
ment significant dislocations in prices following hedge fund redemptions. Hu
et al. (2013) suggest intermediary capital effects cause deviations in fixed
income along the yield curve. Duarte et al. (2007) study specialized fixed
income arbitrage pursued by hedge funds, arguing that these strategies re-
quire significant intellectual capital and leverage. Event-driven strategies
(e.g., merger arbitrage) likely fit in the middle and also exhibit price pres-
sure effects (Mitchell et al., 2004); so does the index of all hedge funds which
is weighted by AUM under each asset class.
   Figure 10 and Internet Appendix Table IAXVI report our results. We find
that predictability is higher for all hedge fund strategies compared to stocks,
consistent with out main hypothesis that these constitute more specialized
strategies that households would have difficulty investing in. Within hedge
fund strategies, we also find that convertible bond arbitrage, fixed income
arbitrage, and event-driven strategies respond more to intermediary health.
Interestingly, the magnitude of predictive coefficients normalized by volatility
for more specialized strategies is comparable to that of the more sophisticated
asset classes of our main sample. Overall, these results are consistent with
the idea that these strategies are more complex and specialized. These results

                                      54
further support the view that intermediaries matter, using separate data on
returns than our main analysis. Thus, they strengthen our conclusions.


                      [Insert Figure 10 about here.]




     V.     Discussion and Relation to Literature

     Having documented our main results, it is useful to contrast our approach
with the existing work on intermediary asset pricing. We find this discussion
more useful ex-post so that we can relate to the literature the particular
aspects of our empirical work and our model.


A.     Contrast with the Euler Equation Approach

     A classic approach to study households' optimization in financial mar-
kets is by studying whether their Euler equation holds. This corresponds to
asking whether their marginal utility is a stochastic discount factor that can
price the cross-section of expected returns. A natural counterpart to this
approach for a view that intermediaries are central to asset pricing is to ask
whether their Euler equation also holds. Several papers empirically evalu-
ate the intermediary Euler equation. For instance Adrian et al. (2014) and
He et al. (2017) construct empirical counterparts of intermediaries' marginal
utility and find empirical success in using these variables to explain the cross-
section of expected returns.
     In our setting, intermediaries have frictionless access to the risky asset
market and therefore their Euler equation always holds. In fact, the portfolio

                                       55
of intermediaries is always mean-variance efficient -- see Equation (7) ­ which
implies their marginal utility is a valid pricing kernel for all assets. However,
in our model this is true independently of whether intermediaries matter for
asset prices. The empirical success of the intermediary Euler equation, while
very useful, only validates the specification of a frictionless demand function
for intermediaries.
   Tests of the household Euler equation can complement this evidence.
In our setting, intermediaries do matter if and only if the household Eu-
ler equation fails.   This is a direct consequence of the observation that
when intermediaries do not matter, prices coincide with the frictionless
benchmark. Specifically, in our model the CAPM does not hold unless
                 -1
      1                   1
 +       C
      I diag
                      +      C
                          H diag
                                      is the identity matrix.
   Since Hansen and Singleton (1983), there is a long literature providing
evidence inconsistent with particular specifications of the Euler equation for
households. It remains somewhat unclear if this empirical failure reflects the
fact that the household Euler equation does not hold, or that we have insuf-
ficient models of household marginal utility, or that data on quantities like
aggregate consumption are poor for these purposes. For example, Greenwald
et al. (2014) argue that movements in aggregate risk aversion appear uncor-
related with standard measures of consumption. Malloy et al. (2009) argue
that stockholder consumption lines up better with asset returns, while pa-
pers such as Constantinides and Duffie (1996) and Schmidt (2015) focus on
household heterogeneity and idiosyncratic risk. Savov (2011) and Kroencke
(2017) argue that measurement of NIPA consumption plays a role in the
failure of the CCAPM. These papers point to failures of the CCAPM for

                                       56
specific reasons related to preferences or measurement. The approach of this
paper is to go beyond these shortcomings and instead to discuss alternative
predictions of the theory, more directly focused on intermediaries.


B.      Micro Evidence

     Our results also relate to "micro" studies which show intermediary fric-
tions mattering in a particular asset class or at a particular point in time. For
example, Siriwardane (2016) shows price dispersion in CDS contracts that
relates to dealer net worth. That is, losses for a particular dealer on other
contracts affect the CDS price that dealer is willing to offer, that is it affects
their risk-bearing capacity. Similarly, Du et al. (2017) document that end
of quarter regulatory constraints for banks affect their risk-bearing capacity
and spill over into FX markets. These end-of-quarter constraints result in
large violations of covered interest parity for short periods of time. Gabaix
et al. (2007) provide evidence that banks are marginal investors in mortgage
backed securities (MBS). Duffie (2010) and He and Krishnamurthy (forth-
coming) provide a host of similar examples.41 These studies are extremely
useful in documenting clean effects of intermediaries on asset prices, by get-
ting as directly as possible to the mechanisms behind intermediary decisions.
However, a limitation is that they typically study specific relative price effects
at particular points in time but do not give a sense of more aggregate effects
of intermediaries. In particular, it could be that the local disruptions they
document "wash out" in the aggregate. By zooming out at a very aggregate

  41
       See also Lou et al. (2013).




                                       57
level, we get directly at broad asset class variation in risk premiums.
   The natural next step is to relate magnitudes of intermediary effects in
the microeconomic studies with those in the aggregate evidence. To do so,
one has to step out of our simple, single intermediary framework, and account
for the structure of the intermediary sector. In Internet Appendix Section
IA.I.E, we extend the model of Section I.B to a richer organization of the
intermediary sector. Using this setting, one can consider both broad shocks
to the entire intermediary sector, or shocks specific to a single intermediary,
and understand the determinants of the price response they imply. However,
we also show that doing so relies crucially on quantifying specific properties
of the intermediation sector. One must measure the degree of substitutability
across various intermediaries and the assets they specialize in.42 For example,
to aggregate the results of Siriwardane (2016), one needs to know how easy
it is for another dealer to access the same CDS contract, and how closely
related are the risks of various CDS contracts. In addition, one needs to
be able to relate the shocks used in various empirical settings to common
measures of risk appetite. Doing so is beyond the scope of this paper, and
we leave this promising avenue open for future research.



                               VI.        Conclusion

   A sufficient condition for intermediaries to matter for asset prices is that
the risk premium of more intermediated assets responds relatively more to

  42
       Morelli et al. (2019) is an example of using such an exercise in the context of emerging
market debt.



                                               58
changes in intermediary risk appetite. This prediction is valid even if inter-
mediary risk appetite is positively correlated with other aggregate drivers
of risk appetite. We provide direct empirical evidence of this pattern of
variation in risk premia. Hence, we argue that intermediaries matter for
a number of key asset classes including CDS, FX, MBS, and commodities.
Quantitatively, a sizable amount of variation in risk premium in these asset
classes is attributable to intermediaries. We view this study as a first step in
quantifying the effect of intermediaries on variation in aggregate asset prices.




                                      59
                        REFERENCES

Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir, 2014, Financial intermediaries
  and the cross-section of asset returns, The Journal of Finance 69, 2557­
  2596.

Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, 2014, Procyclical leverage and value-
  at-risk, Review of Financial Studies 27, 373­403.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2006, Stock return predictability: Is it
  there? The Review of Financial Studies 20, 651­707.

Asvanunt, Attakrit, and Scott Richardson, 2016, The credit risk premium,
  The Journal of Fixed Income 26, 6­24.

Brunnermeier, Markus, and Lasse Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and fund-
  ing liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201­2238.

Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Yuliy Sannikov, 2014, A macroeconomic model
  with a financial sector, The American Economic Review 104, 379­421.

Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A
  consumption-based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Jour-
  nal of Political Economy 107, 205­251.

Campbell, John Y, and Samuel B Thompson, 2008, Predicting excess stock
  returns out of sample: Can anything beat the historical average? The
  Review of Financial Studies 21, 1509­1531.




                                    60
Chen, Hui, Scott Joslin, and Sophie Xiaoyan Ni, 2019, Demand for crash
  insurance, intermediary constraints, and risk premia in financial markets,
  The Review of Financial Studies 32, 228­265.

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Andra Ghent, and Valentin Haddad, 2021, Asset
  insulators, The Review of Financial Studies 34, 1509­1539.

Constantinides, George M, and Darrell Duffie, 1996, Asset pricing with het-
  erogeneous consumers, Journal of Political economy 219­240.

Danielsson, Jon, Hyun Song Shin, and Jean-Pierre Zigrand, 2011, Balance
  sheet capacity and endogenous risk, working paper .

Dew-Becker, Ian, Stefano Giglio, Anh Le, and Marius Rodriguez, 2017, The
  price of variance risk, Journal of Financial Economics 123, 225 ­ 250.

Diep, Peter, Andrea L Eisfeldt, and Scott A Richardson, Forthcoming, Pre-
  payment risk and expected mbs returns, Journal of Finance .

Du, Wenxin, Alexander Tepper, and Adrien Verdelhan, 2017, Deviations
  from covered interest rate parity, Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Duarte, Jefferson, Francis A Longstaff, and Fan Yu, 2007, Risk and return
  in fixed-income arbitrage: Nickels in front of a steamroller? The Review
  of Financial Studies 20, 769­811.

Duffie, Darrell, 2010, Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-
  moving capital, The Journal of finance 65, 1237­1267.



                                      61
Eisfeldt, Andrea L, Hanno N Lustig, and Lei Zhang, 2017, Risk and return
  in segmented markets with expertise, Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the
  returns on stocks and bond, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3­56.

Fleckenstein, Matthias, Francis A. Longstaff, and Hanno Lustig, 2014, The
  tips-treasury bond puzzle, The Journal of Finance 69, 2151­2197.

Gabaix, Xavier, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Olivier Vigneron, 2007, Limits
  of arbitrage: Theory and evidence from the mortgage-backed securities
  market, The Journal of Finance 62, 557­595.

Garleanu, Nicolae, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2011, Margin-based asset pric-
  ing and deviations from the law of one price, The Review of Financial
  Studies 24, 1980­2022.

Gilchrist, Simon, and Egon Zakrajek, 2012, Credit spreads and business cycle
  fluctuations, American Economic Review 102, 1692­1720.

Gorton, Gary, and K Geert Rouwenhorst, 2006, Facts and fantasies about
  commodity futures, Financial Analysts Journal 62, 47­68.

Greenwald, Daniel L., Martin Lettau, and Sydney C. Ludvigson, 2014, The
  origins of stock market fluctuations, working paper .

Haddad, Valentin, Serhiy Kozak, and Shrihari Santosh, 2020, Factor timing,
  The Review of Financial Studies 33, 1980­2018.



                                     62
Haddad, Valentin, and David Sraer, 2020, The banking view of bond risk
  premia, The Journal of Finance 75, 2465­2502.

Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consump-
  tion, risk aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns, Journal of
  political economy 91, 249­265.

He, Zhiguo, Bryan Kelly, and Asaf Manela, 2017, Intermediary asset pricing:
  New evidence from many asset classes, Journal of Financial Economics
  forthcoming.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary asset pricing,
  The American Economic Review 103, 732­770.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2019, A macroeconomic framework
  for quantifying systemic risk, American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
  nomics 11, 1­37.

He, Zhiguo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy, forthcoming, Intermediary asset
  pricing and the financial crisis, Annual Review of Financial Economics .

Hodrick, Robert J, 1992, Dividend yields and expected stock returns: Al-
  ternative procedures for inference and measurement, Review of Financial
  Studies 5, 357­86.

Hu, Grace Xing, Jun Pan, and Jiang Wang, 2013, Noise as information for
  illiquidity, The Journal of Finance 68, 2341­2382.

Kelly, Bryan T, Seth Pruitt, and Yinan Su, 2019, Characteristics are covari-



                                     63
  ances: A unified model of risk and return, Journal of Financial Economics
  134, 501­524.

Koijen, Ralph SJ, and Motohiro Yogo, 2015, An equilibrium model of in-
  stitutional demand and asset prices, Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh, 2018, Interpreting factor
  models, The Journal of Finance 73, 1183­1223.

Kozak, Serhiy, Stefan Nagel, and Shrihari Santosh, 2020, Shrinking the cross-
  section, Journal of Financial Economics 135, 271­292.

Krishnamurthy, Arvind, 2010, How debt markets have malfunctioned in the
  crisis, Journal of Economic Perspectives 24, 3­28.

Kroencke, Tim A, 2017, Asset pricing without garbage, The Journal of Fi-
  nance 72, 47­98.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Resurrecting the (c)capm: A
  cross-sectional test when risk premia are time-varying, Journal of Political
  Economy 109, 1238­1287.

Lewis, Kurt F., Francis A. Longstaff, and Lubomir Petrasek, 2017, Asset
  mispricing, Working Paper 23231, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lou, Dong, Hongjun Yan, and Jinfan Zhang, 2013, Anticipated and repeated
  shocks in liquid markets, The Review of Financial Studies 26, 1891­1912.




                                     64
Malloy, Christopher J., Tobias J. Moskowitz, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen,
  2009, Long-run stockholder consumption risk and asset returns, Journal
  of Finance 64, 2427­2479.

Mitchell, Mark, Lasse Heje Pedersen, and Todd Pulvino, 2007, Slow moving
  capital, American Economic Review 97, 215­220.

Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino, 2012, Arbitrage crashes and the speed of
  capital, Journal of Financial Economics 104, 469 ­ 490, Market Institu-
  tions, Financial Market Risks and Financial Crisis.

Mitchell, Mark, Todd Pulvino, and Erik Stafford, 2004, Price pressure around
  mergers, The Journal of Finance 59, 31­63.

Morelli, Juan M, Pablo Ottonello, and Diego J Perez, 2019, Global banks
  and systemic debt crises, New York University and University of Michigan
  .

Muir, Tyler, 2017, Financial crises and risk premia, The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics .

Nagel, Stefan, 2012, Evaporating Liquidity, The Review of Financial Studies
  25, 2005­2039.

P´
 astor, L'ubos, 2000, Portfolio selection and asset pricing models, The Jour-
  nal of Finance 55, 179­223.

P´
 astor, L'ubos, and Robert F Stambaugh, 2000, Comparing asset pricing
  models: an investment perspective, Journal of Financial Economics 56,
  335­381.

                                     65
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected
  stock returns, Journal of Political Economy 111, 642­685.

Santos, Tano, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, Habits and leverage, Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Savov, Alexi, 2011, Asset pricing with garbage, The Journal of Finance 66,
  177­201.

Schmidt, Lawrence, 2015, Climbing and falling off the ladder: Asset pricing
  implications of labor market event risk, working paper .

Shanken, Jay, 1990, Intertemporal asset pricing: An empirical investigation,
  Journal of Econometrics 45, 99­120.

Siriwardane, Emil, 2016, Concentrated capital losses and the pricing of cor-
  porate credit risk, working paper, Harvard University .

Stambaugh, Robert F, 1999, Predictive regressions, Journal of Financial
  Economics 54, 375­421.

Zellner, Arnold, 1962, An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated
  regressions and tests for aggregation bias, Journal of the American statis-
  tical Association 57, 348­368.




                                     66
              Table I. Summary statistics of asset returns.
We report means, standard deviations, and Sharpe ratios of excess returns for each of the
asset classes. All numbers are quarterly. The text describes the returns and sources in
detail.


                    (1)      (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)
                  Stocks   Treas.   Options     Sov.    Comm.      FX      MBS      Credit
 E [rt ]          1.50%    0.46%     2.35%     1.97%    1.29%     2.06%    0.09%    0.28%
  (rt )           9.10%    1.91%     4.78%     5.39%    6.28%     5.04%    0.68%    1.31%
 E [rt ]/ (rt )    0.17     0.24      0.49      0.37     0.21      0.41     0.13     0.22
 Observations      167      160       103        65      105       116       97       47




                     Table II. Ranking of asset classes.
Ranking by degree of intermediation by source, with our chosen ranking on the top row.
From left to right is less intermediated asset classes, with relatively easier access of in-
vesting by households, to more intermediated asset classes, with lower participation by
households. The sources for the rankings are: the Flow of Funds (FoF), BIS derivatives
positions, Vale-at-Risk (VaR), and ETF expense ratios. The text explains these sources
and rankings in detail.


 Our Ranking      Stocks   Bonds     Options       Sov Bonds    Comm        FX      MBS        CDS
 FoF              Stocks   Bonds                   Sov Bonds                        MBS
 VaR              Stocks   Bonds                                Comm       FX
 BIS                       Bonds     Options                    Comm       FX                  CDS
 Expense          Stocks   Bonds    Sov Bonds          FX       Comm      Options   MBS        CDS




                                              67
          Table III. Intermediary health and excess returns.
Predictive regressions of future excess returns in each asset class on our proxy for inter-
                                         
mediary risk aversion,  ~I,t . We run: ri,t +1 = ai + bi ×    ~I,t + i,t+1 and report bi . Excess
          
returns ri,t+1 are normalized by their full sample volatility.      ~I,t is the standardized aver-
age of the AEM and HKM intermediary factors. Standard errors are computed using the
reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different
from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using
the bootstrap approach described in Section III.A. The last row, elasticity, computes the
                                          
elasticity of expected returns as bi /E [ri,t +1 ]. See text for more details.



                      (1)       (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)     (6)        (7)        (8)
                    Stocks    Treas.    Options        Sov.    Comm.     FX        MBS      Credit
 I                   0.12      -0.01    0.29***       0.38**    0.18*   0.18*     0.30**    0.57***
                    (0.09)    (0.07)     (0.10)       (0.17)   (0.10)   (0.09)    (0.13)     (0.22)
 Boots. p-value      0.198     0.904     0.005        0.019    0.083     0.056     0.016     0.006
 Observations         167       160       103          65       105       116        97        47
 Adjusted R2         0.008    -0.006     0.075        0.126    0.022     0.021     0.078     0.316
 Elasticity
                     0.71      -0.04      0.58         1.03     0.87     0.43      2.34       2.67




                                                 68
Table IV. Predicting returns with intermediary and household risk
aversion.
Predictive regressions of future excess returns in each asset class on our proxy for in-
                                                                                         
termediary risk aversion,    ~I,t and household risk aversion,        ~H,t . We run: ri,t  +1 =
                                                                                            
ai + bI,i × ~I,t + bH,i ×  ~H,t + i,t+1 and report coefficients bi . Excess returns ri,t      +1
are normalized by their full sample volatility.    ~I,t is the standardized average of the AEM
and HKM intermediary factors.          ~H,t is proxied by the consumption wealth ratio (cay)
from Lettau and Ludvigson (2001). Standard errors are computed using the reverse re-
gression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different from zero
at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the bootstrap
approach described in Section III.A. The last row, elasticity, computes the elasticity of
                            
expected returns as bi /E [ri,t +1 ]. See text for more detail.



                    (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)      (5)     (6)       (7)      (8)
                  Stocks     Treas.   Options         Sov.    Comm.     FX       MBS     Credit
 I                0.15*       -0.00   0.29***        0.36**    0.18*   0.18*    0.31**   0.59**
                  (0.09)     (0.07)    (0.10)        (0.17)   (0.10)   (0.09)   (0.13)   (0.27)
 cay
 H                0.21***     0.06      0.12          0.22     0.01     0.12    0.20*      -0.06
                   (0.07)    (0.07)    (0.12)        (0.14)   (0.12)   (0.11)   (0.11)    (0.34)
 Observations       167       160       103            65      105      116       97        47
 Adjusted R2       0.044     -0.009    0.075         0.144    0.013    0.022    0.092     0.302
 Elasticity
    I               0.91      -0.02     0.58          1.00     0.87    0.43      2.39      2.74
     cay
     H              1.23      0.25      0.24          0.59     0.05    0.29      1.53     -0.26




                                                69
      Table V. Predicting risk with intermediary risk aversion.
Predictive regressions of future risk measures in each asset class on our proxy for interme-
diary risk aversion,  ~I,t . We run: Yi,t+1 = ai + bI,i × ~I,t + i,t+1 and report coefficients
bI,i . Excess returns ri,t+1 are normalized by their full sample volatility. Panel A predicts
                                  2
the square returns, Yi,t+1 = ri,t   +1 . Panel B predicts the exposure to market returns,
Yi,t+1 = ri,t+1 × rM KT,t+1 . Panel C predicts the exposure to the liquidity factor of Pastor
and Stambaugh (2003), Yi,t+1 = ri,t+1 × rLIQ,t+1 . Standard errors are computed using the
reverse regression approach of Hodrick(1992).  ,  , and  means statistically different
from zero at 10, 5 and 1% level of significance, where the p-values are computed using the
bootstrap approach described in Section III.A.
                                                      2
                                  Panel A. Variance (ri,t +1 )
                   (1)        (2)      (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)
                 Stocks     Treas. Options      Sov.      Comm.       FX      MBS     Credit
 I               0.34**      0.17      0.10     0.23        0.30     -0.09    0.15     0.35
                 (0.16)     (0.13)    (0.17)   (0.34)      (0.26)   (0.11)   (0.20)   (0.54)
 Observations      167       160       103       65         105       116      97       47
 Adjusted R2     0.041      -0.002   -0.007    -0.005      0.004    -0.004   -0.004   -0.000


                   Panel   B, Market Risk Exposure (ri,t+1 × rM KT,t+1 )
                   (1)        (2)     (3)      (4)        (5)     (6)    (7)            (8)
                 Stocks     Treas. Options    Sov.     Comm.      FX     MBS          Credit
 I               0.38**      0.07    0.27*    0.24       0.09     0.14   0.11          0.22
                 (0.16)     (0.08)   (0.14)  (0.28)     (0.11)   (0.12) (0.17)        (0.39)
 Observations      167       160      103       65       105      116     97            47
 Adjusted R2     0.057      -0.003   0.046    0.009     -0.004   0.006 -0.003         -0.005


                  Panel C. Liquidity Risk Exposure (ri,t+1 × rLIQ,t+1 )
                   (1)     (2)       (3)      (4)       (5)      (6)     (7)            (8)
                 Stocks Treas. Options       Sov.    Comm.       FX     MBS           Credit
 I                0.07    -0.03    0.27**    0.06      0.14     0.04    0.13           0.00
                 (0.14) (0.06)     (0.14)   (0.14)    (0.18)   (0.10) (0.16)          (0.27)
 Observations     167      160       103      65        105     116      97             47
 Adjusted R2     -0.004 -0.006      0.026   -0.013 -0.004 -0.008 -0.002               -0.022




                                             70
                                                                            Asset 1
                                                  Costc1                     PriceP1




                       Household        Intermediary
                        RiskaversionH   RiskaversionI        Frictionless




                                                    Costc2                  Asset2
                                                                             PriceP2




                              Figure 1. Model setting.
This figure describes the model with two risky assets but this picture easily generalizes to
N assets. We highlight that the household owns the intermediary in the model (though
they may have differing risk aversions) and that the household can also invest directly into
various assets at different costs c1 , c2 . The costs might be higher in some assets (e.g., CDS
markets) than others (e.g., the stock market).




                                                        71
                                                                            Asset 1
                                                  Costc1                     PriceP1




                       Household        Intermediary
                        RiskaversionH   RiskaversionI        Frictionless




                                                    Costc2 c1               Asset2
                                                                             PriceP2




                   Panel A. Response to aggregate risk aversion shock
                   under null




                                                                            Asset 1
                                                  Costc1                     PriceP1




                       Household        Intermediary
                        RiskaversionH   RiskaversionI        Frictionless




                                                    Costc2 c1               Asset2
                                                                             PriceP2




                   Panel B. Response to intermediary risk aversion
                   shock


                                Figure 2. Model shocks.
This figure describes the response of asset prices to risk aversion changes. In Panel A,
we show the response of a risk aversion shock under the null that intermediaries do not
matter (either because c = 0 for all assets or because I = H ) and in this case all risk
premia move proportionally when risk aversion changes. In Panel B, we show the response
of an intermediary risk aversion shock in the case where there are differential costs c across
assets and show how the cross-section of risk premia change.




                                                        72
                                  3
                                  2
                                  1
                                  0
                                  -1
                                  -2




                                                            1972                1985                 1997             2010

                                                                                        Risk Aversion:
                                                                                        Intermediaries
                                                                                        Households




          Figure 3. Intermediary and household risk aversion.
This figure plots our proxy for intermediary risk aversion taken from AEM and HKM in
green. For reference, it also plots aggregate risk aversion implied by a habit model using
aggregate consumption in red.



                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                      Credit
                    Predictability Coefficient bi,I




                                                      0.4
                                                                                        Sov.


                                                                             Options                            MBS


                                                      0.2
                                                                                               Comm. FX

                                                              Stocks



                                                      0.0              Treas.
                                                                         2                4                 6           8
                                                                                       Rank of cost ci




Figure 4. Predictability across asset classes: predictive coefficients.
We plot the predictive coefficients from Table III, which runs predictive regressions of
excess returns on intermediary effective risk aversion. The x-axis is our ranking for how
intermediated each asset class is. The red line is a linear regression fit through these points.
An upward slope indicates more predictability in more intermediated asset classes.



                                                                                         73
                                                                                        Credit                                                                    Credit
                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                  MBS

                              2
       Elasticity bi,I/E(R)




                                                                                                           0.2
                                                                                                      R2




                                                                                                                                          Sov.
                              1                               Sov.
                                                                     Comm.                                 0.1
                                  Stocks                                                                                        Options                     MBS
                                                    Options
                                                                             FX
                                                                                                                                                 Comm. FX
                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                 Stocks
                              0                                                                                           Treas.
                                           Treas.
                                             2                 4             6            8                                 2              4            6           8
                                                          Rank of cost ci                                                             Rank of cost ci


                                           Panel A. Elasticity                                                                  Panel B. R2


Figure 5. Predictability across asset classes: risk premium elastic-
ity and R2 .
Panel A repeats the previous figure using the elasticity of the risk premium to intermediary
risk aversion: the predictive coefficient divided by the sample mean of excess returns in
each asset class. Panel B measures the degree of predictability using the R2 in each
predictive regression across asset classes (see Table III). The x-axis is our ranking for
how intermediated each asset class is. The red line is a linear regression fit through these
points. An upward slope indicates more predictability in more intermediated asset classes.




                                                                                                 74
                                         16.0%
                 Posterior probability




                                         12.0%




                                         8.0%




                                         4.0%



                                                 -0.10          -0.05        0.00       0.05          0.10
                                                         Truncation level of quarterly Sharpe ratio



Figure 6. Posterior probability of less predictability for intermedi-
ated asset classes: the effect of truncation.
We report the posterior probability that the elasticity of risk premium to intermediary
health is lower for more intermediated assets. The x-axis varies the lower bound on
the prior of the unconditional quarterly Sharpe ratio. The different lines correspond to
different criteria for less predictability. The thick black line is for the slope of a linear
regression across elasticities. The thin black line compares the average elasticity of Credit
and MBS relative to the average elasticity of Stocks and Treasuries. The dotted-dash
line compares Stocks and Treasuries to all other asset classes. The dotted line compares
Stocks, Treasuries, and Options to all other asset classes.




                                                                        75
                                                                                               15.0%




         2




                                                                       Posterior probability
                                                                                               10.0%
 Slope




         1
                                                                                               5.0%




         0                                                                                     0.0%

             0.00     0.05       0.10      0.15      0.20      0.25                                    0.00   0.05     0.10     0.15      0.20     0.25
             Standard deviation of prior for quarterly Sharpe ratio                                Standard deviation of prior for quarterly Sharpe ratio

             Panel A. Slope across asset classes                      Panel B. Probability of less predictability for
                                                                      intermediated assets


Figure 7.                    Statistical significance of predictability across asset
classes.
The x-axis varies the standard deviation on the prior of the unconditional quarterly Sharpe
ratio, lower values imply a shrinkage towards the assumption of a constant unconditional
Sharpe ratio across asset classes equal to 0.25. Panel A reports the distribution of the
slope of a linear regression across elasticities: median, 5th, 10th, 90th, and 95th per-
centile. Panel B reports the posterior probability that the elasticity of risk premium to
intermediary health is lower for more intermediated assets. The different lines correspond
to different criteria for less predictability. The thick black line is for the slope of a linear
regression across elasticities. The thin black line compares the average elasticity of Credit
and MBS relative to the average elasticity of Stocks and Treasuries. The dotted-dash
line compares Stocks and Treasuries to all other asset classes. The dotted line compares
Stocks, Treasuries, and Options to all other asset classes.




                                                                76
                                   0.6
                                                                                                                                  Credit                                                                        Sov.
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2   Stocks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MBS




                                                                                                                                               Predictability Coefficient bi,H
 Predictability Coefficient bi,I




                                   0.4
                                                                                                          Sov.                                                                                        Options                  FX
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                                                                                                            MBS
                                                               Options
                                                                                                                                                                                                Treas.
                                   0.2
                                                                                                                 Comm. FX
                                         Stocks                                                                                                                                                                        Comm.
                                                                                                                                                                                 0.0



                                   0.0            Treas.                                                                                                                                                                                  Credit
                                                    2                                                      4            6            8                                                            2              4             6            8
                                                                                                      Rank of cost ci                                                                                       Rank of cost ci

                                              Panel A. Intermediaries                                                                                                                            Panel B. Households


Figure 8. Predictability across asset classes: households versus
intermediaries.
We plot coefficients from a predictive regressions of excess returns on intermediary effective
risk aversion and household risk aversion, proxied by the consumption wealth ratio cay .
The x-axis is our ranking for how intermediated each asset class is. Panel A shows the
pattern of coefficients on intermediary risk aversion, and Panel B shows this for household
risk aversion. The red line is a linear regression fit through these points. An upward slope
indicates more predictability in more intermediated asset classes, and vice versa. See text
for more details.
                                                        Fraction of Variance of Expected Returns




                                                                                                   100%




                                                                                                   75%




                                                                                                   50%




                                                                                                   25%




                                                                                                    0%

                                                                                                           Stocks   Treas. Options   Sov.     Comm.                                     FX        MBS     Credit

                                                                                                                            Household         ?                                    Intermediary




                                           Figure 9. Decomposition of risk premium variation.
This figure plots lower bounds of variation in risk premia coming from households and
intermediaries for each asset class using the pattern of predictability across the asset
classes. See text for details.


                                                                                                                                         77
                                                                                                                                  2.0
                                                                                  Cvtbl Arb                                                                                                FI Arb
 Predictability Coefficient bi,I




                                   0.3
                                                                                              FI Arb                                                                           Cvtbl Arb
                                                                                                                                  1.5




                                                                                                           Elasticity bi,I/E(R)
                                                                                                                                                         Mkt Ntrl
                                                                         Evt Drvn

                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                  1.0
                                              L-S Equity
                                                            DJCS Index

                                                                                                                                        Stocks
                                                      Mkt Ntrl                                                                               L-S Equity                 Evt Drvn
                                         Stocks
                                                                                                                                  0.5                         DJCS Index
                                   0.1
                                                  2                4                 6                                                               2              4              6
                                                           Rank of cost ci                                                                                   Rank of cost ci

                                         Panel A. Volatility Normalization                                                                          Panel B. Elasticity

                                                                                                                                        Cvtbl Arb


                                                                  0.09



                                                                                                                                                    FI Arb
                                                                  0.06
                                                             R2




                                                                                                                  Evt Drvn
                                                                  0.03

                                                                              L-S Equity
                                                                                                  DJCS Index
                                                                         Stocks
                                                                                          Mkt Ntrl
                                                                  0.00


                                                                                     2                 4                                   6
                                                                                                 Rank of cost ci

                                                                                         Panel C. R2


                                                      Figure 10. Hedge fund strategy returns.
This figure reports the behavior of risk premiums across stocks and hedge fund returns by
category: long short equity, market neutral equity, the DJCS hedge fund index weighted
across all hedge fund styles, event driven, convertible bond arbitrage, and fixed income
                                  
arbitrage. The top panel runs: ri,t +1 = ai + bi ×    ~I,t + i,t+1 and reports bi across fund
                            
categories. Excess returns ri,t+1 are normalized by their full sample volatility. The lower
right panel reports the R2 in this predictive regression. The lower left panel gives the risk
premia elasticity found by running ri,t+k /E [ri,t+k ] = ai + bi ~I,t + i,t+k . The right hand
side variable I,t that measures intermediary health is an equal weighted average of the
AEM and HKM factors. See text for more details.




                                                                                                  78
