                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF LOCAL ECONOMIC SHOCKS THROUGH
                        MIGRANT NETWORKS

                                   María Esther Caballero
                                       Brian Cadena
                                     Brian K. Kovak

                                     Working Paper 28696
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28696


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




This work has benefited from research, administrative, and computing support provided by the
University of Colorado Population Center (CUPC; Project 2P2CHD066613-06), funded by the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD).
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the
official views of CUPC or NICHD. This research was funded in part by a grant from the Russell
Sage Foundation's Race, Ethnicity, and Immigration Program. Laura Goyeneche provided
excellent research assistance. Special thanks to Ambassador Juan Carlos Mendoza, Edith Soto
Ramirez, Mark Hugo Lopez, Caue Dobbin, and Melanie Morten for assistance with data access
and interpretation. Thanks to Treb Allen, Caue Dobbin, Chloe East, Ethan Lewis, Philip Luck,
Hani Mansour, Craig McIntosh, Melanie Morten, Andrea Velasquez, and various seminar
participants for helpful comments. Remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by María Esther Caballero, Brian Cadena, and Brian K. Kovak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The International Transmission of Local Economic Shocks Through Migrant Networks
María Esther Caballero, Brian Cadena, and Brian K. Kovak
NBER Working Paper No. 28696
April 2021
JEL No. F22,J21,J23,J61,R23

                                         ABSTRACT

Using newly validated data on geographic migration networks, we study how labor demand
shocks in the United States propagate across the border with Mexico. We show that the large
exogenous decline in US employment brought about by the Great Recession affected
demographic and economic outcomes in Mexican communities that were highly connected to the
most affected markets in the US. In the Mexican locations with strong initial ties to the hardest
hit US migrant destinations, return migration increased, emigration decreased, and remittance
receipt declined. These changes significantly increased local employment and hours worked, but
wages were unaffected. Investment in durable goods and children's education also slowed in these
communities. These findings document the effects in Mexico when potential migrants lose
access to a strong US labor market, providing insight regarding the potential impacts of stricter
US migration restrictions.

María Esther Caballero                          Brian K. Kovak
H. John Heinz III College                       H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University                      Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3018                    4800 Forbes Avenue, HBH 3012
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                            Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mcaballe@cmu.edu                                and NBER
                                                bkovak@cmu.edu
Brian Cadena
Department of Economics
University of Colorado Boulder
256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
http://spot.colorado.edu/~cadenab/
brian.cadena@colorado.edu
1         Introduction

Goods trade and capital flows are well-studied economic mechanisms that integrate markets across
international borders, but international migration represents another potentially equilibrating force
(Chiswick and Hatton 2003). International migration is driven partly by economic incentives, with
migrants responding to relative economic conditions in sending and receiving locations. Research
suggests that potential migrants choose destinations with higher expected earnings, and their choices
affect the size and composition of the labor force in source and destination communities (Hanson and
Spilimbergo 1999, Borjas 2001, Cadena 2013, Cadena and Kovak 2016). This earnings-maximizing
behavior implies that local labor market conditions in potential destinations will affect demographic
and economic outcomes in sending locations by changing both migration choices and the remittance
behavior of existing migrants.
        In this paper, we study how changes in US labor demand affect migration, demographic, and
economic outcomes in migration-network-connected communities in Mexico. The United States
is by far the most important destination for migrants from Mexico, as 98 percent of Mexicans
living abroad are in the US and approximately 10 percent of the Mexican-born population lives
in the United States.1 Changes in US labor demand should thus have important consequences in
Mexican sending communities. We focus on the effects of US labor demand declines during the
Great Recession and show that these demand shocks affect outcomes across an international border
in Mexican sending areas with strong ties to the hardest-hit US local labor markets. Our focus on
sending communities contrasts with that of most of the literature on the economics of Mexico-US
migration, which primarily evaluates the impacts of Mexican migration on US destination markets.2
We know relatively little about the effects of the US labor market on outcomes in Mexico because of
the lack of detailed information connecting migrants' sources and destinations at the sub-national
level.
    1
      Numbers living in the US and in other countries are available in Secretar´  ia de Relaciones Exteriores (2015).
Population numbers for 2010 and 2015 are available at https://www.inegi.org.mx/temas/estructura/.
    2
      See National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2017) for a survey of the literature on the effects
of immigration on earnings, employment, and wages in destination countries, and Mishra (2014) for a survey of the
literature on the effects of emigration on wages in source countries.


                                                           1
       We overcome this challenge using newly validated administrative data from the Matr´
                                                                                         icula Con-
sular de Alta Seguridad (MCAS) identification card program. These data measure the distribution
of US commuting zones chosen by migrants from each Mexican municipio (similar to a US county).
This network measure has far more geographic detail than is available in other data sources, allow-
ing us to observe each Mexican sending community's ties to each US local labor market.3 We derive
a reduced-form estimating equation and shock measure from a simple location choice model, which
shows how to leverage two key sources of variation: the heterogeneity across US commuting zones in
employment declines during the Great Recession and differences in migration network connections
between each Mexican municipio and each US destination. The resulting research design compares
the change in outcomes between source municipios whose migrants face larger and smaller effective
declines in US employment given their source location's mix of US destinations.
       In order for this analysis to have a causal interpretation, a municipio's network-weighted US
demand shock must be uncorrelated with other factors affecting its demographic and economic
outcomes. This exogeneity assumption is likely to hold in part because the relevant demand shocks
for each municipio occur in another country (the US) and are thus unlikely to be related to other
changes in Mexican source communities. To strengthen the causal interpretation, we include Mexi-
can state fixed effects so that we compare only geographically proximate municipios, and we allow for
differential trends based on pre-existing characteristics of the source community. Further, we follow
the model-motivated estimation strategy by controlling for contemporaneous changes in observ-
able source-level characteristics such as drug-related violence and local trade shocks, and network-
weighted averages of destination-level changes in local immigration enforcement policy. The results
are robust to the inclusion of these controls, bolstering the interpretation of the key coefficient as
the causal effect of declining US labor demand on Mexican source community outcomes.
       Using Mexican Census data we find that source communities with strong initial ties to the US
destinations hardest-hit by the Recession experienced faster population growth, driven in large part
   3
     Caballero, Cadena and Kovak (2018) confirm the quality and representativeness of the MCAS data by comparing
it against high quality household survey data. Other papers using various versions of the MCAS data include Albert
and Monras (2019), Allen, Dobbin and Morten (2019), and Tian, Caballero and Kovak (2020).



                                                        2
by increased return migration and decreased emigration. The change in migration also substantially
increased the share of the local workforce that is male in these source communities. Beyond the
movement of people, we also find a decline in the likelihood that households receive remittances in
Mexican sources facing larger US labor demand declines.
      These changes in population size and composition directly lead to a substantial increase in the
size of the local labor force. Further, the loss of US remittance income creates an incentive for
additional household members to enter the labor force. Using data from the Mexican Economic
Census, we examine the impact of these changes on municipio-level labor market outcomes. As
expected, we find clear evidence of an expansion in labor supply, with source communities facing
the largest declines in US employment opportunities seeing increases in employment and total hours
worked, especially among women. We reinforce this result with descriptive evidence showing that
the relationship between labor supply and US labor demand shocks appears only in households
with migrants in the US. Interestingly, we find no evidence that this expansion of labor supply led
to a decrease in local wages, a result that is consistent with much of the literature on the effect of
immigration on host labor markets.4 We then document the effects of declining US labor demand on
household investment behavior, both in durable goods and human capital. We find that municipios
facing larger US job losses see slower growth in the ownership of televisions (and minimal estimated
effects on other appliances) and that children in these communities are less likely to remain in
school, especially at late primary school ages.
      Taken together, these results demonstrate that migrant networks transmit changes in US local
labor demand across the southern border with Mexico, leading to significant effects on a wide variety
of outcomes in sending areas. Further, because our analysis focuses on job loss among migrants, the
results show how losing access to US employment affects economic outcomes in Mexican migrant-
sending communities. Policymakers have recently proposed limiting some migrants' ability to work
in the US through other means, such as mandatory nationwide E-Verify, which would require firms
to check a nationwide electronic database to see whether a job applicant has legal authorization
  4
      See National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2017) for a thorough literature review.



                                                          3
to work before hiring them.5 Thus, in addition to documenting the impacts of the US Great
Recession across Mexican communities, our findings provide insight regarding the potential impacts
of migration restrictions currently under consideration.
       This paper contributes to multiple strands of literature. First, as mentioned above, many papers
find that international migrants' location choices respond to local labor market conditions. Borjas
(2001) simulated how foreign-born workers' location choices might equalize native workers' wages
across regional labor markets in the destination country, and Cadena and Kovak (2016) empirically
measure these equalizing effects, showing that a metropolitan area's local population of Mexican-
born workers with no more than a high school degree was strongly responsive to changes in local
labor demand during the Great Recession.6 Our results here reinforce the idea that, in addition to
internal migration, international migration also contributes to the reallocation of migrants across
US markets. If this behavior applies more generally, it poses an additional challenge in identifying
the effects of immigration on destination markets that is not addressed by standard enclave-based
instruments.7 These instruments are designed to address endogenous sorting across destinations
among those who choose to migrate. Our results imply that local labor demand conditions in the
relevant subset of potential migrant destinations influence the choice of whether to migrate inter-
nationally, raising the likelihood of reverse causality between destination labor market conditions
and the source-level migrant flows used to construct enclave-based instruments.
       Second, this study expands our understanding of the role networks play in driving interna-
tional migration. Larger numbers of migrants from a sending community increase the likelihood
   5
     Related papers document population responses to Arizona's statewide E-Verify policy, with migration results
similar to what we find in this paper (Bohn, Lofstrom and Raphael 2014, Caballero et al. 2018). The Comprehensive
Immigration Reform Bill that passed the US Senate in 2013 included a mandatory national E-Verify provision. More
recently, in February 2021, Senators Romney and Cotton proposed universal E-Verify as a condition for raising the
federal minimum wage to $10 (King 2021).
   6
     Clemens (2017) also exploits the geographic variation in unemployment during the Great Recession to evaluate
the effects of Mexican migrant labor supply on native employment in the US agricultural sector, finding that foreign-
worker competition in a recessionary environment caused a negative but small impact on native employment in this
sector.
   7
     This type of instrument was first introduced by Altonji and Card (1991), based on results in Bartel (1989).
Although some papers attempt to identify specific source-level shocks to predict aggregate inflows from each
source(Llull 2018), most papers simply assume that the total inflow from each source is exogenous. Jaeger, Ruist
and Stuhler (2019) provide a more complete overview of this literature and offer an independent critique of the
instrument based on the dynamics of adjustment to previous waves of migration.


                                                         4
of subsequent migration by lowering migration costs, especially for those with relatively low levels
of education (Massey and Espinosa 1997, Winters, de Janvry and Sadoulet 2001, McKenzie and
Rapoport 2007, Garip and Asad 2016). Migrant networks are also important in determining mi-
grants' destination locations, occupational choices, and labor market success (Munshi 2003, Edin,
Fredriksson and °
                Aslund 2003). We extend this literature by showing that migrant networks also de-
termine how source-location outcomes are affected by differences in foreign demand changes across
locations within a single destination country.
      Third, our results relate to the substantial literature examining the effects of migration on family
members left behind. As summarized nicely in Antman (2013), demand shocks at the destination
are one of two commonly used instruments in this body of work.8 Relative to this literature, our
analysis is distinct in two ways. First, we consider the effects of a decline in destination labor market
opportunities and thus the effects of increased return migration, deferred emigration, and a decline
in remittances. We therefore examine the inverse of typical studies in this literature, which focus
on the effects of emigration. The second distinction is that we consider outcomes at the municipio
level rather than the household level. This unit of analysis allows us to measure the overall effects
on local markets including any cross-household spillovers resulting from spatial equilibrium and
allows us to use a wide array of high-quality survey and administrative data sources to measure
municipio-level outcomes.
      Finally, we extend the literature considering how changes in destination-market labor demand
or policies affect sending communities. Caballero et al. (2018) and Allen et al. (2019) use MCAS
migration network data to show that migration enforcement reduces international migration between
affected sources and destinations, and Caballero (2020) uses the rollout of the Secure Communities
program to show that local migration enforcement at the destination reduces school enrollment in
the most affected sources. The studies most closely related to the present paper consider the effects
of US labor demand conditions on economic outcomes in Mexico, such as occupational choices,
entrepreneurship, inequality, and education (McKenzie and Rapoport 2007, Schnabl 2007, Fajardo,
  8
      Examples include Antman (2011) and Cortes (2015).



                                                          5
Gutierrez and Larreguy 2017, Conover, Khamis and Pearlman 2021).9 We make a number of
contributions relative to this prior literature. First, our simple location choice model clarifies how
to combine information on migration network connections, variation in labor demand across US
destinations, and source locations' exposure to the US labor market in an internally consistent
research design. We also use uniquely detailed geographic information in the US and Mexico.
This detail allows us to measure shocks to well-defined US local labor markets (commuting zones)
and to compare outcomes among municipios within the same Mexican state, strengthening causal
identification. Further, by focusing on municipios, we are able to examine the impact of US job loss
on a wide variety of outcomes using reliable full-count tabulations from multiple Mexican datasets.
       Another set of papers considers the effects of foreign demand on sending communities in countries
other than the US and Mexico. Yang (2008) and Theoharides (2018) combine variation in the
historical destination countries of migrants from different source communities within the Philippines
with destination-level shocks.10 Our approach is similar, but it benefits from using variation in labor
demand across migrant destinations within the same country (the US). Because each municipio
sends migrants primarily to the US, our analysis is robust to other nationwide changes to the
attractiveness of living in the destination, including immigration enforcement or visa availability.
In our context, there is also less scope for selection into migration to particular destinations based
on unobserved source characteristics that may affect the outcomes ­ migrant sources connected to
San Antonio vs. Chicago are likely more similar to each other than are sources sending migrants
to Germany vs. Qatar. Dinkelman and Mariotti (2016) and Dinkelman, Kumchulesi and Mariotti
(2017) leverage the exogenous imposition and later lifting of emigration restrictions in Malawi to
yield highly credible estimates of the causal effects of remittances on educational attainment, capital
accumulation, and the structure of rural labor markets in migrant sources. In the absence of such
policy changes in the Mexican context, our approach combines shocks across migrant destinations
   9
     In historical contexts, Kosack (forthcoming) studies the effect of differential access to the US Bracero program
on Mexican human capital investment, and Brum (2019) studies the effects of economic shocks in US counties on
migration from Italian municipalities.
  10
     Yang (2008) uses exchange rate changes that alter the domestic value of remittances from different source
countries, and Theoharides (2018) uses the overall flow of migrants from the Philippines to each source country.



                                                         6
with persistent geographic migrant networks to generate similar variation across migrant sources in
access to higher-paying foreign labor markets.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces our novel dataset and
demonstrates that historical settlement patterns led to substantial variation in how Mexican source
municipios experienced the US Great Recession. Section 3 provides the location choice model that
leads to our estimation strategy. Section 4 discusses the variety of US and Mexican data sources we
compile to execute our analysis. Section 5 shows that larger negative labor demand shocks in the US
led to increases in source population through both increased return migration decreased emigration,
as well as a decline in the share of households receiving remittances. Section 6 then demonstrates
that these changes increased local employment without decreasing average wages but that they led
to a slowdown in local appliance purchases and a reduction in school enrollment among children.
Section 7 concludes.



2     Motivation and Context

The central analysis in this paper is based on the idea that potential migrants from different
Mexican source communities face different changes in US labor demand. This variation comes from
two sources: 1) changes in local labor demand were different across US local labor markets, and 2)
migrant-sending communities in Mexico have historical ties to different sets of destinations within
the US. In this section, we provide descriptive evidence supporting each of these two key facts.


2.1    Geographic Variation in Job Loss During the Great Recession

Identifying labor demand shocks is generally challenging because observed changes in employment
and earnings normally reflect changes in both labor demand and labor supply. To overcome this
challenge, we take advantage of the unique environment provided by the Great Recession. During
this time period, there was a dramatic reduction in hiring and a large increase in layoffs, but wages
did not fall substantially along with employment (Rothstein 2012, Daly, Hobijn and Wiles 2012).


                                                 7
This pattern suggests that the labor market adjusted primarily along the employment margin rather
than through wage reductions. Given downward-rigid wages, one can measure local labor demand
shocks over the Great Recession period (2006-2010) using only changes in payroll employment
(Cadena and Kovak 2016, Clemens 2017).11 Moreover, as emphasized in Section 3, our focus on
outcomes in Mexico mitigates identification concerns that would have otherwise arisen had we
focused on US outcomes.
       Figure 1 shows the substantial variation in employment changes from 2006-2010 across US local
labor markets. This map uses data from the County Business Patterns (CBP) and the American
Community Surveys (ACS) to show changes in employment in US Commuting Zones (CZ), which
define destination labor markets throughout the paper.12 We account for the industry mix of Mex-
ican workers' US employment by measuring the relevant employment change in each commuting
                  EmpM    Emp2010
                             id -Empid
                                       2006
zone d as            id
                i EmpM            2006
                              Empid
                                              , where Empyear
                                                         id   is employment in industry i in destination
                     d
                            EmpM
commuting zone d and           id
                            EmpM
                                    is the share of Mexican-born workers in commuting zone d working
                               d

in industry i in 2006.13 This measure accounts for the fact that Mexican-born workers are dis-
proportionately represented in industries that are especially sensitive to the business cycle, such
as construction.14 As Figure 1 shows, although most commuting zones experienced a decline in
employment, there was substantial variation, with a 14 percent decline at the 25th percentile and
no change at the 75th percentile.
  11
      If wages are perfectly downward rigid, then negative shifts in labor demand are perfectly captured by changes in
employment. However, our approach is valid whenever the change in local labor demand is proportional to observed
change in employment.
   12
      We aggregate county-level information to the CZ level using the crosswalk in Dorn (2009) (https://www.ddorn.
net/data.htm (file E7)), making manual adjustments to maintain consistent county boundaries over time. Because
the most disaggregated sample available in the ACS is the Public Use Micro Areas (PUMA), we use another crosswalk
from Dorn (2009) to match PUMAS to commuting zones (https://www.ddorn.net/data.htm (file E5)).
   13
      The CBP data provide employment counts for the universe of employment in covered private industries. We fill in
employment changes for industries not covered by the CBP (including government and agriculture) and measure the
CZ-specific share of Mexican individuals working in each industry using data from the 2006 American Community
Survey (ACS) from IPUMS (Ruggles, Flood, Goeken, Grover, Meyer, Pacas and Sobek 2017). We observe 20
separately identifiable industries at the CZ level.
   14
      The main results are qualitatively similar, however, when using unweighted CZ-level employment declines.




                                                          8
2.2       Matr´
              iculas Consulares de Alta Seguridad

In addition to this spatial variation in US labor demand, we leverage variation in the destinations
historically chosen by migrants from different Mexican source communities. We measure this varia-
tion using administrative tabulations from Mexico's Matr´
                                                        icula Consular de Alta Seguridad (MCAS)
program, in which Mexican consulates issue identity cards to Mexican-born individuals living in
the US. The cards, which provide a secure form of identification and verified current residence for
banking and other purposes, are issued primarily to those without authorization to live and work
in the US and who therefore cannot access other forms of identification.15 Caballero et al. (2018)
validated the use of the MCAS data to measure the joint distribution of sending municipios in
Mexico (similar to US counties) and receiving US states by comparing the MCAS data against
well-known household surveys, finding close agreement among the data sources.
       To examine the variation in US destinations for migrants from different source municipios, we
                                        msd
use the MCAS data to calculate           msd
                                               , i.e. the share of migrants born in source municipio s who
                                        d

settled in destination commuting zone d in 2006. We use data from 2006 because it is the first year
the MCAS tabulations are available and because it is prior to the onset of the Great Recession.
To calculate these shares at such a fine of a level of geography, we rely on a customized extract
from the MCAS administrative database that captures Mexican-born individuals' birthplace and
county of residence in the US.16 The publicly available tabulations used in Caballero et al. (2018),
in contrast, report only Mexican migrants' state of residence in the US. We aggregate destination
counties to the commuting zone (CZ) level, continuing to treat CZs as separate local labor markets
within the US.
  15
     See Massey, Rugh and Pren (2010), Caballero et al. (2018), Albert and Monras (2019), and Allen et al. (2019)
for examples of prior work using the MCAS data.
  16
     See Appendix A-2 for details on matching geographic locations in the MCAS extract to municipios and counties.
Special thanks to Melanie Morten for providing the specific version of the extract used in this study.




                                                        9
2.3    Migrants from Nearby Sources Settle in Distinct Destinations

As a motivating example of the variation in migrant destinations, Figure 2 compares the destina-
tion distributions for two Mexican source municipios in the state of Guanajuato: Dolores Hidalgo
and Jaral del Progreso. Our empirical analysis controls for Mexican state fixed effects, so we are
especially interested in within-Mexican-state differences in chosen destinations. Despite these two
source communities' close proximity to each other and thus roughly equal distances to each US
labor market, there are large differences in the US destinations selected by migrants from these two
municipios. Migrants from Dolores Hidalgo tend to concentrate in the commuting zones containing
the main cities of Texas, while migrants from Jaral del Progreso concentrate in Chicago and the
largest cities of California. As shown in Figure 1, the Texas cities faced particularly mild labor
demand declines during the Great Recession, while southern California saw larger negative shocks.
Thus, migrants from Jaral del Progreso experienced a larger effective decline in US labor demand
than did migrants from Dolores Hidalgo.



3     Theoretical Framework and Research Design

To formalize the intuitive idea that potential migrants from different Mexican source locations
experienced the US Great Recession differently, we use a location choice model in which Mexican-
born individuals can choose to live in Mexico or in one of many potential destinations in the
US. Potential migrants benefit from living alongside others from their place of birth, a model
feature motivated by the variation in geographic migrant networks documented in Figure 2. We use
comparative statics from the model to derive a tractable and intuitive expression relating source
municipio population growth to the change in US employment faced by potential migrants from
each source. This expression motivates our reduced-form estimating equation and clarifies the set
of potential confounding variables that must be controlled for in order to identify the causal effect
of US labor demand shocks on Mexican outcomes.




                                                 10
3.1       Location Choice Model

An individual j from Mexican source community s may choose to live in any destination d, including
their municipio of birth s or any of the potential US destination commuting zones. For simplicity, we
assume costless migration and ignore internal migration within Mexico. Individual j 's utility from
choosing destination d depends on three things: the common value vd of living in that location,
which does not depend on the migrant's origin community, a network component reflecting the
presence of prior migrants from the potential migrant's source nsd , and an iid type-I extreme value
shock jsd .17
                                           ujsd = vd + nsd + jsd                                            (1)

Because in the MCAS data we observe migrants' birth location rather than their location prior to
migrating to the US, this expression is the utility of choosing destination d for a person born in
source s, irrespective of their current location. The probability that a person born in s chooses to
live in d is then
                                                   exp (vd + nsd )
                                      Ps (d) =                       .                                      (2)
                                                   d exp (vd + nsd )

       We examine how population growth in each source municipio is affected by a set of shocks to
the value of locating in the various potential destinations. Let Ms be the number of people born
in Mexican source s, and let Msd be the number of people born in source s living in destination
d. The population residing in s is therefore Mss = Ms Ps (s) , i.e. the number of people born in s
multiplied by the probability that a person born in s stays in that location. Assume that the total
number of people born in source s (Ms ) is invariant to changes in destination values (i.e. shocks do
not affect mortality). As shown in Appendix A-1, taking the total derivative of Mss with respect to
changes in values vd for all possible destinations and evaluating the changes in choice probabilities
using (2) yields the following expression relating the proportional change in source s population to
  17
    The parameter  captures the importance of vd relative to the idiosyncratic shock, jsd . The inclusion of  is
only relevant once we parameterize vd in equation (4).




                                                      11
the shocks to the value of living in each potential location:

                                    dMss
                                         = s dvs -             sd dvd                              (3)
                                     Mss                 d=s
                                                                          Ps (d)
                           where s  (1 - Ps (s)) and sd 
                                                                        1 - Ps (s)

This expression is intuitive. The term s is the share of people from source s who had chosen to live
in the US prior to the shock, i.e. the source's baseline exposure to the US labor market. The first
term in square brackets is the change in the value of living in the source community. As its own
conditions improve, it attracts more residents, and this effect is larger when there are more residents
abroad to attract, i.e. when exposure is higher. The second term in square brackets captures the
effects of changing conditions in the US as mediated through the migrant network (nsd in (1)).
This term is a proper weighted average of shocks in US destinations, where the weights, sd , reflect
the baseline distribution of migrants from s across US destinations (d = s). As conditions in the
US labor markets to which source s has existing network connections improve, more people move
abroad, reducing municipio s's resident population.
   To study how changes in labor demand across US destinations affected demographic and eco-
nomic outcomes in Mexican source communities, we parameterize the value of living in each US
destination commuting zone. The common value of living in US location d (= s) depends on
expected earnings and other factors such that


                                      vd = wd · P r(empd ) + d ,                                   (4)


where wd is the real wage and P r(empd ) is the probability of employment, their product is expected
earnings in location d, and d captures other features affecting the attractiveness of destination d.
We take the change in (4) holding wd fixed based on the wage rigidity observed during the Great




                                                  12
Recession (discussed in Section 2), and plug it into (3), yielding the following expression.


                 dMss
                      = s dvs - s                sd wd dP r(empd ) + s             sd dd + s                 (5)
                  Mss                      d=s                               d=s


This expression forms the basis of our reduced form estimation equation, which relates source
municipio population growth to changes in the attractiveness of the source community (dvs ), changes
in employment probabilities across US destinations (dP r(empd )), and other changes affecting the
attractiveness of particular destinations within the U.S (dd ).18


3.2     Estimating Equation

To empirically operationalize (5) we must first define the change in expected earnings in each US
destination in terms of observable quantities. We assume that i) the employment probability facing
Mexican-born residents of d is given by the employment to population ratio among the Mexican-born
population, ii) the baseline employment probability for Mexicans is equal across US destinations, iii)
job losses in a given industry and commuting zone are allocated with equal probability to Mexican-
born and US-born workers, and iv) the baseline real wage for Mexican workers is equal across US
destinations. Given these assumptions (see Appendix A-1),

                                                                       EmpM
                                                                          id   d Empid
                              sd wd dP r(empd ) = w           sd          M
                                                                             ·                               (6)
                        d=s                             d=s        i
                                                                       Empd     Empid


where w is the US wage and  is the baseline employment probability facing Mexican workers in
the US, Empid is employment in industry i in destination d, EmpM
                                                               id is Mexican employment in i

and d, and EmpM
              d is overall Mexican employment in d.
                                                   19
                                                      This shock to expected earnings can be
  18
     Note that we normalize ds = 0, so the dd for d = s reflect changes in the attractiveness of US destination d
relative to staying in Mexico.
  19
     See Appendix A-1 for a step-by-step derivation.




                                                       13
written in the following form, which is helpful in interpreting its scale.20

                                         EmpM
                                            id   d Empid            1                Msd
                                sd          M
                                               ·         =                               d EmpM
                                                                                              d .              (7)
                          d=s        i
                                         Empd     Empid           d =s   Msd   d=s
                                                                                     Md


Note that sd has been replaced by the observed share of Mexican migrants from s who reside in
d: Msd /(     d =s   Msd ). Since        d =s   Msd is the total number of US migrants from s, the right side
of (7) is the number of jobs lost (or gained) per migrant from s. We therefore interpret the US
employment shocks faced by Mexican migrants in terms of US jobs lost per migrant from each
source.
       In addition to US employment shocks, (5) shows that source-municipio population growth is also
affected by changes in amenities in the source municipio (dvs ) or US destinations (dd ). We account
for changes in source-municipio amenities in three ways. First, we include Mexican-state (entidad
federal ) fixed effects, e(s) to account for changes in the value of living in one's home community that
are common to municipios within the same Mexican state. Our identification strategy therefore relies
on within-Mexican-state variation in US labor demand shocks, which comes from both the variation
in the depth of recession shown in Figure 1 and within-state variation in network connections
demonstrated in Figure 2. Second, we present specifications controlling for a vector Xs of changes
in municipio-level characteristics potentially affecting the attractiveness of each source, including
changes in local homicide rates and trade shocks. Third, we present specifications including pre-
Recession differences in outcome growth as additional explanatory variables to control for any
unobserved changes in source-level amenities that vary persistently over time.
       Equation (5) shows that changes in the attractiveness of destinations enter the expression in
a weighted average, where the weights, sd , are identical to those in the US employment shock
measure. We therefore control for weighted averages of changes in CZ-level characteristics, Xd ,
including local immigrant enforcement measures and employment policies. Our results are robust
to including or excluding these various source- and destination-level controls.21
  20
     Thanks to Craig McIntosh for suggesting this interpretation of our shock measure. See Appendix A-1 for a
detailed derivation.
  21
     Table 2 presents specifications with and without the various controls, and Appendix Section A-3 shows specifi-

                                                            14
    Finally, note that all of the terms on the right side of (5) are proportional to the source's
exposure to the US labor market, s . For expositional clarity and to aid in interpreting the associated
regressions, we divide the entire expression by s . We also plug in the controls just discussed and the
observable US employment shock in (6), and replace the parameters , w, and  with reduced-form
regression coefficients,  , , and , yielding the following estimating equation,

           1                             EmpM
                                            id d Empid
             ys =               sd          M
                                                       + e(s) + Xs +      sd Xd + s ,                             (8)
           s              d=s        i
                                         Empd Empid                   d=s



where s = s /s . We have replaced the source population growth with ys to indicate a change in a
generic source-level outcome. Note that the Mexican state fixed effects, e(s) , subsume the standard
intercept term. This equation relates the exposure-normalized change in outcome in municipio
s to the change in US employment faced by migrants from that destination.22 Because dividing
the dependent variable by s may introduce heteroskedasticity, we use feasible GLS weighting to
improve the efficiency of our estimates, following Wooldridge (2013) Section 8.4, and report standard
errors clustered at the Mexican commuting-zone level.23 Mexican commuting zones are contiguous
groups of economically integrated municipios. We assign municipios to Mexican commuting zones
using the crosswalk constructed by David Atkin (Atkin 2016) and by making manual adjustments
for municipios boundaries that changed over time, resulting in 1,829 separate commuting zones in
Mexico.
    Our coefficient of interest,  in (8), compares the change in outcome between municipios in
the same Mexican state whose migrants face larger vs. smaller US employment declines during the
Great Recession. To interpret this relationship as causal, there must be no unobserved variables that
influence municipio outcome growth that are also correlated with the size of the US employment
declines faced by the municipio's migrants. This assumption is plausible in our context because the
cations with subsets of controls for the remaining outcomes.
  22
     Appendix A-3.1 shows that there is extensive variation in the municipio-level US employment shock for all values
of exposure.
  23
     In Appendix A-3.3, we present unweighted results along with Breusch-Pagan test statistics for heteroskedasticity.
This additional analysis supports the conclusion that the weighted analysis is appropriate and improves efficiency.




                                                         15
shocks and outcomes apply to different countries; unobserved developments in Mexican municipios
are unlikely to be related to US labor demand shocks in the municipio's historical migrant desti-
nations. Moreover, the model-derived estimating equation provides clear guidance on the classes
of controls to include in the analysis. As shown in the following sections, our results are robust to
omitting or including these controls and controls for pre-Recession outcome growth.



4        Data and Measurement

Throughout our analysis, we treat Mexican municipios as independent migrant source communi-
ties.24 This is the finest level of geography identifiable across all of our various datasets, and, as
shown in Figure 2, the US destination mix is often quite different even for migrants from geographi-
cally proximate municipios. We treat US Commuting Zones (CZs) as potential migrant destinations
because each CZ is designed to represent an integrated local labor market.
       The US employment shock, the term in square brackets in (8), is calculated using information
on the migration network and changes in US employment from before to after the Great Recession.
As in Section 2.2, we measure the migration network term as sd = msd /                       d   msd , i.e. destination
d's share of MCAS cards issued to migrants from source s in 2006. Empid is employment in industry
i and commuting zone d in 2006 (prior to the Great Recession), and d Empid is its change from
2006 to 2010 (bracketing the Great Recession). We calculate these employment measures using
the County Business Patterns and American Community Surveys as described in Section 2.1.25
EmpM      M
   id /Empd measures the share of Mexican-born workers living in CZ d who work in industry i,

which we calculate using the 2006 American Community Survey. Combining this information as in
(8) allows us to measure the US jobs lost per migrant from each source s.
       The exposure term, s , reflects the share of those born in a given source municipio who live
in the US. This stock of migrants at the source-destination level, Msd , is not directly observable
  24
       For a more detailed discussion of data sources and variable construction summarized in this section, see Appendix
A-2
  25
    We primarily use CBP data, but we fill in data for non-covered industries from the ACS. See footnote 13 for
details.



                                                            16
in any data source that we are aware of. We instead combine 2006 ACS estimates of the stock
of Mexican-born migrants living in each US destination with migrant network information from
MCAS to estimate s . Specifically, we apportion the 2006 Mexican-born population observed in
each destination, Md , to source municipios based the each source's share of identity cards issued to
residents of that destination CZ in 2006:

                                                   msd
                                      Msd =                   Md       d = s.                                     (9)
                                                   s ms d



Finally, we calculate the Mexican-born population living in each source municipio, Mss , using the
2005 Mexican Inter-Censal Count. The exposure for source s is then the share of people from the
source living in the US:
                                                          d=s   Msd
                                             s =                        .                                        (10)
                                                   Mss +        d=s Msd

       We examine the effects of US employment shocks on a variety of demographic and economic
outcomes in Mexican municipios. We measure most outcomes using full-count tabulations from the
2005 Inter-Censal Count and 2000 and 2010 Mexican Censuses of Population. This survey timing
allows us to measure changes in outcomes from 2005 to 2010, spanning the Great Recession, and to
control for pre-existing changes in outcomes from 2000 to 2005. These outcomes include population
growth, return migration, the population sex ratio, educational attainment among adults, house-
hold appliance ownership, and school attendance among children. For emigration and household
remittance receipt, we measure the outcome in the 2010 Census and the pre-existing value in the
2000 Census because the 2005 Inter-Censal Count omits questions on these topics. Finally, we mea-
sure municipio aggregate labor earnings and aggregate hours in the 1999, 2004, and 2009 Mexican
Economic Census. This data source allows us to measure changes in earnings, hours, earnings to
population ratio, and earnings per hour from 2004 to 2009, spanning the Great Recession, and
pre-existing changes from 1999 to 2004.26
  26
    The inclusion of these pre-Recession outcome controls directly addresses the possibility that pre-existing popula-
tion growth differed across sources facing different shocks (Monras 2020). This approach also partly absorbs variation
that might confound the analysis if markets adjust slowly to prior shocks (Jaeger et al. 2019). Because our migra-
tion network data begin in 2006, we are unable to calculate US shocks faced by migrants from different municipios


                                                         17
   In addition to pre-Recession outcome controls, we present specifications controlling for other
municipio-level developments, including changes in the local homicide rate and changes in trade
with the US.27 We control for local homicides to capture the effects of drug-related violence in
Mexico during our study period. We use administrative data on homicides from the Mexican
Statistical Office (INEGI) and measure the number of homicides during 2005-2010 divided by the
2005 population from the Inter-Censal Count. We control for the sharp reduction in trade between
Mexico and the US during the Great Recession using a weighted average of industry-level changes
in trade value from the period 2001-05 to the period 2006-10, weighted by the municipio's initial
industry mix of employment in 2004. Because this trade control has a shift-share structure across
tradable industries, we also control for the share of employment in nontradable sectors in 2004 to
address the "incomplete shares problem" raised by Borusyak, Hull and Jaravel (2019).28
   We also account for changes in US destinations (Xd ) that affect their attractiveness to potential
migrants for reasons other than the employment shocks. These controls include indicators for new
state-level anti-immigrant employment legislation and indicators for new 287(g) agreements that
allow local officials to enforce federal immigration law. Both variables are based on the immigration
policy database complied by Bohn and Santillano (2012). For each of these measures, we follow
(8) and calculate a weighted average of changes in the policy indicators with weights based on the
destination distribution of migrants from the relevant municipio.
   Our analysis focuses on source municipios for which where we can accurately measure both the
US employment shock and key dependent variables. We initially focus on municipio population
growth and on the contributions of emigration and return migration specifically. Because these
dependent variables are measured as shares of the initial population, they are highly sensitive to
measurement error in small-population municipios. Further, the US employment shock requires
accurate measures of each municipio's migrant-destination distribution. To address each of these
during the period that preceded the Great Recession. Moreover isolating demand shocks is more challenging in a
non-recessionary environment.
  27
     Because these controls may themselves be affected by the US employment shocks, we show that our findings are
robust to including or excluding them from the analysis.
  28
     See Appendix A-2 for the details of the construction of these controls.



                                                       18
concerns, we limit the sample to the 866 municipios that had at least 5,000 residents in the year
2005, had exposure s > 0.066 (the 25th percentile), and whose citizens received at least 100 MCAS
cards in 2006. The municipios in our analysis sample account for more than 56 percent of the
working-age Mexican population in 2005, and their residents received nearly 765,000 out of the
roughly 923,000 MCAS identity cards issued in 2006.
   Descriptive statistics appear in Table 1. The difference between the 90th percentile and the 10th
percentile US employment shock is 6.5 percentage points. We will use this difference to interpret the
magnitudes of the estimated effects by comparing municipios facing relatively large and relatively
small US employment declines. The average municipio in our sample had an exposure to the US
labor market (s ) of approximately 25 percent, reflecting the fact that our sample uses municipios
with relatively strong migrant ties to the US. Because we will divide each of the dependent variables
by this exposure variable, interpreting the magnitude of the resulting coefficients requires a reference
level of exposure, and we will use this average in our interpretation. Note that the descriptive
statistics for the outcome variables listed in this table represent the values of the outcome variable
prior to dividing by exposure.
   Our identification strategy relies on within-Mexican-state variation in the network-weighted
US employment shock faced by migrants and potential migrants from different source municipios.
Figure 3 demonstrates the geographic variation in these employment shocks experienced by each
Mexican source community, controlling for Mexican-state fixed effects. We show municipios facing
larger US demand declines in darker blue and municipios connected to smaller declines in lighter
blue. Municipios excluded from our analysis are shown in white. The clear differences in US
employment shocks, even for geographically proximate municipios in the same state, provide the
identifying variation driving the empirical results in the next section.




                                                  19
5        Results for Population Changes and Remittances

Our empirical analysis begins by finding the effect of US employment shocks on the overall growth
of a municipio's population, consistent with the comparative static modeled in Section 3. We then
examine the contribution of both emigration and return migration to the total population response.
Next, we use the same empirical specification to document additional effects on the demographic
composition of the municipio population and the likelihood that households received remittance
income. Together, these initial outcomes are the primary channels through which migrant networks
transmitted US local economic shocks to Mexican sending communities. After finding substantial
effects on these mechanisms, we examine in the next section how the loss of access to a strong US
labor market affected Mexican labor market outcomes and household investment decisions.


5.1       Effects on Population Size and Migration

5.1.1      Population and Migration Measures

Municipio populations are directly observable every five years in the Census and in the Inter-
Censal Count (Conteo). We measure working-age population growth as the proportional change
in population ages 15-64. Both of these surveys also include questions about respondents' current
location and their location of residence 5 years prior to the survey, allowing us to identity return
migrants as those living in Mexico during the survey period and who lived in the US 5 years earlier.29
Given the timing of the surveys, we can identify return migrants who moved from the US to Mexico
during three five-year periods: 1995-2000, 2000-2005, and 2005-2010. We then measure return
migration's contribution to population growth as the number of working-age return migrants to a
given municipio, divided by the community's population at the start of the period. Note that this
measure is not a traditional return migration rate, as the denominator is the municipio population
rather than the number of people born in the municipio who were living abroad.
       Information on emigration is not available in the 2005 Conteo, so we have emigration measures
  29
   The count of return migrants does not include any individuals who moved to the US and back within the five-year
window.


                                                       20
only from the 2000 and 2010 Censuses. These surveys ask households in Mexico whether a household
member emigrated to the US during 1995-2000 or 2005-2010, respectively. Because this question
is available only in the long-form survey, we have information for an approximately 10% sample
of the Mexican population. Although this measure allows us to observe instances where one or
more family members move to the US while some of the household remains in Mexico, it does
not capture whole-household migration, because no one remains in Mexico to be surveyed. Our
emigration measure is the number of working-age emigrants over a five-year interval divided by the
working-age population at the start of the interval.


5.1.2   Results for Population Changes

Table 2 estimates Equation (8) using population growth and migration outcomes. Recall from
Section 3 that we divide all dependent variables by the municipio's exposure to the US labor
market, i.e. the share of people born in municipio s who were living in the US in 2005. This
adjustment accounts for the fact that population growth in sources with more people living in the
US is more affected by any changes in the relative attractiveness of living at home or abroad. In
columns (1)-(3), we provide results for population growth. The coefficient on the US employment
shock is consistently negative and statistically significant, meaning that municipios connected to
US destinations with larger job losses experienced larger increases in local population. Columns
(2) and (3) include additional controls to account for possible omitted variable bias. In column
(2), we add population growth over the prior five year period, which allows for the possibility that
municipios facing more negative demand shocks were previously on systematically different trends
in population growth. Column (3) adds controls of the type suggested by the model, including
weighted averages of newly implemented destination-level immigration policies along with source-
community trade shocks and homicide rates. Including these sets of controls reduces the size of the
coefficient somewhat, but the coefficient of interest in column (3) is still statistically significantly
distinguishable from zero (p< 0.05).
   Interpreting the magnitude of the coefficient requires three pieces of information: the coeffi-


                                                  21
cient estimate, a difference in shock size, and a value for exposure to the US. From Table 1, the
typical municipio in our sample had 25 percent of its population living in the US, and the 90-10
percentile difference in shock size was roughly 0.065. Therefore, the estimate in column (3) im-
plies that when comparing two municipios with average exposure and a substantial difference in
shock size, the more affected municipio experienced 2.3 percentage points faster population growth
((-1.422)(.25)(-.065) = 0.023).


5.1.3      Results for Return Migration and Emigration

A decline in US labor demand should lead to both an increase in return migration to Mexico and
a decline in emigration to the US. Figure 4 confirms this intuition in the aggregate. Following
substantial net migration to the US in the 1990s and early 2000s, during 2005-2010 emigration
to the US fell by 32 percent and return migration to Mexico quadrupled.30 These patterns are
consistent with the interpretation that a decline in labor market opportunities led to a slowdown in
net migration to the US. The remainder of Table 2 leverages spatial variation in demand conditions
to further examine this hypothesis.31
       Because our return migration and emigration measures are scaled by the initial municipio pop-
ulation, they can be interpreted as the contribution of each migration flow to local population
growth.32 The coefficients on the US shock have the expected sign for both outcomes: municipios
exposed to larger US job losses saw substantially larger return migration (columns (4)-(6)) and
smaller emigration (columns (7)-(9)) during the 2005-2010 time period. The coefficients on the US
employment shock are relatively stable across specifications, and the magnitudes are similar (al-
though oppositely signed) for both the return migration and emigration outcomes. This similarity
  30
     The substantial increase in the early 2000s has been documented elsewhere, including in Card and Lewis (2005),
with explanations including the poor economic performance of Mexico after the ratification of the North American
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1990 and the Mexican Peso crisis of 1991 (Chiquiar and Salcedo 2013, Monras
2015, Fajardo et al. 2017). Other analysis of higher-frequency data also shows a substantial slowdown over this time
period, with annual net arrivals of fewer than 200,000 migrants (Passel, Cohn and Gonzalez-Barrera 2012).
  31
     The nationwide emigration numbers shown in this figure are from CONAPO, which does not allow for the
calculation of municipio-specific migration rates.
  32
     Note that internal migration, aging in and out of the working-age sample, and mortality may also affect local
population growth.



                                                        22
suggests that both return migration due to lost jobs and potential migrants choosing not to leave
for the US while demand was weak were important drivers of population adjustment in Mexican
sources. Note that because the return migration and emigration measures are based on different
samples covering different portions of the population, there is scope for substantial differences in
the population growth implied by observed migration flows and the population growth measured
most accurately based on Census head counts.


5.2       Effects on Population Composition and Remittance Receipt

Along with effects on the size of local populations in Mexico, US employment declines may have
altered the composition of the population, particularly because the characteristics of return migrants
differed on average from those of the overall Mexican population. Table 3 and Figure 5 use 2010
Mexican Census data to compare return migrants to non-migrants, demonstrating that return
migrants are much more likely to be male (69 percent vs. 49 percent) and are more likely to have
primary-school education rather than higher or lower levels. They are also more likely to be married,
and they have higher levels of labor force attachment, each of which is likely related to the fact that
return migrants disproportionately fall in the 25-45 age range. Although return migration represents
only a portion of the overall population adjustment, we expect residents who chose not to emigrate
in response to the decline in labor demand to share similar characteristics. The changing migration
flows documented in the prior subsection should therefore lead to changes in the composition of the
local labor force.
       Column (1) of Table 4 examines changes in the female-to-male sex ratio for working-age (16-54)
individuals. The positive coefficient estimate for the US employment shock implies that municipios
facing larger US employment declines had larger declines in the sex ratio, consistent with return
migrants being disproportionately male.33 The coefficient's magnitude implies that the sex ratio
in a municipio facing the 90th percentile shock fell by 0.008 more than in a municipio at the 10th
percentile, which is 20 percent of a standard deviation in the change in sex ratio over this time
  33
   For concision, Table 4 only shows specifications with the full set of controls. Results for alternative specifications
appear in Appendix A-3

                                                           23
period. Based on the comparisons shown in Table 3, it was possible that the US employment
shocks also changed the distribution of educational attainment in affected municipios. The results
in columns (2)-(5) of Table 4, however, show no statistically significant relationship between the
shock and the share of population with any particular level of education. These results imply only
a limited scope for the US shocks to affect wages in Mexican municipios because they alter only
the aggregate amount of labor in a given municipio and not the relative supplies of different skill
levels. Consistent with this interpretation, we find no substantial wage effects in the next section.
   Declines in US labor demand not only reduce the relative value of locating in the US, but they
also decrease migrants' ability to send money back to Mexico. Column (6) of Table 4 examines the
relationship between US shocks and the share of households receiving remittances from abroad in
2010. Because households are not asked about remittance receipt in the Conteo, we control instead
for the year-2000 share of households receiving remittances to account for pre-existing differences
in remittance behavior across municipios.34 The coefficient on the US labor demand shock is
positive and strongly statistically significant, implying that households in the municipios facing
larger declines in US labor demand were less likely to receive remittances, even after controlling
for the baseline remittance share in 2000. The point estimate of 0.6 in column (6) implies that,
for municipios with average exposure to the US, a strongly affected community saw a roughly 1
percentage point larger decline in the share of households receiving remittances compared to a less
affected community ((0.602)(0.25)(-0.065)=0.0098). This is a substantial decrease compared to the
mean of 4 percent.
   Together, the results in this section show that US local labor demand shocks during the Great
Recession affected Mexican sending communities through a variety of channels. Because many US
destination markets became much less attractive during this time period, former migrants returned
to Mexico, and potential migrants chose not to move to the US. These shifts led to increased
population growth in municipios facing larger US labor demand declines and changes in the gender
mix of working-age populations. The decline in US employment opportunities also reduced the share
 34
    This specification is therefore similar to the return migration specification that asks whether more affected
municipios received more return migrants, controlling for the amount of return migration in the prior five years.


                                                       24
of Mexican households receiving remittances from abroad. In the following section, we examine how
these changes in the size and composition of the local labor force and the reduction in household
budgets due to declining remittances affected employment, earnings, and household investment
behavior in migrant source communities.



6        Labor Market and Investment Outcomes

6.1       Labor Market Outcomes

To credibly measure labor market outcomes at the detailed municipio level, we use full-count tabu-
lations from the 2004 and 2009 Mexican Economic Census, which cover all formal economic activity
in Mexico outside agriculture, livestock, forestry and a few service industries.35 These data allow
us to measure municipio-level employment (separately by gender), aggregate yearly earnings, and
aggregate yearly hours worked in covered sectors.
       Given the declines in employment opportunities in the US, we expect households to compensate
by increasing labor supply in Mexico. We first consider changes in the share of the local population
that is employed. Increases in this metric may reflect the higher labor force attachment of return
migrants compared to the broader population (Table 3) or household members newly entering
the labor force. Column (1) of Table 5 examines the change in the municipio employment-to-
population ratio from 2004 to 2009, using employment from the Economic Census and population
from the 2005 Inter-Censal Count or 2010 Census, respectively. All of the specifications in this
table include the full set of controls. The negative coefficient estimates for the US employment
shock imply that sources facing larger US employment declines exhibited larger increases in the
employment to population ratio. Panels B and C make clear that the overall effect in Panel A
is driven almost entirely by women.36 The coefficient of -0.85 in Panel B implies that a strongly
  35
     Service sectors that are not covered by the Economic Census include mass transit, taxis, farmers' insurance
funds, political organizations, and domestic employees (INEGI 2009).
  36
     Although this analysis is not limited to married women, this result is similar to the "added worker effect" in
which married women enter the labor force after their husbands lose employment. See Stephens (2002) for a thorough
review of this literature. In Section 6.1.1, we present descriptive evidence suggesting that differences in labor supply


                                                          25
affected municipio with average exposure to the US experienced a 1.4 percentage point larger
increase in employment to population ratio among women compared to a similar municipio that was
less affected ((-0.847)(0.25)(-0.065)=0.014). Employment rates for men, however, did not change
differentially based on the municipio's US labor demand shock, in spite of the fact that the vast
majority of return migrants were men. This pattern of results suggests that return migrants and
non-emigrants did not substantially crowd out employment in source communities. The loss of
remittance income from higher-paying US jobs, however, led more women to enter the workforce.
   Columns (2)-(4) demonstrate that local labor markets were able to accommodate substantial
increases in the supply of hours worked without substantially reducing wages. The second and
third columns show that both total municipio-level hours worked and total earnings increased in
the most affected source communities. Note that both of these aggregate outcomes are affected
directly by the increase in population shown in the previous section. Comparing two municipios
at the 90th and 10th percentile of the shock distribution, the more affected municipio experienced
a 7 percentage point larger increase in local hours and a 10 percentage point larger gain in total
earnings. If the increase in labor supply had put downward pressure on wages, total earnings would
have risen by a smaller percentage than hours did. Instead, as confirmed in the final column, which
uses earnings per hour as the dependent variable, the negative coefficient on the US shock implies
a small increase in the wage rate for municipios facing more negative US shocks, although this
estimated effect is not statistically significant. Note, however, that we are unable to disaggregate
earnings or hours by gender or migration status, so we cannot directly address whether particular
groups faced downward wage pressure.
   Overall, these results are consistent with the broader international migration literature, which
typically finds modest effects of migration-related population growth on local equilibrium wages
(National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2017). Recall that Table 4 found no
significant effects on the educational composition of municipios' working-age populations. Because
there was no change in the skill mix in affected municipios, the lack of a wage effect could be
are driven primarily by women in households with US migrants.



                                                     26
explained by modest capital adjustments over a five year period (Borjas 2013). Finally, one might
be concerned that municipios in the same Mexican commuting zone might might be part of an
integrated labor market in equilibrium. In Appendix A-3.4, we provide very similar results when
aggregating the unit of analysis to the Mexican commuting zone level, showing that the choice of
Mexican market aggregation does not substantially affect our findings.


6.1.1   Supporting Evidence from Cross-Sectional Analysis

Our interpretation of the results in Table 5 presumes that the observed labor supply responses
occurred in Mexican households with US migrants, i.e. among those who were directly affected
by a loss of US employment opportunities during the Great Recession. An ideal analysis would
assess this interpretation using panel data to observe household-level changes in labor supply in
response to return migration or a loss of remittances. Since no such panel data are available,
as an alternative we examine whether employment probabilities for members of households with
US migrants are more strongly related to the US shocks faced by potential migrants from their
communities compared to households without US migrants.
   We implement this supporting analysis using data from the 2010 Census. We define households
that were exposed to the US labor market as those with either i) a return migrant who had lived
in the US in 2005 but returned to Mexico by 2010 or ii) a former household member who left
for the US after 2005. Individuals living in households meeting this definition are identified by
the indicator function 1(exposedj ) and referred to as "members of exposed households." We then
use the following individual-level regression to ask whether the cross-sectional relationship between
non-migrants' labor supply and US shocks is driven primarily by these individuals with direct ties




                                                 27
to the US labor market.

                                                                       EmpM
                                                                          id d Empid
                  1(employedj ) =1 1(exposedj ) ·            sd                                             (11)
                                                       d=s         i
                                                                       EmpM
                                                                          d   Empid

                                                                                EmpM
                                                                                   id d Empid
                                    + 2 1(exposedj ) + 3               sd
                                                               d=s          i
                                                                                EmpM
                                                                                   d   Empid

                                    + e(s) + Xs +                  sd Xd +       j
                                                             d=s



If reductions in US employment faced by a person's municipio (the terms in square brackets)
increase employment probabilities more for members of migrant households, the estimate of 1 will
be negative.
       The results in Table 6 confirm this expected pattern. Columns (1) and (2) estimate the specifica-
tion in (11) (column (1) omits the controls), and column (3) estimates a more general specification
subsuming all municipio-level terms into municipio fixed effects, including the non-interacted US
employment shock, controls, and Mexican state fixed effects. Panel A shows the results for all
individuals. The interaction term's coefficient, ^1 , is negative and significant in columns (1) and

(2) with state fixed effects, and negative but statistically insignificant in column (3) with municipio
fixed effects. Figure 6 shows a binscatter plot visualizing the variation identifying 1 in column
(1). The gray circles plot the employment share of working-age population for those in unexposed
households (without US migrants) and the black diamonds show employment shares for those in
exposed households. For unexposed households, there is no relationship between the employment
probability and the US employment shock; this is expected because unexposed households by con-
struction were not directly affected by US employment declines. In contrast, there is a strong
negative relationship for members of exposed households. Column (2) in Table 6 confirms that
this pattern holds when including the full battery of controls as well.37 Moreover, just as in Table
5, these employment effects among exposed households are driven almost entirely by women, for
whom we find a significant negative effect even in the very demanding specification in column (3)
  37
    Results are qualitatively similar to those in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6, though a bit less precise, when
controlling for state × exposure status fixed effects.


                                                       28
of Panel B, with municipio fixed effects. These cross-sectional results strongly support the inter-
pretation that when migrants' households lost income due to negative employment shocks during
the US Great Recession, other household members, particularly women, sought to compensate by
entering the labor force.


6.2    Investment Results

If households are unable to fully adapt to a loss of US labor market income, they may adjust
on other consumption and investment margins as well. Table 7 shows the effects of US labor
demand shocks on two sets of investment behaviors: ownership of household durables and human
capital investment via school attendance. Each column provides the results of a separate regression,
returning to the specification in (8) with alternative dependent variables. The first four columns
consider the change in the share of households owning the relevant household durable from 2005 to
2010, including personal computers, washing machines, refrigerators, and televisions. The coefficient
on the US employment shock for televisions is positive and statistically significant, implying that
households in more negatively affected municipios slowed down their purchases of televisions.
   The final three columns use municipio-level school attendance rates among different age groups ­
primary (age 6-12), early secondary (13-15), and late secondary (16-18) ­ as the dependent variables.
The coefficients on the US employment shock are uniformly positive, meaning that declining US
labor demand was associated with decreases in school attendance at all three levels. The coefficient
is precisely measured only for the elementary school age outcome, however, where it implies a 0.4
percentage point larger larger decline in school enrollment for a municipio with average exposure
connected to a very negative shock compared to one with similar exposure but a mild shock.
Together, these results imply that the loss of access to a strong US labor market slowed investment
in affected communities. These results are consistent with Caballero's (2020) findings in which
school enrollment decreased in municipios with stronger migration ties to US destinations that
adopted deportation policies. More generally, these findings are important because education early
in life strongly influences future labor market outcomes. These differences in schooling attendance


                                                 29
across municipios could lead to persistent inequalities among children at pivotal schooling ages
during the Great Recession.



7     Conclusion

This paper documents the role of geographic migrant networks in transmitting the effects of the
US Great Recession across the border to migrant-connected Mexican locations. The empirical
analysis relies on variation in the magnitude of labor demand declines across US commuting zones
and variation in the mix of US destination locations chosen by migrants from different Mexican
municipios. We derive our empirical approach from a simple location choice model, showing how to
combine these sources of variation, and we use administrative data from the Matr´
                                                                                icula Consular de
Alta Seguridad (MCAS) ID card program to observe migrant connections between municipios and
US commuting zones. We compare changes in outcomes between municipios in the same Mexican
state that faced larger vs. smaller declines in US employment and show that the results are robust
to controlling for pre-existing differences in outcomes across municipios and other changes in the
attractiveness of source and destination locations.
    The results reveal that in municipios whose migrants faced larger US labor demand declines,
the working-age population grew faster, return migration increased more, and emigration decreased
more than in municipios facing smaller shocks. Household remittance receipt fell by more in these
source locations as did the female-to-male sex ratio, since return migrants were disproportionately
male. These changes in the size and composition of the local labor force, along with the reductions
in household budgets due to lost remittance income, linked Mexican local labor market outcomes to
US local labor demand shocks. Specifically, the employment-to-population ratio increased by more
in harder hit regions, with the increase happening almost entirely among women. This change in
female labor supply likely reflects households compensating for lost US earnings among migrants.
We also find that households in locations facing more negative US shocks were less likely to purchase
televisions and that school enrollment for children age 6-12 in those locations grew less than in other



                                                  30
locations.
   These findings demonstrate the substantial influence of the US labor market on Mexican de-
mographic and economic outcomes, likely with long-lasting consequences. While this paper studies
changes in US labor demand driven by the Great Recession, one can expect to find similar effects if a
large portion of Mexican migrants lost access to the US labor market due to changes in immigration
and enforcement policies. For example, a well enforced universal E-Verify program would largely
cut off labor market access for unauthorized immigrants, including approximately 43 percent of
Mexican-born residents of the US in 2019 (Gonzalez-Barrera and Krogstad 2019).
   Along with these policy implications, our findings inform the broader literature on the effects of
immigration on local labor markets. Specifically, we find that aggregate outflows from sending
locations are strongly responsive to labor demand conditions in the subset of US destinations
where previous migrants from that source had historically settled. This finding conflicts with
a key assumption behind the most commonly used instrument to correct for the endogeneity of
immigrant inflows, suggesting that alternative approaches may be needed. Finally, these findings
reinforce the conclusion that US-Mexico migration operates through a series of tight connections
between specific sources and destinations. Thus, we expect that any local shocks on one side of the
border are likely to affect outcomes in migrant-connected localities on the other side.




                                                 31
References

Albert, Christoph and Joan Monras, "Immigration and Spatial Equilibrium: the Role of
    Expenditures in the Country of Origin," working paper, 2019.

Allen, Treb, Cau^
                e de Castro Dobbin, and Melanie Morten, "Border Walls," NBER Working
    Paper, 2019, (25267).

Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card, The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
    of Less-skilled Natives, University of Chicago Press, January

Antman, Francisca M, "The intergenerational effects of paternal migration on schooling and
    work: What can we learn from children's time allocations?," Journal of Development Eco-
    nomics, 2011, 96 (2), 200­208.

    , "The impact of migration on family left behind," International handbook on the economics
    of migration, 2013, (p 293).

Atkin, David, "Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico," American
    Economic Review, August 2016, 106 (8), 2046­85.

Bartel, Ann P, "Where do the new US immigrants live?," Journal of Labor Economics, 1989, 7
    (4), 371­391.

Bohn, Sarah and Robert Santillano, "Do local immigration laws impact employment and
    wages? Evidence from the 287 (g) program," Public Policy Institute of California, 2012.

    , Magnus Lofstrom, and Steven Raphael, "Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Workers Act
    reduce the state's unauthorized immigrant population?," Review of Economics and Statistics,
    2014, 96 (2), 258­269.

Borjas, George J, "Does immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?," Brookings papers
    on economic activity, 2001, 2001 (1), 69­119.

    , "The analytics of the wage effect of immigration," IZA Journal of Migration, 2013, 2 (1),
    1­25.

                                               32
Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel, "Quasi-experimental shift-share research
    designs," Mimeo, 2019.

Brum, Matias, "Italian Migration to the United States: The Role of Pioneers' Locations," un-
    published, 2019.

Caballero, Maria E., Brian C. Cadena, and Brian K. Kovak, "Measuring Geographic
    Migration Patterns Using Matr´
                                 iculas Consulares," Demography, 2018, 55 (3), 1119­1145.

Caballero, Mar´
              ia Esther, "The Effects of Immigration Enforcement on Educational Investments
    in Migrants' Source Regions," Working Paper, 2020.

Cadena, Brian C, "Native Competition and Low-Skilled Immigrant Inflows," Journal of Human
    Resources, 2013, 48 (4), 910­944.

Cadena, Brian C. and Brian K. Kovak, "Immigrants Equilibrate Local Labor Markets: Ev-
    idence from the Great Recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2016, 8
    (1), 257­290.

Card, David and Ethan Lewis, "The Diffusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Ex-
    planations and Impacts," Technical Report w11552, National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge, MA August 2005.

Chiquiar, Daniel and Alejandrina Salcedo, "Mexican Migration to the United States: Under-
    lying Economic Factors and Possible Scenarios for Future Flows," Banco de M´
                                                                               exico Working
    Paper, 2013.

Chiswick, Barry and Timothy J Hatton, "International Migration and the Integration of
    Labor Markets," in "Globalization in historical perspective," University of Chicago Press,
    2003, pp. 65­120.

Clemens, Michael, "The Effect of Occupational Visas on Native Employment: Evidence from
    Labor Supply to Farm Jobs in the Great Recession," IZA Discussion Paper Series, 2017,
    (10492).


                                             33
Conover, Emily, Melanie Khamis, and Sarah Pearlman, "Gender Imbalances and Labor
    Market Outcomes: Evidence from Large-Scale Mexican Migration," IZA Journal of Develop-
    ment and Migration, 2021, 12 (1).

Cortes, Patricia, "The feminization of international migration and its effects on the children left
    behind: Evidence from the Philippines," World Development, 2015, 65, 62­78.

Daly, Mary C, Bart Hobijn, and Theodore S Wiles, "Dissecting Aggregate Real Wage
    Fluctuations: Individual Wage Growth and the Composition Effect," FRB-SF Working Paper,
    May 2012, (2011-23).

Dinkelman, Taryn and Martine Mariotti, "The long-run effects of labor migration on human
    capital formation in communities of origin," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
    2016, 8 (4), 1­35.

    , Grace Kumchulesi, and Martine Mariotti, "Labor Migration, Capital Accumulation,
    and the Structure of Rural Labor Markets," Technical Report, Working Paper 2017.

Dorn, David, "Essays on Inequality, Spatial Interaction, and the Demand for Skills," PhD diss.
    3613, University of St. Gallen., 2009.

Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof °
                                              Aslund, "Ethnic enclaves and the economic
    success of immigrants ­ Evidence from a natural experiment," The quarterly journal of eco-
    nomics, 2003, 118 (1), 329­357.

Fajardo, Gustavo, Emilio Gutierrez, and Horacio Larreguy, "Taking One for the Team:
    Shocks at Destination and Households' Supply of Migrants," 2017.

Garip, Filiz and Asad L Asad, "Network effects in Mexico-US migration: disentangling the
    underlying social mechanisms," American Behavioral Scientist, 2016, 60 (10), 1168­1193.

Gonzalez-Barrera, Ana and Jens Manuel Krogstad, "What we know about illegal immigra-
    tion from Mexico," June 2019.




                                                34
Hanson, Gordon H and Antonio Spilimbergo, "Illegal immigration, Border Enforcement, and
    Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the US-Mexico Border," American Economic
    Review, 1999, 89 (5), 1337­1357.

INEGI, "Metodolog´
                 ia de los Censos Econ´
                                      onomicos 2009," Technical Report, Instituto Nacional de
    Estad´
         istica y Geograf´
                         ia, M´
                              exico 2009.

Jaeger, David A., Joakim Ruist, and Jan Stuhler, "Shift-Share Instruments and Dynamic
    Adjustments: The Case of Immigration," unpublished, 2019.

Jr., Melvin Stephens, "Worker Displacement and the Added Worker Effect," Journal of Labor
    Economics, 2002, 20 (3), 504­537.

King, Ledyard, "Republican plan would raise minimum wage to $10 but only if businesses are
    required to ensure worker legality," USA Today, February 23 2021.

Kosack, Edward, "Guest Worker Programs and Human Capital Investment: The Bracero Pro-
    gram in Mexico, 1942-1964," Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.

Llull, Joan, "The effect of immigration on wages: exploiting exogenous variation at the national
    level," Journal of Human Resources, 2018, 53 (3), 608­662.

Massey, Douglas S and Kristin E Espinosa, "What's driving Mexico-US migration? A theo-
    retical, empirical, and policy analysis," American journal of sociology, 1997, 102 (4), 939­999.

Massey, Douglas S., Jacob S. Rugh, and Karen A. Pren, "The Geography of Undocumented
    Mexican Migration," Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos, February 2010, 26 (1), 129­152.

McKenzie, David and Hillel Rapoport, "Network effects and the dynamics of migration and
    inequality: theory and evidence from Mexico," Journal of development Economics, 2007, 84
    (1), 1­24.

Mishra, Prachi, "Emigration and Wages in Source Countries: A Survey of the Empirical Litera-
    ture," in "International Handbook on Migration and Economic Development," Edward Elgar
    Publishing, 2014.


                                                35
Monras, Joan, "Immigration and Wage Dynamics: Evidence from the Mexican Peso Crisis," 2015,
    p. 54.

    , "Economic Shocks and Internal Migration," unpublished, 2020.

Munshi, Kaivan, "Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S. Labor Mar-
    ket," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (2), 549­599.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, The Economic and Fiscal
    Consequences of Immigration, Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2017.

Passel, Jeffrey, D'Vera Cohn, and Ana Gonzalez-Barrera, "Net Migration from Mexico
    Falls to Zero and Perhaps Less," 2012, p. 47.

Pierce, Justin R. and Peter K. Schott, "A Concordance Between U.S. Harmonized System
    Codes and SIC/NAICS Product Classes and Industries," Journal of Economic and Social
    Measurement, 2012, 37 (1-2), 61­96.

Rothstein, Jesse, "The Labor Market Four Years into the Crisis: Assessing Structural Explana-
    tions," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 2012, 65 (3), 467­500.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas,
    and Matthew Sobek, "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 8.0," 2017. Machine-
    readable database. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.

Schnabl, Peter, "Migration and Development in Mexican Communities: Evidence from US Labor
    Demand Shocks," 2007, p. 51.

Secretar´
        ia de Relaciones Exteriores, "Do you know how many Mexicans live abroad?," De-
    cember 2015.

Theoharides, Caroline, "Manila to Malaysia, Quezon to Qatar: International Migration and
    Its Effects on Origin-Country Human Capital," Journal of Human Resources, 2018, 53 (4),
    1022­1049.




                                               36
Tian, Yuan, Mar´
               ia Esther Caballero, and Brian K. Kovak, "Social Learning along Interna-
    tional Migrant Networks," unpublished, 2020.

Winters, Paul, Alain de Janvry, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, "Family and Community Networks
    in Mexico-U.S. Migration," The Journal of Human Resources, 2001, 36 (1), 159.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M, Introductory econometrics: A modern approach, 5th ed.Mason, OH:
    South-Western., 2013.

Yang, Dean, "International migration, remittances and household investment: Evidence from
    Philippine migrants' exchange rate shocks," The Economic Journal, 2008, 118 (528), 591­630.




                                              37
                                 Figure 1: Change in U.S. Employment across CZs




This map shows proportional changes in employment between 2006 and 2010 (bracketing the Great Recession) for each US commuting zone
(CZ), with darker colors indicating larger declines in labor demand. Our measure accounts for Mexican-born workers' industry distribution
of employment in each commuting zone (see main text). We use data from the County Business Patterns (CBP) supplemented with data
from the American Community Survey (ACS) to fill in employment in a few industries that are not covered by the CBP. This variation in
labor demand declines across US destinations leads to variation in network-connected labor demand across Mexican sources with different
destination distributions (as shown in Figure 2).




                                                                  38
                                                 Figure 2: Migrant Destination Distributions by Source Region




39
     These maps show the distributions of U.S. destinations for migrants from two different municipios located in the state of Guanajuato: Dolores Hidalgo and Jaral del Progreso.
     The destination distribution is calculated as the share of 2006 MCAS identity cards issued to migrants living in each US commuting zone among those born in each of the
     source communities, with darker colors indicating a larger share of migrants from the respective source. Despite the proximity of the two source municipios, the faced large
     differences in US labor demand during the Great Recession due to large differences in their destination distribution. Dolores Hidalgo tends to send migrants to US destinations
     that experienced relatively mild labor demand declines, while Jaral del Progreso tends to send migrants to US destinations that experienced large labor demand declines.
       Figure 3: US Employment Shock Measure, Controlling for Mexican-State Fixed Effects




This map shows the distribution of network-connected changes in US labor demand (as defined in the main text) over the time period
of the Great Recession for each Mexican municipio, controlling for Mexican-state fixed effects. Our sample omits municipios (shown in
white) with less than 5,000 residents in 2005, with initial exposure less than 0.066, or with fewer than 100 matriculas issued in 2006. This
sample restriction maintains 56% of the year-2005 working age Mexican population. The 90-10 percentile gap in the network-connected
change in US labor demand distribution is 0.065. Because our analyses include Mexican-state fixed effects as control variables, the
variation displayed in this map is the key identifying variation in our analysis.




                                                                    40
                                       Figure 4: Five-Year Migration Flows Between Mexico and the U.S.


                               2,000



                                                  1632.8           1639.8


                               1,500
        Migrants (thousands)




                                                                                    1112.3
                                                                            994.5
                               1,000


                                                                                                     719.2


                                                                                             495.4
                                500

                                          293.4
                                                           244.2
                                                                                                             Return Migrants
                                                                                                             Emigrants
                                  0
                                           1995-2000       2000-2005        2005-2010        2010-2015



Authors' calculations using data from INEGI and CONAPO. Return migration is calculated using the 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census,
the 2005 Inter-Censal Count (Conteo ) and the 2015 Inter-Censal Survey (Encuesta Intercensal ). The return migration measure counts
the number of people in Mexico reporting living abroad five years prior to the survey. Emigrants are calculated using data from the 2000
and 2010 Mexican Census and data from CONAPO for 2005 and 2015. The measure counts the number of emigrants leaving surveyed
households within the five year period preceding the survey. Note the large increase in return migration to Mexico in 2005-10, during the
US Great Recession.




                                                                            41
                              Figure 5: 2005-2010 Return Migrants' Age Distribution
               0.20
                                                                                 all   return migrants
               0.18

               0.16

               0.14

               0.12

               0.10


               0.08

               0.06

               0.04

               0.02

               0.00
                       5-14   15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-100


Authors' calculations using data from the 2010 Mexican Census. Return migrants are defined as those living in the US in June 2005, five
years prior to the Census. Note that, in comparison to the overall population, return migrants are much more likely to be in the 25-39
age range and less likely to be under 20 and over 60.




                                                                 42
         Figure 6: Employment Share of Working-Age Population vs U.S. Employment Shock
               Employed Share of Working-Age Population




                                                          .6



                                                                                                                         Unexposed Households


                                                          .5




                                                                                                                            Exposed Households

                                                          .4




                                                          .3
                                                               -.15                              -.1                        -.05                 0   .05
                                                                                                                  U.S. Employment Shock
                                                               Points are binscatter means in 48 quantile bins.




This figure shows a binscatter plot of the variation identifying the main coefficient in column (1) of Table 6. Each gray circle shows
the employment share of the working-age population living in households with no US migrants (unexposed households) while each black
diamond shows the employment share of the working-age population living in households with US migrants (exposed households). There is
a strong negative relationship between the employment probability and the US employment shock for exposed households and essentially
no relationship for unexposed households.




                                                                                                                       43
                                               Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                        Obs      Mean       Std. Dev.          p10         p90
     Panel A: Shock Measure and Control Variables
       Exposure                                                          866      0.259       0.138           0.096 0.453
       US Employment Shock                                               866     -0.093       0.030          -0.119 -0.054
       New 287g Policy                                                   866      0.133       0.128           0.032  0.254
       Employment Policy                                                 866      0.174       0.137           0.047  0.360
       Trade Shock ($1000s)                                              866     -8.479       70.479        -13.747 4.706
       Non-tradable share of Employment                                  866      0.722       0.175           0.467  0.902
          Homicide Rate (per 1000)                                       866      0.891       1.329           0.055  2.174

     Panel B: Outcome Variables
       Population growth and Migration - Mexican Population Census
           Population Growth 2005-10               866 0.138       0.079                                      0.065       0.218
           Return Migration 2005-10/Pop2005        866 0.028       0.017                                      0.008       0.051
           Emigration 2005-10/Pop2005              866 0.024       0.021                                      0.006       0.047

         Other Channels - Mexican Population Census
               Sex Ratio (F/M) 2005-10                                   866     -0.046        0.040         -0.098      -0.002
               Less than primary education 2005-10                       866     -0.053        0.020         -0.079      -0.025
               Primary education 2005-10                                 866     0.004         0.040         -0.049      0.051
               Secondary education 2005-10                               866     0.035         0.014          0.020       0.052
               University education 2005-10                              866      0.020        0.012          0.006       0.036
            Households with Remittances 2010                             866      0.040        0.036          0.008       0.093

         Economic Outcomes - Mexican Economic Census
              Log Earnings per Hour 2004-09       864                            0.230         0.477         -0.243       0.659
              Epop 2004-09                        866                            0.018         0.049         -0.012       0.058
              Epop Men 2004-09                    866                            0.014         0.054         -0.030       0.061
              Epop Women 2004-09                  866                            0.021         0.054         -0.003       0.060

         Economic Outcomes - Mexican Population Census
              Computer Ownership 2005-10           866                           0.066         0.034          0.026       0.113
              Washing Machine Ownership 2005-10 866                              0.068         0.043          0.012       0.123
              Refrigerator Ownership 2005-10       866                           0.064         0.045         0.008        0.127
              TV Ownership 2005-10                 866                           0.027         0.039         -0.003       0.077
              Attendance Rate (ages 6-12) 2005-10  866                           0.005         0.011         -0.007       0.018
              Attendance Rate (ages 13-15) 2005-10 866                           0.050         0.040         0.003        0.106
              Attendance Rate (ages 16-18) 2005-10 866                           0.055         0.037         0.008        0.102

This table shows summary statistics for all municipio-level outcomes, the main independent variable, and control variables used in the
analyses. To construct dependent variables used in the regressions, we divide the listed variables by exposure. These values come from
the underlying variable before this division.




                                                                 44
                       Table 2: Population Growth, Return Migration, and Emigration

                                     Population Growth                    Return Migration                        Emigration
                                          2005-10                             2005-10                              2005-10
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)            (7)       (8)          (9)

  US Employment Shock        -3.051***    -1.608***    -1.422**    -0.235**    -0.308***   -0.215*** 0.259*        0.264*      0.349**
                              (0.673)      (0.617)      (0.604)     (0.083)     (0.073)     (0.078)  (0.140)       (0.140)     (0.146)


  Pre-shock Outcome                        0.750**     0.730***                1.616***     1.588***              0.124***     0.112***
                                           (0.126)      (0.130)                 (0.283)      (0.283)               (0.025)      (0.025)


  New 287g Policy                                       0.253*                              0.077***                            0.027
                                                        (0.137)                              (0.018)                           (0.026)


  Employment Policy                                      0.087                                -0.011                            0.003
                                                        (0.096)                              (0.012)                           (0.017)


  Trade Shock                                            -0.131                             0.021**                            0.051***
                                                        (0.178)                             (0.009)                             (0.014)


  Non-tradable share                                   -0.150**                               -0.012                            0.011
  of Employment                                         (0.065)                              (0.008)                           (0.013)


  Homicide Rate                                        -22.307**                           -4.926***                          -7.952***
  2005-10                                               (10.508)                            (1.066)                            (2.741)

    State FE                    Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
    Observations                866          866          866         866         866          866        866        866         866
    R-squared                  0.177        0.571        0.581       0.311       0.513        0.538      0.269      0.269       0.316

This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 population growth, return migration to, and emigration
from each Mexican source municipio. Note that outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8).
We restrict attention to individuals age 15-64. Population growth is defined as the proportional change in population. Return migration
is the number of individuals reporting living in the US 5 years prior to the relevant survey, divided by the municipio population in
the survey year, while emigration is the number of household members who left for the US during the 5 years prior to the relevant
survey, divided by the initial municipio population, measured using the roughly 10% long-form sample from the 2000 or 2010 Census
(emigration information is not available in 2005). We use full-count tabulations from the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo to
calculate population growth and return migration. All specifications in columns (1) to (6) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address
potential heteroskedasticity. The "Pre-shock Outcome" controls in columns (2), (5), and (8) are 2000-2005 population growth, 2000-2005
return migration, and 1995-2000 emigration, respectively. Columns (3), (6), and (9) additionally control for anti-immigrant employment
legislation and new 287(g) agreements across U.S. CZs, trade shocks across municipios (divided by 1000000), share of employment in
Mexico's non-tradable sector, and changes in homicide rates across municipios. All specifications control for Mexican state fixed effects,
and standard errors clustered at the Mexican commuting zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   45
                                      Table 3: Descriptive Statistics, 2010 Census

                         Characteristics                           All      Return Migrants 2005-2010

                         Female                                  51.3%                    31.3%
                         Married                                 42.0%                    57.9%

                         Education
                           Less than primary                     35.5%                    25.8%
                           Primary                               42.8%                    54.5%
                           Secondary                             14.5%                    15.5%
                           University                             7.2%                     4.2%

                         Employment
                          Employed                               50.1%                    62.9 %
                            Self-employed                        27.7%                    31.6%
                            Paid employee                        69.1%                    63.6%
                            Unpaid worker                         3.2%                     4.7%
                          Unemployed                              2.4%                     5.5%
                          Not in the labor force                 47.5%                    31.6%

                         Hourly wage (yr 2000 pesos)              19.64                    18.90


Authors' calculations using data from the 2010 Mexican Census. Return migrants are defined as those living in the US in June 2005,
five years prior to the Census. Hourly wages calculated as (monthly earnings / 4.33) / (weekly hours) and deflated to year 2000 pesos
using the consumer price index (INPC) from INEGI. Average hourly wages omit the top and bottom 1 percent of observations. Note
that, in comparison to the overall population, return migrants are disproportionately male, more likely to be married, more likely to have
primary school education, and more likely to be in the labor force.




                                                                   46
                  Table 4: Sex Ratio, Attainment, and Households Receiving Remittances

                                 Sex Ratio        Less than Primary         Primary       Secondary        University    Household
                             (F/M) 2005-10            2005-10              2005-10        2005-10          2005-10    Remittances 2010
                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)

  US Employment Shock            0.499**                -0.024              0.167           -0.096          0.001            0.602***
                                 (0.242)               (0.145)             (0.224)         (0.107)         (0.075)            (0.143)


  Pre-shock Outcome             -0.214***             0.545***            0.724***        0.892***        0.735***           0.499***
                                 (0.032)               (0.027)             (0.087)         (0.040)         (0.042)            (0.046)


  New 287g Policy                 -0.043              -0.090***           0.111***          -0.030          -0.003             0.005
                                 (0.051)               (0.032)             (0.041)         (0.021)         (0.016)            (0.027)


  Employment Policy               0.012                 0.013               0.006           -0.015          0.003              0.026
                                 (0.038)               (0.023)             (0.031)         (0.013)         (0.021)            (0.018)


  Trade Shock                   -0.074**                -0.028            0.280***       -0.181***          -0.016            0.046**
                                 (0.029)               (0.018)             (0.042)        (0.029)          (0.022)            (0.022)


  Non-tradable share              0.018                0.0005             0.083***          -0.006        -0.032***           0.022*
  of Employment                  (0.023)               (0.014)             (0.019)         (0.012)         (0.007)            (0.013)


  Homicide Rate                 10.085***               2.827             6.232***          0.541           -0.823            -4.990**
  2005-10                        (3.740)               (1.869)             (2.184)         (0.980)         (1.131)             (2.505)

    State FE                       Yes                   Yes                 Yes            Yes              Yes                Yes
    Observations                   866                   866                 866            866              866                866
    R-squared                     0.282                 0.753               0.578          0.748            0.687              0.346

This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in the female to male sex ratio for the working
age population (15-64), the 2005-10 change in the share of the working age population in each education level for each Mexican source
municipio, and the share of households receiving remittances in 2010. Note that outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided
by exposure as in equation (8). We measure the sex ratio and educational attainment using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005
Inter-Censal Count. We calculate the share of households receiving remittances as the number of households reporting receiving income
from relatives living abroad divided by the municipio's total number of households in the Census year, using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican
Census. All specifications in columns (1) to (6) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. The "Pre-shock
Outcome" control in column (1) is the 2000-2005 change in the sex ratio. In columns (2)-(5) this control is the 2000-2005 change in
the share of the municipio population with the listed level of schooling. In column (6), this control is the share of households receiving
remittances in 2000. All specifications include controls for anti-immigrant employment legislation and new 287(g) agreements across U.S.
CZs, trade shocks across municipios (divided by 1000000), share of employment in Mexico's non-tradable sector, changes in homicide
rates across municipios, and Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   47
                      Table 5: Employment-to-population Ratio and Earnings per Hour

                                              EPOP            ln(Hours)           ln(Earnings)           ln(EarnPerHour)
                                            2004-09           2004-09              2004-09                  2004-09
                                              (1)               (2)                  (3)                      (4)
         Panel A. All
         US Employment Shock                -0.440**          -4.29**               -6.06*                      -2.08
                                             (0.210)           (1.75)               (3.34)                     (2.78)
           EPOP                            -0.463***
         1999-04                             (0.116)

           ln(Hours)                                          -0.14**               0.30**                    0.44***
         1999-04                                               (0.05)               (0.12)                     (0.10)

           ln(Earnings)                                       0.08***              -0.17***                  -0.24***
         1999-04                                               (0.03)               (0.06)                    (0.05)
         Panel B. Women
         US Employment Shock               -0.847***
                                            (0.211)

           EPOP                            -0.561***
         Women 1999-04                      (0.157)


         Panel C. Men
         US Employment Shock                  -0.080
                                             (0.273)

           EPOP                            -0.357***
         Men 1999-04                        (0.083)


         State FE                              Yes              Yes                   Yes                       Yes
         Observations                          865              846                   846                       846

This table examines the effects of declines in US labor demand on the 2004-2009 change in the employment-to-population ratio, earnings,
hours worked, and earnings per hours in each municipio, using employment, earnings and hours from the 1999, 2004 and 2009 Mexican
Economic Census and population from the 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo. Note that the outcome and pre-shock
outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We trim the bottom and top 1 percent of the earnings distribution. All
specifications in columns (1) to (4) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. All specifications include
controls for anti-immigrant employment legislation and new 287(g) agreements across U.S. CZs, trade shocks across municipios (divided
by 1000000), share of employment in Mexico's non-tradable sector, changes in homicide rates across municipios, and Mexican state fixed
effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  48
                                   Table 6: Cross-Sectional Employment Analysis

                                                                     State FE          State FE         Municipio FE
                                                                        (1)               (2)               (3)
              Panel A. All
              US Employment Shock*1(exposedh )                       -0.224***         -0.166**              -0.114
                                                                      (0.078)           (0.075)             (0.076)

              1(exposedh )                                           -0.038***         -0.031***           -0.020***
                                                                      (0.008)           (0.007)             (0.007)

              Observations                                          33,270,660        33,270,660          33,270,660

              Panel B. Women
              US Employment Shock*1(exposedh )                       -0.352***         -0.268***           -0.235**
                                                                      (0.097)           (0.096)             (0.098)

              1(exposedh )                                           -0.048***         -0.039***           -0.026***
                                                                      (0.009)           (0.009)             (0.009)

              Observations                                          17,511,744        17,511,744          17,511,744

              Panel C. Men
              US Employment Shock*1(exposedh )                          -0.038           -0.005              0.055
                                                                       (0.099)          (0.097)             (0.093)

              1(exposedh )                                              -0.005           -0.001              0.007
                                                                       (0.009)          (0.009)             (0.009)

              Observations                                          15,758,916        15,758,916          15,758,916


This table examines how labor supply behavior differs for households with and without US migrants in municipios facing different US
shocks. We use cross-sectional data from the 2010 Census and define households exposed to US labor markets as those with either
return migrants or with a household member living in the US. Columns (1) and (2) estimate the specification in Equation (11) while
column (3) estimates a more general specification with municipio fixed effects. Column (2) show the results including controls for anti-
immigrant employment legislation and new 287(g) agreements across U.S. CZs, trade shocks across municipios (divided by 1000000),
share of employment in Mexico's non-tradable sector, and changes in homicide rates across municipios (and the municipio fixed effects
in column (3) subsume all these controls). The negative coefficients for the interaction coefficient in all columns of Panel A imply that
the employment probability is higher in exposed households in municipios connected to larger US employment declines. Panels B and C
show that the relationship is driven almost entirely by women. Results are qualitatively similar to those in columns (1) and (2), though
a bit less precise, when controlling for state × exposure status fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone
level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  49
                                                      Table 7: Appliances Ownership and School Attendance

                                     Computer         Washing Machine           Refrigerator       TV          Attendance Rate         Attendance Rate         Attendance Rate
                                     2005-10            2005-10                 2005-10         2005-10     (ages 6-12) 2005-10     (ages 13-15) 2005-10    (ages 16-18) 2005-10
                                       (1)                 (2)                     (3)            (4)                (5)                     (6)                     (7)

       US Employment Shock             -0.171               0.067                 0.312        0.619***           0.252***                  0.417                   0.196
                                      (0.120)              (0.273)               (0.264)        (0.219)            (0.078)                 (0.273)                 (0.298)


         in Outcome                  0.890***             0.298***              0.348***       0.425***            -0.012                 0.136***                0.236***
       2000-05                        (0.025)              (0.021)               (0.024)        (0.029)           (0.025)                  (0.028)                 (0.028)


       New 287g Policy                 -0.026               0.057                 0.056          0.024             0.023                    0.095                   0.074
                                      (0.034)              (0.058)               (0.057)        (0.052)           (0.017)                  (0.058)                 (0.060)


       Employment Policy              -0.042*              -0.079*                -0.028         0.010             0.018                    0.045                   -0.006
                                      (0.024)              (0.041)               (0.042)        (0.036)           (0.012)                  (0.041)                 (0.041)




50
       Trade Shock                     -0.041               0.053                 0.066          0.049            0.041***                0.111***                  -0.029
                                      (0.039)              (0.066)               (0.049)        (0.034)            (0.014)                 (0.030)                 (0.044)


       Non-tradable share              -0.018               -0.040                -0.007         0.015             -0.009                 -0.062**                -0.094***
       of Employment                  (0.015)              (0.029)               (0.037)        (0.034)           (0.009)                  (0.026)                 (0.031)


       Homicide Rate 05-10             -0.432               1.268                 1.650         5.582*             -0.990                 -8.353**                  -2.068
                                      (1.499)              (2.723)               (2.747)        (3.203)           (1.182)                  (3.872)                 (4.421)


         State FE                       Yes                  Yes                   Yes            Yes               Yes                      Yes                     Yes
         Observations                   866                  866                   866            866               866                      866                     866
         R-squared                     0.860                0.594                 0.566          0.533             0.097                    0.308                   0.366

     This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in ownership of household durables (personal computers, washing machines, refrigerators,
     and televisions) and in school attendance. We calculate the change in the share of households owning the relevant household durable and the share of the population in primary
     (age 6-12), secondary (13-15), and high-school (16-18) reporting having attended school using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo. All specifications in columns
     (1) to (7) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. All specifications include controls for anti-immigrant employment legislation and new
     287(g) agreements across U.S. CZs, trade shocks across municipios (divided by 1000000), share of employment in Mexico's non-tradable sector, changes in homicide rates across
     municipios, and Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican
     Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
A     Appendix
1


A-1       Model Derivations
To derive equation (3), start with the total derivative of Mss = Ms Ps (s), holding Ms constant.

                                           Ps (s)               Ps (s)
                             dMss = Ms            dvs +                dvd                     (12)
                                           vs             d=s
                                                                vd

Then, evaluate the partial derivatives of the choice probabilities in (2).
                                                                                     2
                    Ps (s)    exp(vs + nss )                    exp(vs + nss )
                           =                    -
                    vs        d exp(vd + nsd )                  d exp(vd + nsd )               (13)
                           = Ps (s)(1 - Ps (s))

                     Ps (s)     exp(vs + nss ) exp(vd + nsd )
                            = -                                        where d = s
                     vd            ( d exp(vd + nsd ))2                                        (14)
                             = -Ps (s)Ps (d)
Plugging these into (13) and simplifying yields (3).
   To derive equation (6), start with its left hand side, and impose the assumptions listed just
above (6). Assumption i) implies P r(empd ) = EmpM                      M
                                                       d /Md , where Empd is the number of em-
ployed Mexicans in d, and Md  s Msd is the Mexican population of d. Assumption ii) implies
EmpM d /Md =  , so
                                                     d EmpM d
                                    d P r(empd ) =         M
                                                               .                            (15)
                                                      Empd
Since total Mexican employment in d is the sum of Mexican employment across industries i, we
have the following identity.
                              d EmpM  d       EmpM         M
                                                  id d Empid
                                                                                        (16)
                               EmpM d       i
                                              Emp M
                                                  d   Emp M
                                                          id

Assumption iii) implies
                                                  EmpM
                                                     id
                                    d   EmpM
                                           id   =       d Empid ,                              (17)
                                                  Empid
and assumption iv), wd = w, in combination with the preceding expressions yields (6).
   To derive (7), start with its left hand side and use the definition of  from above, the identity




                                                   51
in (16), and the migration network term  = Msd /(      d =s   Msd ) and simplify to yield (7).

                                EmpM
                                   id   d Empid   EmpMd                   Msd      d EmpMd
                       sd          M
                                      ·         =                                      M
                 d=s        i
                                Empd     Empid     Md        d=s
                                                                   (     d =s Msd ) Empd
                                                                                                 (18)
                                                       1                 Msd
                                               =                             d EmpM
                                                                                  d
                                                     d =s   Msd    d=s
                                                                         Md




                                                52
A-2         Data
A-2.1        Matr´
                 iculas Consulares de Alta Seguridad
We use a custom extract from the MCAS administrative dataset covering all the matr´        iculas con-
sulares issued in 2006 to Mexican-born individuals by place of birth in Mexico and place of residency
in the US. Because this extract did not contain numerical identifiers for municipio or county, we
needed to determine which municipio each record represented. We assigned each source municipio
name an identifier to match those used by Mexico's Statistical Office (INEGI) and we assigned each
US count a county-level FIPS code.
    Mexican place of birth: The extract contained Mexican state and municipio of birth. However,
the field for municipio of birth was sometimes reported by cardholders as their town or place of
birth. After merging municipio names from INEGI's list, we ended up with 87 percent of the
matr´ iculas perfectly matched. For the remaining 13 percent of the matr´  iculas, more than half (7
percent of the total) were from individuals reporting Mexico City as their place of birth. To address
this issue, we aggregated municipios within Mexico City (Distrito Federal) in all Mexican datasets.
For the remaining 6 percent we matched the information recorded in the municipio field to INEGI's
identifiers by using a record linkage method (reclink2) in Stata, performing fuzzy matches. With
these two procedures we were able to identify 95 percent of municipios in the dataset. Finally,
we manually assigned places to municipios for 3 percent of the unmatched matr´     iculas in the data,
leaving us with 98 percent of the matr´iculas matched to a municipio.
    US county of residency: The extract contained US state and county of residency. However,
in some instances cardholders reported places or cities of residency, abbreviated or misspelled city
names (i.e. LA for Los Angeles), or in very few instances county of residency that did not corre-
sponded to the reported state of residence (i.e Charleston, South Dakota instead of Charleston,
South Carolina). After merging county names using the FIP codes list from the US Census Bureau,
we ended up with 88 percent of the matr´   iculas perfectly matched. For the remaining unmatched
cases, including those just mentioned, we manually coded the correct counties.
    We aggregate destination counties to the commuting zone level, using the crosswalk in Dorn
(2009).38 This provides us with information on the connections between each Mexican municipio
and each US commuting zone.

A-2.2        US Employment
We measure changes in US labor demand using payroll employment from the County Business
Patterns (CBP) data from 2006-2010. This dataset includes the universe of employment at business
establishments in covered industries in each US county. We fill in employment estimates from
uncovered industries, notably government and private household employees, using the American
Community Survey (ACS) from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2017). Because our goal is to measure labor
demand changes specific to Mexican-born workers employed in US industries, we also use data from
the 2006 American Community Survey (ACS) to measure the share of the Mexican-born migrants
employed in each industry prior to the Great Recession.
    Because we want to measure changes in US labor demand at the local labor market level, we
use commuting zones as our geographic unit of analysis in the US. We aggregate county-level em-
 38
      https://www.ddorn.net/data.htm (file E7)


                                                 53
ployment information from CBP and migrant destination data from MCAS to the commuting zone
level using the crosswalk in Dorn (2009).39 We make manual adjustments to maintain consistent
county boundaries over time. Because the most disaggregated sample available in the ACS is the
Public Use Micro Areas (PUMA), we use another crosswalk from Dorn (2009) to match PUMAS to
commuting zones.40 After these aggregations at the commuting zone level, we were able to use these
two datasets to construct a weighted average of employment changes accounting for the industrial
composition of Mexican employment in each US labor market.

A-2.3        Demographic and Population Outcomes
Return Migration: We define return migrants from the US to each Mexican municipio between
2005-2010 as individuals ages 15-64 living in Mexico during the 2010 Census reference period but
who lived in the US five years before. These flows are identified through a question that asks
respondents their country of residency five years prior to the Census year. Note that the count of
return migrants does not include any individuals who were living in Mexico five years previously
but who moved to the US and back within the five year window. We also calculate pre-shock return
migration for the working age population between 2000-2005 using information from the the 2005
Conteo and the 2000 Mexican Census. To calculate these measures, we use official tabulations of the
full-count 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Inter-Censal Count (Conteo ), available at INEGI's
website. We divided the 2005-2010 measure by the 2005 working age population and the 2000-2005
measure by the 2000 working age population in each municipio, using official tabulations of the
full-count 2000 Mexican Census and 2005 Conteo, available at INEGI's website.
    Emigration: We calculate emigration from each Mexican municipio to the US as the number of
individuals ages 15-64 who reported leaving between 2005-2010 in the 2010 Mexican Census, using
the 2010 Mexican Census supplemental sample questionnaire. This survey, available at the Mexican
Statistical Office website (INEGI) contains an international migration module, conducted on a 10%
sample of Mexican households in each Census year, asking respondents if anyone in the household
went to live in the US during the previous five years. We also calculate pre-shock emigration for
the working age population who reported leaving to the US between 1995-2000 using microdata
from the 2000 Mexican Census, as the 2005 Conteo does not include information on emigration. We
divided the 2005-2010 measure by the 2005 working age population and the 1995-2000 measure by
the 2000 working age population in each municipio, using official tabulations of the full-count 2000
Mexican Census and 2005 Conteo, available at INEGI's website. Note that because the Mexican
Census does not provide information on emigration of entire households, our emigration measure
may be underestimated. Since we construct the emigration measure using a sample rather than the
population, the return migration estimate is likely more reliable.
    Population Changes: This measure is defined as the proportional change in the total number of
Mexican individuals ages 15-64 in each Mexican municipio between 2005-2010 and between 2000-
2005. We use official tabulations of the full-count 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005
Conteo, available at INEGI's website.
    Sex Ratio: This measure is defined as the ratio of the total number of Mexican women ages
15-64 in each Mexican municipio at the time of the Census or Conteo to the total number of men
 39
      https://www.ddorn.net/data.htm (file E7)
 40
      https://www.ddorn.net/data.htm (file E5).



                                                  54
ages 15-64 in each Mexican municipio at the same time. We calculate the female to male sex ratio
using official tabulations of the full-count 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo,
available at INEGI's website.
    Educational Attainment: We measure the share of the municipio population with each education
level as the total number of individuals ages 15-64 with that level of education at the time of the
Census or Conteo, divided by the total working age population of the same municipio. The "less
than primary education" category includes those with no schooling and with up to 4 years of
primary education; individuals with primary education are those with primary and lower secondary
completed; those with upper secondary completed are considered to have a secondary education;
individuals with university education are those with at least some post-secondary schooling. We use
official tabulations of the full-count 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo, available
at INEGI's website.
    Households receiving Remittances: We measure the share of households receiving remittances as
the proportion of households in each municipio and Census year reporting receiving income from
relatives abroad. We use 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census microdata from (Ruggles et al. 2017) to
calculate this measure. Note that although the 2000 Census includes a question on the amount of
remittances received by each surveyed household in Mexico, the 2010 Census reports only whether
the household received any remittances. The relevant question is somewhat open-ended regarding
the timeframe of remittance receipt, and enumerators encouraged respondents to report both regular
and sporadic remittance receipt.

A-2.4     Economic Outcomes
Employment-to-population ratio: We calculate the employment-to-population ratio for each munici-
pio as the share of the population ages 15-64 with formal employment. We measure the number
of employed people in each municipio, separately for women and men, using full-count tabulations,
available at INEGI's website, from the 1999, 2004, and 2009 Mexican Economic Census, which
covers formal employment in Mexico excluding agriculture, livestock, forestry, mass transit, taxis,
farmers' insurance funds, political organizations, and domestic employees. We divide this employ-
ment count by the working age population of the corresponding municipio using official tabulations
of the full-count 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo available at INEGI's website.
    Earnings per hour: We measure earnings per hour as the municipio's aggregate yearly earn-
ings divided by the municipio's aggregate yearly hours worked, using full-count tabulations from
the 1999, 2004, and 2009 Mexican Economic Census. This earnings measure therefore covers the
same sectors as the employment measure. Note that earnings and hours worked are not available
separately for men and women.
    Appliance Ownership: We calculate appliance ownership as the proportion of households in each
municipio reporting owning the relevant appliance at the time of the Census or Conteo, including a
personal computer, a refrigerator, a washing machine, or a television. We use official tabulations of
the full-count 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo, available at INEGI's website.
    School Attendance Rate: We calculate the school attendance rates as the total number of children
in each municipio attending primary (ages 6-12), lower secondary (ages 13-15) or upper secondary
(ages 16-18) education at the time of the Census or Conteo, divided by the total population in that
same age group and municipio. We use official tabulations of the full-count 2000 and 2010 Mexican
Census and the 2005 Conteo, available at INEGI's website.

                                                 55
A-2.5     Controls
Immigration policies: We use indicators for newly introduced state-level anti-immigrant employ-
ment legislation and indicators for new 287(g) agreements allowing local officials to enforce federal
immigration law, using information from the database complied by Bohn and Santillano (2012).
Because these variables are measured at the state level, we use the crosswalk in (Dorn 2009) to
map states to commuting zones.41 The control variables we include in the regressions are weighted
averages of changes in the policy indicators with weights based on the destination distribution of
migrants from the relevant municipio.
     Trade Shocks: We focus on the effects of declining U.S. employment opportunities facing po-
tential migrants from Mexico, but the Great Recession also reduced trade between Mexico and the
U.S. Because we focuse on migration-related channels, the effects of declining trade could confound
our analysis. We control for such trade effects by constructing municipio-level exposure to change
in Mexican trade with the U.S. We begin by constructing industry-level changes in trade from
Mexico to the U.S. per Mexican worker. We use trade data from the U.S. Census Bureau, provided
in Stata format by Peter Schott.42 We aggregate these data from 10-digit HS products to 4-digit
NAICS industries using the concordance from Pierce and Schott (2012) and calculate the change
in trade value from the period 2001-2005 to the period 2006-2010. We measure initial Mexican
employment using data from the 2004 Mexican Economic Census, which covers the vast majority
of firms in sectors outside agriculture.43 For each municipio, we then generate a weighted average
of these industry-level trade changes, where the weights reflect the municipio's 2004 distribution of
tradable-industry employment across 4-digit NAICS industries, also calculated using the Economic
Census. The weights sum to one across tradable industries, and we include an additional control for
the nontradable share of employment in 2004 to address the incomplete shares problem (Borusyak
et al. 2019).
     Homicide Rate: We measure the number of homicides during 2005-2010 for each municipio
divided by the 2005 population for the corresponding municipio, by using administrative yearly
records from the Mexican Statistical Office (INEGI) and official tabulations of the full-count 2005
Conteo available at INEGI's website.




 41
    https://www.ddorn.net/data.htm (file E8)
 42
    https://sompks4.github.io/sub_data.html
 43
    https://www.inegi.org.mx/app/saic/ Accessed March 27, 2020.


                                                 56
A-3         Additional empirical results
A-3.1        Shock variation conditional on exposure
Figure A-1 shows a scatter plot relating the US employment shock to exposure, s , for the mu-
nicipios in our sample. Although the two are positively related, with modestly higher average US
employment shocks in municipios with higher exposure to the US labor market, the extensive vari-
ability in US employment shock within narrow ranges of exposure is clearly visible in the scatter
plot. The R-squared for a linear regression relating the two quantities is only 0.019.

                         Figure A-1: Exposure vs. US Employment Shock Measure




This figure shows the relationship between exposure to the US labor market and the UUS Employment Shock measure across Mexican
municipios.




                                                             57
A-3.2     Subsets of controls
Tables A-1 ­ A-5 show results paralleling those in Tables 4 ­ 7, with different subsets of controls,
as in Table 2.




                                                58
                                                   Table A-1: Sex Ratio, Attainment, and Households Receiving Remittances
                                         Sex Ratio                     Less than Primary                     Primary 2005-10                  Secondary 2005-10                   University 2005-10                  Household
                                      (F/M) 2005-10                        2005-10                                                                                                                                 Remittances 2010
                             (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)           (7)         (8)       (9)        (10)         (11)       (12)        (13)         (14)       (15)        (16)       (17)       (18)

      US Employment        0.743***     0.591**       0.499**    0.584***    0.053       -0.024     0.243       0.109     0.167     -0.484***      -0.019     -0.096    -0.318***      -0.027     0.001     0.565***   0.503***   0.602***
      Shock                 (0.254)     (0.229)       (0.242)     (0.197)   (0.121)     (0.145)    (0.230)     (0.197)   (0.224)     (0.149)      (0.094)    (0.107)     (0.090)      (0.064)    (0.075)     (0.148)    (0.131)    (0.143)

      Pre-shock                        -0.216***     -0.214***              0.553***   0.545***               0.707***   0.724***                0.889***   0.892***                 0.738***   0.735***               0.459***   0499***
      Outcome                           (0.032)       (0.032)                (0.025)    (0.027)                (0.086)    (0.087)                 (0.040)    (0.040)                  (0.041)    (0.042)                (0.046)   (0.046)

      New 287g                                         -0.043                          -0.090***                         0.111***                             -0.030                              -0.003                           0.005
      Policy                                          (0.051)                           (0.032)                           (0.041)                            (0.021)                             (0.016)                          (0.027)

      Employment                                       0.012                            (0.023)                           0.006                               -0.015                              0.003                            0.026
      Policy                                          (0.038)                                                            (0.031)                             (0.013)                             (0.012)                          (0.018)

      Trade Shock                                     -0.074**                           -0.028                          0.280***                           -0.181***                             -0.016                          0.046**
                                                       (0.029)                          (0.018)                           (0.042)                            (0.029)                             (0.022)                          (0.022)

      Non-tradable share                               0.018                             0.005                           0.083***                             -0.006                            -0.032***                         0.022*
      of Employment                                   (0.023)                           (0.014)                           (0.019)                            (0.012)                             (0.007)                          (0.013)




59
      Homicide Rate                                  10.085***                           2.827                           6.232***                             0.541                               -0.823                          -4.990**
      2005-10                                         (3.740)                           (1.869)                           (2.184)                            (0.980)                             (1.131)                           (2.505)

        State FE             Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
        Observations         866          866           866        866        866         866       866          866       866         866         866         866         866          866        866        866        866        866
        R-squared           0.197        0.270         0.282      0.269      0.750       0.753     0.304        0.556     0.578       0.386       0.741       0.748       0.266        0.681      0.687      0.188      0.336      0.346


     This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in the female to male sex ratio for the working age population (15-64), the 2005-10 change
     in the share of the working age population in each education level for each Mexican source municipio, and the share of households receiving remittances in 2010. Note that
     outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We measure the sex ratio and educational attainment using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican
     Census or 2005 Inter-Censal Count. We calculate the share of households receiving remittances as the number of households reporting receiving income from relatives living
     abroad divided by the municipio's total number of households in the Census year, using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census. All specifications in columns (1) to (18) use a GLS
     re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. The positive coefficient estimate in column (3) for the US employment shock implies that municipios facing larger
     US employment declines had larger declines in the sex ratio, consistent with return migrants being disproportionately male. The coefficient of 0.499 in column (3), implies that
     the sex ratio in a municipio facing the 90th percentile shock fell by 0.008 more than in a municipio at the 10th percentile. The results in columns (6)-(15) show no statistically
     significant relationship between the shock and the share of population with any particular level of education. Column (18) shows a positive relationship between the share of
     households receiving remittances and the US employment shock, meaning that remittances fall significantly in Mexican source regions facing larger declines in US labor demand.
     The point estimate of 0.6 in column (18) implies that, a strongly affected municipio experienced nearly 1 percentage point larger decline in the share of households receiving
     remittances compared to a less affected municipio. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are
     shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                     Table A-2: Employment-to-population Ratio and Earnings per Hour (All Workers)
                                                         EPOP 2004-09                    ln(Hours) 2004-09              ln(Earnings) 2004-09       ln(EarnPerHour) 2004-09
                                                 (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)       (9)      (10)     (11)      (12)

                      US Employment Shock       -0.278   -0.375**    -0.440**    -3.84**   -4.04***   -4.29**    -5.02*     -4.99*     -6.06*     -1.63     -1.31      -2.08
                                               (0.223)    (0.186)     (0.210)     (1.53)    (1.51)     (1.75)    (2.91)     (2.84)     (3.34)    (2.36)    (2.24)     (2.78)


                        EPOP                             -0.475***   -0.463***
                      1999-04                             (0.117)     (0.116)


                        ln(Hours)                                                           -0.12**   -0.14***             0.34***    0.30**              0.46***    0.44***
                      1999-04                                                                (0.05)    (0.05)               (0.12)    (0.12)               (0.10)     (0.10)


                        ln(Earnings)                                                        0.07***   0.08***              -0.18***   -0.17***            -0.24***   -0.24***
                      1999-04                                                                (0.02)    (0.03)               (0.06)     (0.06)              (0.05)     (0.05)


                      New 287g Policy                                  0.007                            0.62                          1.96**                          1.53*
                                                                      (0.060)                          (0.49)                         (0.85)                          (0.71)




60
                      Employment Policy                                -0.009                           -0.25                         -1.19**                         -1.01*
                                                                      (0.035)                          (0.25)                          (0.49)                         (0.40)


                      Trade Shock                                    -0.334***                          -0.56                           0.23                           0.79
                                                                      (0.085)                          (0.40)                          (0.86)                         (0.53)


                      Non-tradable share                             0.083**                          0.58**                           0.91*                           0.35
                      of Employment                                  (0.035)                          (0.25)                           (0.54)                         (0.37)


                      Homicide Rate 05-10                              1.400                           -22.91                         -78.26**                        -48.98
                                                                      (2.598)                         (20.53)                          (39.41)                       (30.53)

                      State FE                   Yes        Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes         Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
                      Observations               865        865         865       848         846       846       848         846       846       848       846        846
                      R-squared                 0.081      0.267       0.283     0.133       0.148     0.161     0.122       0.149     0.167     0.079     0.161      0.176

     This table examines the effects of declines in US labor demand on the 2004-2009 change in the employment-to-population ratio, earnings, hours worked, and earnings per hour
     in each municipio, using employment, earnings, and hours from the 1999, 2004 and 2009 Mexican Economic Census and population from the 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census
     and the 2005 Conteo. Note that the outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We trim the bottom and top 1 percent of the
     earnings distribution. All specifications in columns (1) to (12) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. The negative and significant coefficient
     estimate for the US employment shock in column (3) implies that regions facing larger US employment declines exhibited larger increases in the employment to population
     ratio. Columns (6) and (9) show that both total hours worked and total earnings increased in the most affected municipios. However, column (12) shows no effect on earnings
     per hour, implying that local labor markets adjusted to the increase in supply of hours worked without reducing wages. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects.
     Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                             Table A-3: Employment-to-population Ratio by Gender

                                                        EPOP Women                                      EPOP Men
                                                         2004-09                                        2004-09
                                             (1)          (2)      (3)                     (4)           (5)     (6)

       US Employment Shock                  -0.366 -0.645***            -0.847***        -0.226         -0.193           -0.080
                                           (0.247)  (0.193)              (0.211)        (0.255)        (0.223)          (0.273)


         EPOP                                           -0.569***       -0.561***                     -0.367***       -0.357***
       1999-04                                           (0.159)         (0.157)                       (0.085)         (0.083)


                                                                           -0.072                                        0.086
                                                                          (0.051)                                       (0.088)
       New 287g Policy

                                                                           -0.051                                        0.044
                                                                          (0.035)                                       (0.045)
       Employment Policy

                                                                           0.027                                      -0.692***
                                                                          (0.103)                                      (0.126)
       Trade Shock

                                                                          0.057*                                       0.121***
                                                                          (0.034)                                       (0.046)
       Non-tradable share
       of Employment
                                                                           -1.680                                        4.292
                                                                          (2.785)                                       (3.475)
       Homicide Rate 05-10

       State FE                              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes              Yes
       Observations                          866            865             865            866           865              865
         R-squared                          0.104          0.308           0.313          0.060         0.209            0.255

This table examines the effects of declines in US labor demand on the 2004-2009 change in the employment-to-population ratio for women
and men in each municipio, using employment from the 1999, 2004 and 2009 Mexican Economic Census and population from the 2000
and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo. Note that the outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as
in equation (8). We trim the bottom and top 1 percent of the earnings distribution. All specifications in columns (1) to (6) use a
GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. The coefficient of -0.85 in colum (3) implies that a strongly affected
municipio with average exposure to the US experienced a 1.4 percentage point larger increase in employment to population ratio among
women compared to a similar municipio that was less affected. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors
clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                   61
                                                                       Table A-4: Appliance Ownership
                                                      Computer                      Washing Machine                       Refrigerator                         TV
                                                      2005-10                         2005-10                             2005-10                           2005-10
                                             (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)     (5)       (6)            (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)

               US Employment Shock -0.748***            -0.032      -0.171     -0.079    0.230       0.067      -0.323     0.344       0.312     -0.067   0.594***    0.619***
                                    (0.208)            (0.097)     (0.120)    (0.246)   (0.236)     (0.273)    (0.267)    (0.231)     (0.264)   (0.230)    (0.192)     (0.219)


                 in Outcome                           0.892***    0.890***              0.310***   0.298***              0.351*** 0.348***                0.421***    0.425***
               2000-05                                 (0.025)     (0.025)               (0.021)    (0.021)               (0.022)  (0.024)                 (0.028)     (0.029)


               New 287g Policy                                      -0.026                           0.057                             0.056                            0.024
                                                                   (0.034)                          (0.058)                           (0.057)                          (0.052)


               Employment Policy                                   -0.042*                          -0.079*                            -0.028                           0.010
                                                                   (0.024)                          (0.041)                           (0.042)                          (0.036)




62
               Trade Shock                                          -0.041                           0.053                             0.066                            0.049
                                                                   (0.039)                          (0.066)                           (0.049)                          (0.034)


               Non-tradable share                                   -0.018                           -0.040                            -0.007                           0.015
               of Employment                                       (0.015)                          (0.029)                           (0.037)                          (0.034)


               Homicide Rate 05-10                                  -0.432                           1.268                             1.650                           5.582*
                                                                   (1.499)                          (2.723)                           (2.747)                          (3.203)


                 State FE                    Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Observations                866         866         866        866       866         866        866        866        866        866        866         866
                 R-squared                  0.345       0.859       0.860      0.468     0.590       0.594      0.357      0.565      0.566      0.233      0.531       0.533

     This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in ownership of household durables (personal computers, washing machines, refrigerators,
     and televisions). We calculate the change in the share households owning the relevant household durable using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo. All specifications
     in columns (1) to (12) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity. The coefficient in column (12) is positive and statistically significant, implying
     that households in more negatively affected municipios slowed down their purchases of televisions. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered
     at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                               Table A-5: School Attendance

                                         Attendance Rate                   Attendance Rate                     Attendance Rate
                                     (ages 6-12) 2005-10               (ages 13-15) 2005-10                  (ages 16-18) 2005-10
                                  (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)

   US Employment Shock          0.174**    0.167**   0.252*** -0.095          0.123       0.417       -0.279       0.095      0.196
                                (0.072)    (0.073)    (0.078) (0.226)        (0.224)     (0.273)     (0.270)      (0.253)    (0.298)


     in Outcome                             -0.010     -0.012               0.149***    0.136***                 0.250***   0.236***
   2000-05                                 (0.024)    (0.025)                (0.028)     (0.028)                  (0.028)    (0.028)


                                                       0.023                              0.095                               0.074
                                                      (0.017)                            (0.058)                             (0.060)
   New 287g Policy

                                                       0.018                              0.045                               -0.006
                                                      (0.012)                            (0.041)                             (0.041)
   Employment Policy

                                                     0.041***                           0.111***                              -0.029
                                                      (0.014)                            (0.030)                             (0.044)
   Trade Shock

                                                       -0.009                            -0.062**                           -0.094***
                                                      (0.009)                             (0.026)                            (0.031)
   Non-tradable share
   of Employment
                                                       -0.990                            -8.353**                             -2.068
                                                      (1.182)                             (3.872)                            (4.421)
   Homicide Rate 05-10

   State FE                       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
   Observations                   866        866        866         866        866         866        866           866        866
   R-squared                     0.086      0.087      0.097       0.257      0.292       0.308      0.268         0.358      0.366

This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in school attendance. We calculate the change in the
share of the population in primary (age 6-12), secondary (13-15), and high-school (16-18) reporting having attended school using the 2000
or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo. All specifications in columns (1) to (9) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential
heteroskedasticity. The coefficient of 0.25 in column (3) implies that a municipio facing a 6.5 percentage point decline in US labor
demand experienced 0.4 percentage point larger declines in school attendance for primary school children. This means that in municipios
experiencing larger US employment declines, school attendance for primary school children fell more relative to municipios facing smaller
employment shocks. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone
level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  63
A-3.3     Unweighted Analysis
Tables A-6 ­ A-11 show results paralleling those in the main text without the GLS weighting pro-
cedure used to address potential heteroskedasticity resulting from dividing the dependent variable
by the municipio's estimated exposure to the US labor market. In nearly all cases, we reject the
null hypothesis of homoskedastic errors at standard levels using a Breusch-Pagan test, the weighted
and unweighted point estimates are very similar, and the weighted standard errors are smaller than
the unweighted ones.




                                                64
            Table A-6: Population Growth, Return Migration, and Emigration (unweighted)

                                     Population Growth                     Return Migration                         Emigration
                                          2005-10                              2005-10                               2005-10
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)             (4)       (5)        (6)             (7)       (8)           (9)

  US Employment Shock        -3.961***      -0.989       -0.954    -0.232***    -0.321***    -0.231***    0.238**    0.239**      0.322**
                              (0.987)      (0.871)      (0.916)     (0.090)      (0.079)      (0.084)     (0.146)    (0.145)      (0.154)


  Pre-shock Outcome                       0.847***     0.833***                 1.698***     1.677***               0.116***     0.108***
                                           (0.177)      (0.175)                  (0.274)      (0.273)                (0.027)      (0.027)


  New 287g Policy                                        0.105                               0.079***                              0.035
                                                        (0.193)                               (0.020)                             (0.028)


  Employment Policy                                      -0.101                                -0.012                              0.000
                                                        (0.113)                               (0.013)                             (0.019)


  Trade Shock                                            -0.209                                0.020                              0.054*
                                                        (0.271)                               (0.009)                             (0.017)


  Non-tradable share                                  -0.283***                                -0.012                              0.006
  of Employment                                        (0.121)                                (0.008)                             (0.015)


  Homicide Rate 05-10                                   -24.889                              -4.950***                           -7.411***
                                                       (13.742)                               (1.167)                             (2.705)


  State FE                       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
  Observations                   866         866          866         866          866          866         866        866          866
  R-squared                     0.144       0.634        0.639       0.301        0.518        0.540       0.247      0.272        0.288
  B-P het. p-val                0.000       0.000        0.000       0.000        0.000        0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000

This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 population growth, return migration to, and emigration
from each Mexican source municipio. Note that outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We
restrict attention to individuals age 15-64. Population growth is defined as the proportional change in population. Return migration is
the number of individuals reporting living in the US 5 years prior to the relevant survey, divided by the municipio population in the survey
year, while emigration is the number of household members who left for the US during the 5 years prior to the relevant survey, divided by
the initial municipio population, measured using the roughly 10%long-form sample from the 2000 or 2010 Census (emigration information
is not available in 2005). We use full-count tabulations from the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo to calculate population
growth and return migration. The "Pre-shock Outcome" controls in columns (2), (5), and (8) are 2000-2005 population growth, 2000-2005
return migration, and 1995-2000 emigration, respectively. Columns (3), (6), and (9) additionally control for anti-immigrant employment
legislation and new 287(g) agreements across U.S. CZs, trade shocks across municipios (divided by 1000000), share of employment in
Mexico's non-tradable sector, and changes in homicide rates across municipios. All specifications control for Mexican state fixed effects,
and standard errors clustered at the Mexican commuting zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                    65
                                Table A-7: Sex Ratio, Attainment, and Households Receiving Remittances (unweighted)
                                          Sex Ratio                     Less than Primary                    Primary 2005-10                 Secondary 2005-10                 University 2005-10                 Household
                                       (F/M) 2005-10                        2005-10                                                                                                                            Remittances 2010
                              (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)         (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)       (12)        (13)        (14)       (15)       (16)       (17)       (18)

      US Employment Shock   0.816***     0.690***      0.628**    0.872***    0.115      0.057      0.093       0.146     0.328     -0.537**     0.032      -0.106    -0.494**     -0.096     -0.066    0.576***   0.503***   0.609***
                             (0.271)      (0.253)      (0.268)     (0.285)   (0.159)    (0.179)    (0.405)     (0.284)   (0.311)     (0.236)    (0.153)    (0.170)     (0.203)    (0.120)    (0.134)     (0.152)    (0.135)    (0.148)


      Pre-shock Outcome                 -0.178*** -0.175***                  0.587***   0.583***              0.856***   0.864***              0.897***   0.904***               0.780***   0.778***               0.460***   0.450***
                                         (0.035)   (0.035)                    (0.013)    (0.014)               (0.029)    (0.029)               (0.026)    (0.027)                (0.020)    (0.020)                (0.046)    (0.046)


      New 287g Policy                                   -0.086                          -0.083**                         0.164**                          -0.096***                           -0.020                           0.007
                                                       (0.071)                           (0.039)                         (0.068)                           (0.037)                           (0.029)                          (0.028)


      Employment Policy                                 0.044                            0.014                            0.033                             -0.008                            0.013                            0.028
                                                       (0.044)                          (0.031)                          (0.053)                           (0.029)                           (0.023)                          (0.019)


      Trade Shock                                      -0.075**                          -0.034                          0.314***                         -0.188***                           -0.021                          0.049**
                                                        (0.031)                         (0.045)                           (0.078)                          (0.042)                           (0.034)                          (0.014)




66
      Non-tradable share                                0.035                            -0.002                          0.108***                           -0.003                          -0.046***                          0.020
                                                       (0.027)                          (0.018)                           (0.031)                          (0.017)                           (0.013)                          (0.013)


      Homicide Rate 05-10                             10.316**                           1.105                           12.528**                           0.002                             -1.134                          -5.290**
      of Employment                                    (4.561)                          (2.799)                           (4.905)                          (2.652)                           (2.106)                           (2.530)


      State FE                Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
      Observations            866          866           866        866        866        866       866          866       866        866         866        866        866         866        866        866        866        866
      R-squared              0.196        0.251         0.262      0.312      0.792      0.793     0.298        0.655     0.672      0.357       0.732      0.740      0.243       0.735      0.739      0.188      0.335      0.345
      B-P het. p-val         0.000        0.000         0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000        0.000     0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.00


     This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in the female to male sex ratio for the working age population (15-64), the 2005-10 change
     in the share of the working age population in each education level for each Mexican source municipio, and the share of households receiving remittances in 2010. Note that
     outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We measure the sex ratio and educational attainment using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican
     Census or 2005 Inter-Censal Count. We calculate the share of households receiving remittances as the number of households reporting receiving income from relatives living
     abroad divided by the municipio's total number of households in the Census year, using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census. The positive coefficient estimate in column (3) for the
     US employment shock implies that municipios facing larger US employment declines had larger declines in the sex ratio, consistent with return migrants being disproportionately
     male. The results in columns (6)-(15) show no statistically significant relationship between the shock and the share of population with any particular level of education. Column
     (18) shows a positive relationship between the share of households receiving remittances and the US employment shock, meaning that remittances fall significantly in Mexican
     source regions facing larger declines in US labor demand. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level
     are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                          Table A-8: Employment-to-population Ratio and Earnings per Hour (All Workers, unweighted)
                                                  EPOP 2004-09                     ln(Hours) 2004-09                  ln(Earnings) 2004-09          ln(EarnPerHour) 2004-09
                                          (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)       (10)     (11)       (12)

                US Employment Shock      -0.366     -0.532     -1.058*    -8.431*** -8.933***    -9.807***   -10.349*      -8.999    -11.178*     -1.919     -0.066      -1.371
                                        (0.731)    (0.575)     (0.548)     (2.900)   (2.896)      (3.192)     (5.761)     (5.696)     (6.257)    (4.542)    (4.351)     (4.798)


                   EPOP                           -0.385***   -0.365***
                99-04                              (0.145)     (0.145)


                   ln(Hours)                                                         -0.122***   -0.144***                0.333***   0.292***              0.454***    0.436***
                99-04                                                                 (0.043)     (0.043)                  (0.085)    (0.085)               (0.065)     (0.065)


                   ln(Earnings)                                                       0.066***   0.077***                -0.177***   -0.160***             -0.243***   -0.237***
                99-04                                                                  (0.019)    (0.020)                 (0.038)     (0.038)               (0.029)     (0.029)


                New 287g Policy                                 -0.218                             0.464                             2.997**                           2.533**
                                                               (0.135)                            (0.691)                            (1.355)                           (1.039)




67
                Employment Policy                               -0.076                             -0.449                            -2.321**                          -1.872**
                                                               (0.073)                            (0.542)                             (1.063)                           (0.815)


                Trade Shock                                   -0.361***                            -0.741                              -0.012                            0.729
                                                               (0.103)                            (0.782)                             (1.533)                           (1.175)


                Non-tradable share                            0.308***                           1.231***                            2.237***                          1.006**
                of employment                                  (0.082)                            (0.324)                             (0.636)                          (0.487)


                Homicide Rate 05-10                             -7.867                            -44.482                            -126.250                           -81.769
                                                               (9.077)                           (49.905)                            (97.823)                          (75.018)


                State FE                  Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes
                Observations              865        865         865        848         846         846        848          846         846       848         846         846
                R-squared                0.105      0.212       0.248      0.117       0.130       0.148      0.114        0.138       0.161     0.086       0.160       0.175
                B-P het. p-val           0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000       0.000      0.000        0.000       0.000     0.000       0.002       0.003

     This table examines the effects of declines in US labor demand on the 2004-2009 change in the employment-to-population ratio, earnings, hours worked, and earnings per hour
     in each municipio, using employment, earnings, and hours from the 1999, 2004 and 2009 Mexican Economic Census and population from the 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census
     and the 2005 Conteo. Note that the outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We trim the bottom and top 1 percent of the earnings
     distribution. The negative and significant coefficient estimate for the US employment shock in column (3) implies that regions facing larger US employment declines exhibited
     larger increases in the employment to population ratio. Columns (6) and (9) show that both total hours worked and total earnings increased in the most affected municipios.
     However, column (12) shows no effect on earnings per hour, implying that local labor markets adjusted to the increase in supply of hours worked without reducing wages. All
     specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                   Table A-9: Employment-to-population Ratio by Gender (unweighted)

                                                       EPOP Women                                    EPOP Men
                                                        2004-09                                      2004-09
                                             (1)         (2)      (3)                     (4)         (5)     (6)

        US Employment Shock                -0.513        -0.895*       -1.453***        -0.179        -0.216         -0.646
                                          (0.781)        (0.524)        (0.523)        (0.744)       (0.657)        (0.631)


           EPOP                                        -0.546***       -0.525***                    -0.286**       -0.272**
        99-04                                           (0.167)         (0.157)                      (0.115)        (0.108)


        New 287g Policy                                                 -0.270**                                     -0.143
                                                                         (0.136)                                    (0.145)


        Employment Policy                                                 -0.104                                     -0.035
                                                                         (0.072)                                    (0.082)


        Trade Shock                                                       0.024                                    -0.736***
                                                                         (0.107)                                    (0.147)


        Non-tradable share                                              0.239***                                   0.367***
        of Employment                                                    (0.071)                                    (0.100)


        Homicide Rate 05-10                                              -11.795                                     -4.038
                                                                         (9.552)                                    (8.630)

        State FE                             Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes
        Observations                         866           865             865            866          865             865
        R-squared                           0.129         0.303           0.326          0.082        0.158           0.205
        B-P het. p-val                      0.000         0.000           0.000          0.000        0.000           0.000

This table examines the effects of declines in US labor demand on the 2004-2009 change in the employment-to-population ratio for women
and men in each municipio, using employment from the 1999, 2004 and 2009 Mexican Economic Census and population from the 2000
and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo. Note that the outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in
equation (8). We trim the bottom and top 1 percent of the earnings distribution. The negative coefficient in colum (3) implies that a
strongly affected municipio experienced larger increase in employment to population ratio among women compared to a similar municipio
that was less affected. All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone
level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  68
                                                               Table A-10: Appliance Ownership (unweighted)
                                                      Computer                     Washing Machine                       Refrigerator                          TV
                                                      2005-10                        2005-10                             2005-10                            2005-10
                                             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)     (5)       (6)             (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)         (12)

               US Employment Shock -1.099**            -0.100      -0.054     -0.688     0.083      0.092      -0.832     0.303       0.272      -0.286    0.809**     0.671*
                                    (0.537)           (0.227)     (0.254)    (0.473)    (0.415)    (0.464)    (0.548)    (0.460)     (0.512)    (0.469)    (0.361)     (0.401)


                 in Outcome                          0.893***    0.893***              0.321***    0.315***             0.357***    0.356***              0.474***    0.480***
               2000-05                                (0.014)     (0.014)               (0.020)     (0.020)              (0.018)     (0.019)               (0.019)     (0.020)


               New 287g Policy                                     0.042                           0.214**                          0.295***                            0.108
                                                                  (0.055)                          (0.101)                           (0.112)                           (0.088)


               Employment Policy                                   -0.004                           -0.089                            -0.124                            -0.055
                                                                  (0.044)                          (0.079)                           (0.088)                           (0.069)




69
               Trade Shock                                         -0.049                           0.127                             0.126                             0.019
                                                                  (0.064)                          (0.116)                           (0.128)                           (0.100)


               Non-tradable share                                -0.051**                           -0.032                           0.098*                            0.096**
               of Employment                                      (0.025)                          (0.047)                           (0.052)                           (0.040)


               Homicide Rate 05-10                                 0.665                            3.036                             3.432                           17.629***
                                                                  (3.988)                          (7.267)                           (8.041)                           (6.285)


               State FE                      Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
                 Observations                866        866         866        866        866        866        866        866         866        866        866         866
               R-squared                    0.339      0.883       0.883      0.574      0.678      0.680      0.420      0.599       0.605      0.245      0.560       0.569
               B-P het. p-val               0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000       0.000

     This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in ownership of household durables (personal computers, washing machines, refrigerators,
     and televisions). We calculate the change in the share households owning the relevant household durable using the 2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo. The
     coefficient in column (12) is positive and statistically significant, implying that households in more negatively affected municipios slowed down their purchases of televisions. All
     specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                    Table A-11: School Attendance (unweighted)

                                         Attendance Rate                  Attendance Rate                    Attendance Rate
                                     (ages 6-12) 2005-10             (ages 13-15) 2005-10                  (ages 16-18) 2005-10
                                   (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)

     US Employment Shock          0.102      0.107    0.211*     -0.041      0.298      0.582      -0.003        0.518      0.646
                                 (0.101)    (0.102)   (0.114)   (0.332)     (0.325)    (0.361)    (0.431)       (0.399)    (0.445)


       in Outcome                            0.005     0.005               0.164***   0.153***                 0.286***   0.272***
     2000-05                                (0.014)   (0.014)               (0.022)    (0.022)                  (0.023)    (0.024)


     New 287g Policy                                   0.005                            0.117                               0.142
                                                      (0.025)                          (0.078)                             (0.097)


     Employment Policy                                0.035*                            0.034                               -0.032
                                                      (0.019)                          (0.062)                             (0.076)


     Trade Shock                                      0.050*                            0.106                               -0.037
                                                      (0.028)                          (0.090)                             (0.111)


     Non-tradable share                                -0.009                         -0.090**                            -0.131***
     of Emplyment                                     (0.011)                          (0.037)                             (0.045)


     Homicide Rate 05-10                               -0.810                           -8.997                              -5.929
                                                      (1.773)                          (5.641)                             (6.963)


     State FE                      Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes
     Observations                  866       866       866        866         866        866        866           866        866
     R-squared                    0.093     0.093     0.101      0.221       0.269      0.280      0.241         0.358      0.367
     B-P het. p-val               0.181     0.069     0.035      0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000         0.000      0.000

This table examines the effect of changes in US labor demand on the 2005-10 change in school attendance. We calculate the change in
the share of the population in primary (age 6-12), secondary (13-15), and high-school (16-18) reporting having attended school using the
2000 or 2010 Mexican Census or 2005 Conteo. The positive coefficient in column (3) implies that in municipios experiencing larger US
employment declines, school attendance for primary school children fell more relative to municipios facing smaller employment shocks.
All specifications include Mexican state fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the Mexican Commuting Zone level are shown in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  70
A-3.4     Mexican Commuting Zone Analysis for Labor Market Outcomes
For consistency with the rest of the analysis, the labor market outcome results in Table 5 use
Mexican municipio as the unit of analysis. Here, we provide a parallel analysis using Mexican
commuting zones as the unit of analysis, in order to address the possibility that municipios in the
same commuting zone may be part of an integrated labor market in equilibrium. We define Mexican
commuting zones following Atkin (2016), and impose the same sample restrictions to commuting
zones that we did to municipios in the main text: at least 5,000 residents in 2005, exposure s > 0.066
(the 25th percentile), and at least 100 MCAS cards in 2006. This yields a sample of 741 Mexican
commuting zones (and 723 with information in the Economic Census). The results in Table A-12
are extremely similar to those in Table 5, showing that the choice of Mexican market aggregation
does not substantially affect our findings.




                                                 71
                   Table A-12: Employment-to-population Ratio and Earnings per Hour

                                              EPOP            ln(Hours)           ln(Earnings)           ln(EarnPerHour)
                                            2004-09           2004-09              2004-09                  2004-09
                                              (1)               (2)                  (3)                      (4)
         Panel A. All
         US Employment Shock                -0.539**         -5.12***               -5.73*                      -0.77
                                             (0.215)          (1.64)                (3.08)                     (2.58)
           EPOP                            -0.483***
         1999-04                             (0.107)

           ln(Hours)                                          -0.17**               0.25*                     0.43***
         1999-04                                               (0.05)               (0.13)                     (0.10)

           ln(Earnings)                                        0.06**               -0.17**                  -0.22***
         1999-04                                               (0.03)                (0.07)                   (0.05)
         Panel B. Women
         US Employment Shock               -0.992***
                                            (0.290)

           EPOP                            -0.614***
         Women 1999-04                      (0.155)


         Panel C. Men
         US Employment Shock                  -0.263
                                             (0.244)

           EPOP                            -0.360***
         Men 1999-04                        (0.086)


         State FE                              Yes              Yes                   Yes                       Yes
         Observations                          741              723                   723                       723

This table examines the effects of declines in US labor demand on the 2004-2009 change in the employment-to-population ratio, earnings,
hours worked, and earnings per hours in each Mexican commuting zone level, using employment, earnings and hours from the 1999,
2004 and 2009 Mexican Economic Census and population from the 2000 and 2010 Mexican Census and the 2005 Conteo. Note that the
outcome and pre-shock outcome variables are divided by exposure as in equation (8). We trim the bottom and top 1 percent of the
earnings distribution. All specifications in columns (1) to (4) use a GLS re-weighting procedure to address potential heteroskedasticity.
All specifications include controls for anti-immigrant employment legislation and new 287(g) agreements across U.S. CZs, trade shocks
across municipios (divided by 1000000), share of employment in Mexico's non-tradable sector, changes in homicide rates across municipios,
and Mexican state fixed effects. Robust standard errors (equivalent to clustering at the Mexican commuting zone level) are shown in
parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                  72
