                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 RISKY BUSINESS CYCLES

                                         Susanto Basu
                                       Giacomo Candian
                                        Ryan Chahrour
                                        Rosen Valchev

                                      Working Paper 28693
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28693


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Ana Lariau, Dana Lawson, and seminar participants at The Ohio State University, the
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Monash University, University of Padua, Aarhus University
and the participants in the AEA Annual Meeting for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Susanto Basu, Giacomo Candian, Ryan Chahrour, and Rosen Valchev. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risky Business Cycles
Susanto Basu, Giacomo Candian, Ryan Chahrour, and Rosen Valchev
NBER Working Paper No. 28693
April 2021
JEL No. E24,E32,G12

                                           ABSTRACT

We identify a shock that explains the bulk of fluctuations in equity risk premia, and show that the
shock also explains a large fraction of the business-cycle comovements of output, consumption,
employment, and investment. Recessions induced by the shock are associated with reallocation
away from full-time permanent positions, towards part-time and flexible contract workers. A real
model with labor market frictions and fluctuations in risk appetite can explain all of these facts,
both qualitatively and quantitatively. The size of risk-driven fluctuations depends on the
relationship between the riskiness and productivity of different stores of value: if safe savings
vehicles have relatively low marginal products, then a flight to safety will drive a larger aggregate
contraction.

Susanto Basu                                               Ryan Chahrour
Department of Economics                                    Boston College
Boston College                                             140 Commonwealth Avenue
140 Commonwealth Avenue                                    Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467                                    ryan.chahrour@bc.edu
and NBER
susanto.basu@bc.edu                                        Rosen Valchev
                                                           Boston College
Giacomo Candian                                            Department of Economics
Department of Applied Economics                            Maloney Hall 396
HEC Montreal                                               140 Commonwealth Avenue
3000, chemin de la CoÌ,te-Sainte-Catherine                 Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
Montreal, QC H3T 2A7                                       rosen.valchev@bc.edu
Canada
giacomo.candian@hec.ca
1       Introduction
Predictable time-variation in the excess returns of risky assets is among the most salient
facts in financial economics (Cochrane, 2011). An extensive literature maps out the possi-
ble channels through which macroeconomic fluctuations might cause this return variation;
see, for example, the classic papers by Campbell and Cochrane (1999), Bansal and Yaron
(2004), and Barro (2006). This paper proposes a converse to this popular research pro-
gram by asking instead: Can ex ante changes in required excess returns be a major driver
of macroeconomic fluctuations?
    We find that the answer is "yes", both in the context of a model-free empirical analysis
and in an estimated structural model with frictional labor markets. Our initial, model-free
empirical analysis identifies the shock that drives the bulk of variation in expected excess
stock returns, and shows that the same shock also accounts for the bulk of variation in
macroeconomic quantities. Moreover, it generates the hallmark business-cycle comove-
ments among output, consumption, investment and employment. To rationalize these
results, we propose a real model where shocks to risk premia propagate to the broader
economy through frictional labor markets. Estimating our model, we find that it closely
replicates the patterns we identify in the data.
    Generating comovement via risk-premia fluctuations is challenging in standard models
because an increase in risk or risk premia leads to precautionary savings, which move
consumption and investment in opposite directions.1 By contrast, our model generates
a version of the Paradox of Thrift: an increase in desired saving leads to a decline in
actual saving and, therefore, to a fall in investment. The ultimate source of risk-premia
fluctuations is not important for our model. Instead, our model demonstrates a feedback
channel from asset prices to the real side of the economy, which can serve as a powerful
transmission mechanism that generates comovement as the consequence of fluctuations in
risk premia, regardless of their origins. We thus avoid taking a strong stand on the specific
source of time-varying risk premia, which remains an open question in the literature, and
focus instead on the aggregate consequences of such fluctuations.
    We begin the paper with a model-free empirical exercise that aims to isolate the po-
tential contribution of risk-premia fluctuations to business cycles. Specifically, we use a
standard macroeconomic vector autoregression (VAR) and a maximum-share identifica-
    1
    For additional intuition, we observe that an increase in risk premia affects allocations today in the
same way as bad news about future productivity (e.g. Beaudry and Portier, 2006). Thus, the literatures
on risk- and news-driven fluctuations face the same Barro and King (1984) challenges to generating
macroeconomic comovement.



                                                   1
tion procedure in the tradition of Uhlig (2003) to identify a shock that explains the largest
portion of the five-year-ahead expected equity excess return, our benchmark measure of
the equity risk-premium. The identified shock explains the vast majority (around 90%) of
unconditional equity risk-premium fluctuations and drives persistent changes in expected
excess returns with a half-life of roughly four years. Having isolated the major source of
risk premium fluctuations in the data, we next examine the effects of this shock on several
important macroeconomic quantities and prices.
    We find that an increase in the equity premium, driven by our shock, is also associated
with substantial falls in output, consumption, investment, employment, and stock returns,
and only a small change in real interest rates.2 Thus, our shock generates the type of
comovement across macro quantities (and a "smooth" risk-free rate) that is consistent
with the main stylized facts about business cycles. The identified shock also explains a
substantial proportion of the overall fluctuations in macro aggregates ­ including over
half of the unconditional fluctuations in output, consumption, investment, employment,
and stock returns. Furthermore, the shock we identify explains an even greater portion of
the covariance in the key variables of interest. For example, we find that the covariance
of output and stock returns driven by our shock is even larger than the unconditional
covariance between these two variables, implying that all other shocks in the data jointly
drive these variables in opposite directions.
    In addition to the main business cycle variables described above, we explore the effects
of our shock on a set of additional variables that are not commonly included in business-
cycle studies. In particular, we show that the identified shock, while causing a fall in
aggregate hours and in total employment, leads part-time employment to rise significantly,
both in absolute terms and as a share of total employment. This fact poses a particular
challenge for many standard macroeconomic models which, whether driven by aggregate
demand or aggregate supply shocks, generally imply that different types of labor should
move in the same direction.
    While our approach to identification does not impose an ex ante structural interpre-
tation of the shock, the patterns we identify suggest that changes in risk premia and
macroeconomic fluctuations largely share a common origin. Indeed, even though it is
identified off of the variation in the equity risk-premium, our shock explains as much or
more of unconditional macroeconomic fluctuations as the shock of Angeletos et al. (2020),
which is also estimated with a maximum-share approach, but instead targets macro quan-
  2
      In robustness checks, we have found aggregate hours to behave similarly to employment.




                                                   2
tities directly.3 Moreover, the tight connection between macroeconomic fluctuations and
the measure of expected excess stock returns embedded in our VAR suggests that our
forward-looking indicator is a useful alternative to more traditional stock market predic-
tors that instead lack predictive power for real activity, as documented by L´    opez-Salido
et al. (2017). However, the link between the equity risk-premium and business cycles
that our shock uncovers poses a fundamental modeling challenge, as increases in risk or
risk-premia push against comovement in a standard real model, because the associated
increase in precautionary saving depresses consumption, but boosts investment.
    To match the empirical patterns we estimate, we build a real business-cycle model
with competitive output markets, frictional labor markets, capital adjustment costs, and
variable capacity utilization. In our model, changes in risk premia are primarily driven
by exogenous variations in risk appetite, modeled as shocks to risk aversion in the utility
function. This modeling choice is motivated by the recent empirical work by Bekaert
et al. (2019), who find that over 90% of the equity risk-premium is attributable to "risk-
aversion" shocks, which are orthogonal to shocks to macroeconomic fundamentals and
their volatility. Nevertheless, our theory offers a general propagation mechanism that
would transmit fluctuations in risk premia to the macroeconomy regardless of their source.
    A key feature of our framework is that we allow for two types of search markets for labor
contracts: the first, which we call "full-time," involves longer-term relationships and sticky
real wages, while the second, which we call "part-time", involves shorter employment spells
and flexible wages.
    Frictions in forming or severing labor relationships mean that labor, like capital, is
a long-lived investment good (as in Hall, 2017). Thus, in addition to an overall rise in
desired savings, a risk-premium shock in our model also leads to portfolio re-allocation as
agents weigh the risk profiles of the different real savings vehicles that are available. In
particular, thanks to wage rigidities in the full-time sector, which amplify the volatility
of the resulting surplus accruing to the firm, the estimated model implies that full-time
labor is the riskiest asset, and hence an increase in risk aversion leads firms to re-allocate
investment away from vacancy postings in the full-time sector, and towards investment
in part-time vacancies and physical capital.4 Investment in the full-time sector, however,
has a relatively high instantaneous marginal product (by contrast, investment in capital
goods has zero marginal product today, since capital only becomes productive tomorrow)
   3
     Another difference is that Angeletos et al. (2020) target business cycle frequencies while we target
the unconditional variance. Our results are robust to this change in the targeted frequencies.
   4
     Recent empirical work by Faia and Pezone (2018) confirms that wage rigidity is indeed an important
source of priced risk in the cross-section of firm valuations, consistent with our model.


                                                   3
and the shift away from full-time vacancies ends up lowering aggregate output today.
This fall in output, by changing the resource constraint, can cause investment to also fall,
driving the economy into a typical business cycle where all four aggregates move together.
    We quantify this savings reallocation channel by matching the consequences of a rise
in risk aversion in our model to the VAR impulse responses generated by our identi-
fied risk-premium shock. We find that the model does an excellent job of matching the
data, generating quantitatively realistic business cycle fluctuations in response to such
shocks. In particular, the model implies that output, employment, consumption, invest-
ment, and real stock prices all fall during a risk-appetite recession. Moreover, the model
matches these salient facts without implying a strong cyclicality of measured final goods
markups, avoiding a contentious debate (e.g. Rotemberg and Woodford, 1999 vs Nekarda
and Ramey, 2013).
    The introduction of two types of labor improves the empirical realism of the model in
several respects. First, the addition of the part-time workers with flexible wages allows
the model to match recent evidence that aggregate wages are cyclical, despite the fact that
wages in our full-time sector are relatively rigid. Second, the short duration of part-time
jobs ensures that the model does not feature counter-factually long average job duration,
thus helping it avoid Borovicka and Borovickov´   a (2018)'s critique of Hall (2017) .
    Third, the part-time labor sector also helps the model deliver the deep recessions
needed to reproduce the comovement of investment and consumption we find in the data.
The mechanism works as follows. The increase in risk aversion encourages firms to de-
crease their investment in the most risky asset, long-term labor relationships. In a model
with only long-term labor, this means that firms either should increase their investment or
increase the dividends they pay to households, thereby pushing up consumption: depend-
ing on parameters, typically either consumption or investment should rise. The addition
of the relatively-safe part-time sector provides an additional attractive outlet for this sav-
ings, but one with a relatively low marginal product nevertheless. This encourages the
firm to increase investment in less-productive part-time jobs, which lowers output and
increases the downward pressures on consumption and investment. Importantly, this re-
allocation of employment from full-time to part-time labor conditional on a risk-premium
shock is indeed a pronounced feature of the data, as we show in our empirical analysis.5
    Lastly, we observe that the role of wage rigidities in our model is distinct from the
one at play in Hall (2005). There, conditional on TFP shocks, sticky wages amplify
  5
    Furthermore, Mukoyama et al. (2018) emphasize that such re-allocation from full-time to part-time
labor is crucial for understanding the over-all counter-cyclicality of part-time labor in the data.



                                                 4
the volatility of the cash flows firms expect to receive from new labor relationships. In
contrast to the TFP shocks, the risk-premium shocks we estimate in our model have a
muted impact on future labor productivity (only indirectly, through the equilibrium fall
in the other inputs to production), and thus do not lead to meaningful variations in the
cash flows of labor matches. Instead, our shocks primarily affect the economy through
their substantial impact on the risk-premium associated with these cash flows. We make
this point clear in a counterfactual exercise which shows that, if we shut down the risk-
premium fluctuations on the full-time labor sector and keep everything else the same, the
model fails to produce significant real fluctuations.
    We thus uncover a new way in which wage stickiness can help deliver large changes in
the value of workers and resolve the Shimer (2005) puzzle: by driving fluctuations in the
risk premia associated with labor input. Remarkably, this amplification channel does not
lead to counterfactual properties in the aggregate wage. Indeed, while wage stickiness in
the full-time sector is important to deliver large risk-premium fluctuation in that sector,
aggregate wages in our model are significantly less rigid than in Hall (2005) thanks to the
wage flexibility in the part-time sector.

Related Literature

Time variation in risk premia is well-documented in the finance literature (e.g. Fama and
French, 1989) and our paper stresses the connection between fluctuations in risk, risk
premia or risk appetite, and the business cycle in much the way that Cochrane (2017)
proposes in general terms. Recent evidence suggests that the equity premium may even
be more volatile than previously acknowledged (Martin, 2017).
    Recent macroeconomic research has rekindled interest in the idea of uncertainty- or
risk-driven macroeconomic fluctuations (Gilchrist et al., 2014), but many models of the
phenomenon have difficulty generating full macroeconomic comovement for the reasons
discussed by Barro and King (1984). For example, Bloom (2009) proposes a model of the
firm where non-convex adjustment costs in investment and labor generate real-option-
value effects so that an increase in aggregate risk triggers a wait-and-see reaction. The
scaling back of production plans thus generates a drop in investment, employment, and
output, but not consumption. Authors, such as Gourio (2012) and Bloom et al. (2018),
have therefore complemented risk mechanisms with first-moment shocks to generate a
drop in consumption along with these other variables.
    One solution to comovement challenges is to use models with nominal rigidities, so that
output is primarily determined by final goods demand (e.g. Ilut and Schneider (2014),

                                            5
Fern´andez-Villaverde et al. (2015), Basu and Bundick (2017), Bayer et al. (2019), Ca-
ballero and Simsek (2020)). Christiano et al. (2014) further exploits the interaction of
nominal rigidities and financial frictions to obtain deep risk-driven recessions. Moreover,
New-Keynesian frictions also help deliver large movements in unemployment following un-
certainty shocks in models with labor search frictions (Leduc and Liu, 2016; Challe et al.,
2017).6 All of the above mechanisms rely on endogenous variations in markups driven by
sticky prices to deliver simultaneous falls in consumption and investment in response to a
risk or uncertainty shock. By contrast, our model does not rely on sticky nominal prices
or suboptimal monetary policy to generate business cycle comovements. In this sense, our
model provides a propagation mechanism that is consistent with the "anatomy" of busi-
ness cycles that Angeletos et al. (2020) infer from the data -- a propagation mechanism
that allows for demand-driven cycles without strict reliance on nominal rigidities.
    Recent work by Di Tella and Hall (2020) is also motivated by the objective of deliver-
ing business-cycle comovements via a risk channel, without nominal rigidities. Those au-
thors solve the comovement problem by introducing uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, which
makes the marginal product of labor and capital uncertain. In this environment, a rise
in idiosyncratic uncertainty can generate a drop in investment, employment, output and
consumption. Obtaining a drop in investment relies on a delicate balance of general equi-
librium effects, so that the risk-driven fall in firms' investment demand is strong enough
to offset the precautionary saving motive of the household that stimulates savings.
    We differ from this work along two dimensions. First, the Di Tella and Hall (2020)
results rely on market incompleteness and idiosyncratic risk, while we work in a setting of
complete markets and aggregate risk. Second, by modeling long-lived labor relationships,
our model treats labor as a form of investment. In turn, our real effects are driven by an
empirically relevant reallocation of savings across different types of investment vehicles,
which differs from the propagation mechanism of their model where labor is not long-lived.
    Hall (2017) argues that the time variation in discount rates or risk premia that are
needed to explain the swings of the stock market can also rationalize the fluctuations in
unemployment. Recent papers have built on this idea to provide a risk-driven explanation
of several patterns in labor markets. Kilic and Wachter (2018) build a model with disaster
risk and real wage stickiness to help resolve the employment volatility puzzle of Shimer
(2005). Kehoe et al. (2019) provide another resolution to the Shimer puzzle in a model
with time-varying risk that relies on human capital accumulation instead of exploiting
   6
   Occasionally binding downward wage rigidity also amplifies the impact of uncertainty shocks on labor
market variables, with or without nominal rigidities (Cacciatore and Ravenna, 2020).



                                                  6
inefficiencies in wage contracting. Mitra and Xu (2019) exploit time-varying risk premia
in a setting with unobserved heterogeneity in workers productivity to explain the large
differences in cyclical unemployment risk across age groups. Freund and Rendahl (2020)
show that with risk-averse households heightened uncertainty lowers employment and eco-
nomic activity via a risk-premium channel that arises because of the positive comovement
between consumption and firm value (i.e., equity prices).
    These and other models that focus on risk-driven unemployment and asset price fluc-
tuations, largely abstract from capital accumulation or, when capital is considered, do
not focus on the comovement properties of the components of aggregate output. This
limitation is important because a higher risk premium, by reducing also the demand for
investment, may well drive consumption and investment in opposite directions.


2         Risk Premium Shocks
This section summarizes our approach to estimating risk-premium shocks in the data.
Our baseline empirical specification consists of a vector-autoregression of the form

                                          Yt = B (L)Yt-1 + A t .                        (1)

In the above, Yt is a vector of observed variables, B (L) contains the weights on past
realizations of Yt , t is a vector of structural economic shocks, and A is the structural
matrix that our procedure seeks to identify from the reduced-form residuals, µt  A t .
    We estimate equation (1) on US data using the observable set

                                                                s b
                                   Yt  gdpt , ct , invt , nt , rt , rt , dpt ,          (2)

which consists of the logs of real per-capita output, real per-capita consumption, real
per-capita investment, per-capita employment, real ex-post stock returns (inclusive of
dividends), real ex-post three-month treasury bill returns, and the level of the dividend-
price ratio. Our data range from 1985Q1 through 2018Q4, starting in the mid-1980s to
avoid the structural break of the start of the "Great Moderation".7 The VAR is estimated
in levels using ordinary least squares, including three lags in the polynomial B (L).
    We augment our baseline VAR with a set of auxiliary variables, St , that includes
additional labor market and business cycle indicators. These auxiliary variables are related
    7
        The Appendix contains more details on data definitions.



                                                       7
to current and past observations of Yt according to

                                             St = (L)Yt + vt ,                                       (3)

and the coefficient matrix (L), estimated via OLS, contains the same number of lags as
the VAR in (1). Using the estimated values of (L), we can then compute the impulse
responses for any auxiliary variable using the responses for Yt implied by (1). Among the
variables in St , we include total employment, part-time employment, the ex-post return
on five-year US bonds, and two measures of market risk perceptions that have appeared
recently in the literature.


2.1       Identification Approach
Our goal is to identify a "rotation" matrix A such that the first shock explains the largest
portion of the expected excess return on equity. Excess returns are not explicitly included
in our data, but they can be computed using the variables in Yt . Specifically, the realized
j -period cumulative excess return is defined as

                              s       s            s         b      b            b
                   rpt,t+j  [rt +1 + rt+2 + ... + rt+j ] - [rt+1 + rt+2 + ... + rt+j ].              (4)

   Assuming the variables in Yt span the information set of investors, we can use the
expectations implied by the VAR to derive an expression for the expectation of the excess
return:
                                                                         j
                                                                   -1
                        Et [rpt,t+j ] = (e5 - e6 ) (I - B (L))                L-j       A   t        (5)
                                                                        i=1         +

where [·]+ denotes the annihilator operator that eliminates terms with negative powers in
L.8
    Let (z )  (e5 - e6 ) (I - B (z ))-1 ji=1 z
                                               -j
                                                   A be the z transfer-function associated
                                                            +
with the MA() representation in (5). The variance of Et [rpt,t+j ] associated with spectra
of periodicity p  [p1 , p2 ] is given by

                                                 2/p1
                                           1
                                 rp
                                 p  =                   (e-i )(e-i ) d.                              (6)
                                          2    2/p2

  8
      For example, in the case of a VAR(1) so that Yt = BYt-1 + A t , the expression in (5) reduces to

                         Et [RPt+j ] = (e5 - e6 )(B + B 2 + ... + B j )(I - BL)-1 A t .




                                                        8
Conversely, the contribution of each to the variance in the same range is given by

                                        2/p1
                                   1
                           rp
                           p    =              (e-i ) (e-i )d.                          (7)
                                  2    2/p2

                                                                     rp
Following Uhlig (2004), we find the shock that explains the most of p   by computing q1 ,
                                                          rp
the eigenvector associated with the largest eigenvalue of p , and setting

                                             ^ 1,
                                         A = Aq                                         (8)

where A  ^ is the Cholesky decomposition of the matrix µ  cov (µt ).
    To implement the procedure, we need to specify the horizon at which excess returns
are computed and the frequency band we want our procedure to target. As a baseline
case we choose j = 20, consistent with common practice in the finance literature of con-
sidering variation in the five-year excess equity return. Second we choose p = [2, 500],
corresponding to fluctuations of periodicity anywhere between 2 and 500 quarters. Prac-
tically, this corresponds to targeting unconditional variances, but allows us to perform
robustness checks in which the VAR is estimated in VECM form and the lag polynomial
B (L) has a unit root. In robustness checks, we find our main qualitative and quantitative
findings are robust to our choice of lag-length in the VAR as well as to estimating the
VAR in VECM form so long as we allow for more than two independent trends in the
data.
    Before turning to the key empirical results, in Figure 1 we plot the expected excess
stock return as estimated by our VAR, Et (rpt,t+20 ) against the realized excess return over
that same forecasting horizon, rpt,t+20 . The Figure shows that both series exhibit sub-
stantial variation, though the ex-post series is not surprisingly somewhat more volatile.
Moreover, the figure shows that VAR-implied excess return is, indeed, a remarkably good
predictor of excess stock returns: it explains about 53% of the unconditional variation
in actual realized returns. Overall, the figure emphasizes that there is a substantial pre-
dictable component in excess stock returns and that our VAR captures that predictability
very well.


2.2    Empirical Results
Our identification procedure based on Uhlig (2003) extracts the structural shock (or com-
bination of shocks) that accounts for the bulk of the fluctuations in the VAR-implied
expected excess returns. Our identification procedure cannot label the deep origins of

                                               9
        0.15



          0.1



        0.05



            0



        -0.05



            1986         1991         1996         2001         2006          2011         2016
                                                      Year

                         Figure 1: Ex-ante and ex-post excess stock returns.

this shock uniquely, and some natural suspects, like TFP, are not significantly related to
the shock we identify, a result we report in the Appendix.9 More generally, a seminal
finding of the asset pricing literature is that risk-premia are excessively volatile and not
clearly attributable to any one fundamental. For example, recent work by Bekaert et al.
(2019) finds that equity risk-premia are in fact almost entirely driven by exogenous shocks
to "risk-aversion" or "risk-appetite", emphasizing that this is a shock to the pricing of
assets rather than a shock to the fundamental volatility of cash flows. Given these results,
it is likely that we are recovering the same shock, hence, we will simply label the result of
our identification procedure as a "risk-premium" or "risk-aversion" shock, and study how
the broader set of macro variables react to such shocks. Our results can then serve as a
well-defined empirical target for any model in which risk premia vary over time, either
exogenously or endogenously as a a result of some other shocks.
     Figure 2 plots the impulse responses of the major business cycle variables in response
to the shock identified by our VAR procedure. The first panel plots the response of the
equity risk premium itself, which rises significantly on impact and stays elevated for at
least fours years. The numbers in the panel titles represent the percent of variance of the
risk premium explained by our shock at the business cycle and unconditional frequencies,
respectively. Not surprisingly, since this is what our procedure targets, these numbers
  9
      This is similar to the findings of Angeletos et al. (2020) on their "main business cycle" shock.


                                                     10
Figure 2: Impulse responses to VAR-identified risk premium shock. Numbers in subplot ti-
tles correspond to the percent of variance explained at the business cycle and unconditional
frequencies, respectively.


are high: the shock explains nearly 90% of the unconditional variation in the predictable
five-year excess return of equity.
    The next four panels in the figure show the responses of the main macro aggregates.
The figures shows that all of these variables are substantially affected by our shock, with
output, consumption, investment and employment all falling substantially on impact, and
remaining depressed for an extended period. The last panel shows that the shock is also
associated with a sharp drop in stock prices on impact (fall in ex-post return), followed,
after more than a year, by a persistent period of higher than average returns. These
eventual higher than average returns underlie the elevated risk-premium.
    The titles of these five panels similarly report the percent of variance explained by
the shock, and these values are also quite large: at business cycle frequencies the shock
explains more than half of variables except consumption and output and the explains
substantially more than half of unconditional variations. In short, this "risk-premium"


                                            11
            Table 1: Unconditional Covariance Explained - Baseline Procedure
                     Output       Cons.     Investment       Employment          Stock Return
   Output       0.77
   Cons.        0.77               0.74
   Investment   0.85               0.93          0.81
   Employment 0.88                 0.88          0.88               0.83
   Stock Return 1.29               1.00          1.41               0.99                0.46



shock causes large fluctuations that follow all of the standard patterns associated with
the typical business cycle, exemplified with strong comovement across Y, C, I and N .
    Table 1 presents an alternative perspective on how important the identified shock is
for generating comovement in the data. Each entry in the table reports the unconditional
covariance between the variables listed in the row/column, conditional on only the risk-
premium shock being active, relative to the covariance implied by the full estimated system
in (1). Thus, the diagonal elements of the table correspond to the standard variance share
decomposition, as reported in the panel titles of Figure 2. By contrast, the off-diagonal
elements are not bounded between zero and one: They will take negative values if the
covariance implied by our shock has the opposite sign as the corresponding unconditional
covariance, and they will be larger than unity when the covariance conditional on our
shock is larger than the unconditional covariance.
    The Table shows that, as important as our shock is for the variances of each variable,
it is an even more important driver of comovement among the variables. For example,
the "share" of 1.29 for the covariance between output and stock returns implies that the
unconditional output-stock return covariance is smaller than the covariance implied by
our identified shock alone. Thus, all other shocks that affect output and stock prices must
move them in opposite directions. More generally, all of the off-diagonal entries in the
table are above 0.75, indicating that our identified shock explains the large majority of
the unconditional comovement we find in the data.
    Since our identification procedure is closely related to the "main business cycle shock"
identification of Angeletos et al. (2020), it is natural to compare our findings here with
theirs.10 In particular, those authors identify the shock that explains the largest portion
  10
    Kurmann and Otrok (2013) have also followed a similar strategy, identifying the shock which best
explains changes in the slope of yield curve. Interestingly, however, the shock they recover does not
generate the full comovement pattern, as on impact of their "yield-curve" shock investment falls. Thus,
we are recovering a different kind of shock (which is also unrelated to TFP, unlike their shock).



                                                  12
    Table 2: Uncondtional Covariance Explained - Angeletos et al. (2020) procedure

                   Output     Cons.     Investment     Employment        Stock Return
   Output       0.62
   Cons.        0.62            0.59
   Investment   0.67            0.74         0.59
   Employment 0.72              0.74        0.67             0.66
   Stock Return 0.59            0.67        -0.20            0.64              0.51



of the (business cycle) variance of a single quantity variable, such as a measure of em-
ployment, output or investment. To compare our results, we perform their procedure on
our estimated VAR by targeting just employment over business cycle frequencies.
    Table 2 reports the same covariance shares as we report for our identified shock.
The table shows that the shock identified using their procedure captures a somewhat
smaller share of unconditional output fluctuations, as well as a smaller portion of the
comovement across the variables, especially with regard to stock returns. Backing out
the point estimates of identified shocks, however, the two series are strongly correlated at
89.7%. Meanwhile, though we do not report them, the corresponding impulse responses
are qualitatively similar to what we find. Hence we conclude that, though we target very
different portions in the data (excess returns vs employment, unconditional vs business
cycles) the shock we identify is closely related to this "main business cycle" shock. From
this perspective, the central contribution of our empirical exercise is to show that the
"main business cycle shock" is also very strongly related to financial market outcomes
and, in particular, is responsible for the strong counter-cyclicality of equity risk-premia.
    Figure 3 reports impulse responses to our identified shock for some additional variables
of interest, including those included in our vector of auxiliary vector St . The first panel
in the top row shows a somewhat surprising result ­ the employment of part-time workers
actually increases in response to our shock. This response is significant after the impact
period, and the fluctuations induced by our shock explain a very large portion of the
fluctuations in this series as well ­ 74% of the unconditional variance. The second panel
plots the share of part-time employment in total employment; since total employment is
falling this share rises even more in percentage terms than the part-time employment itself.
Finally, last panel of the first row shows that aggregate hours-per-worker fall substantially
after the shock, which is another manifestation of the shift towards part-time employees.
    The final row of the figure shows that real interest rates, both short and longer term,


                                             13
Figure 3: Impulse responses to VAR-identified risk premium shock for additional variables.
Numbers in subplot titles correspond to the percent of variance explained at the business cycle
and unconditional frequencies, respectively.


are hardly affected by our shock at all. The fluctuations are small for both variables,
never significant for the 5-year bond rate, and capture only relative small portions of the
variance of either.
    While safe rates are relatively unaffected by the shock, the final panel of figure show
that excess bond returns -- measured by the spread between Baa-rated corporate debt
and the 10-year treasury yield -- do rise strongly in the period after the shock, though
the effect is significantly less persistent than for the equity risk-premium. While we do
not report it, the perceived-risk measure of Pflueger et al. (2020) also increases strongly
in response to our shock. Overall, the risk premia of a variety of asset classes rise, in the
periods after our shock hits the economy.




                                              14
3     Model
Here, we propose a theory that can explain the empirical patterns we have isolated above.
Our model is a standard real economy, with frictional labor markets, capital adjustment
costs, and variable capacity utilization. The model consists of a representative household
and a representative firm. The household consumes, supplies labor inelastically, and in-
vests in firm shares along with firm and government debt instruments. The firm produces
final goods and accumulates labor and capital in order to maximize shareholder value. We
present the key elements of the model below and relegate full derivations to the Appendix.
    The central challenge a model faces in matching our empirical results, is that gener-
ating comovement via risk fluctuations is challenging, because an increase in risk leads to
precautionary savings, which move consumption and investment in opposite directions.
Frictions in forming or severing labor relationships effectively turn labor into another in-
vestment good and thus a real savings technology. As a result, in addition to an overall
increase in desired savings the agents are also facing a portfolio choice problem.
    The key to our mechanism is that labor relationships are in fact riskier than capital,
hence the increase in risk leads to a re-allocation of savings from vacancies (i.e. investment
in labor relationships) to capital. This has a negative impact on current output, not only
because resources invested in vacancies tend to have an immediate effect on output while
capital only becomes operational with a lag, but also because the marginal product of labor
is higher at our benchmark estimation. Thus, reallocation of savings towards capital, and
away from labor, has a negative impact on output, and through the general equilibrium
effect of market clearing, ends up lowering both consumption and investment.
    To sum up, upon an increase in risk, our economy experiences a shifting allocation
of savings towards an effectively safer, but less productive asset, which depresses output,
and causes all four main macro aggregates to fall together with it.

Households

The economy is populated by a representative household with a continuum of members of
unit measure. In period t, the household chooses aggregate consumption (Ct ), government
                                                   c
bond holdings (Bt+1 ), corporate bond holdings (Bt  +1 ), and holdings of equity shares in
the firms (Xt+1 ), to maximize lifetime utility
                                                                          1
                                                                 1-1/   1-1/
                                       1-1/                 -t
                    Vt = max (1 -    )Ct       +    (Et Vt1
                                                          +1 )
                                                                  1-t          ,          (9)



                                             15
subject to the period budget constraint, denoted in terms of the consumption numeraire,

                                               1
       Ct + Pte Xt+1 + Qc   c       c
                        t (Bt+1 - dBt ) +         B  (Dt
                                                r t+1
                                                       e               c
                                                         + Pte ) Xt + Bt + Bt + Etl .                 (10)
                                               Rt

In the above, Qc  t is price of a multi-period corporate bond where a fraction (1 - d) of
                                        r
the principal is repaid each period, Rt   is the one-period safe real interest rate, Pte is the
                                                                             e
price of a share of the representative firms that pays a real dividend Dt      , and Etl is the
household's total labor earnings (detailed below). Risk aversion is denoted by t and can
vary over-time, while  is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
    The Epstein-Zin preferences in equation (9) imply the following stochastic discount
factor between t and t + 1:

                                                 1-1/                                   1/ -t
                   Vt /Ct+1               Ct+1             Ct              Vt+1
       Mt,t+1                     =                                               1             .     (11)
                   Vt /Ct                  Ct             Ct+1       (Et Vt1 -t 1-
                                                                           +1 )
                                                                                  t



    Households supply labor inelastically, but labor markets are subject to search and
matching frictions in the spirit of Mortensen and Pissarides (1994). There are two types of
labor contracts: the first, which we call "full-time", involves longer-term relationships and
sticky wages, labeled W1,t , while the second, which we call "part-time", involves shorter
employment spells and flexible wages, W2,t . We denote with N1,t and N2,t the masses of
labor currently working under the full-time and part-time contracts, respectively. While
employment status may vary across workers, their consumption is the same because the
household provides perfect consumption insurance for its members.
    Workers search sequentially. Specifically, all unemployed workers at the beginning of
period t first try to find a full-time job. If the search is unsuccessful, a given worker
searches for a part-time job.11 Accordingly, the mass of searchers for the two types of
contracts are:

                            S1,t = 1 - (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                              (12)
                            S2,t = 1 - N1,t - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 .                                        (13)

    Equation (12) reflects the following timing assumptions. At the beginning of period
t, a fraction 1 and 2 of employment relationships that were active in the full-time and
part-time sector at time t - 1 experience exogenous separation and the corresponding
  11
    This behavior is optimal if the expected value of searching sequentially in the full-time and part-time
sector exceeds the value of searching only in the part-time sector. We verify that this is the case in all
our simulations. See the Appendix for the formal details.

                                                    16
workers enter the pool of unemployed. All of these workers, 1 N1,t-1 + 2 N2,t-1 , and those
who were unemployed in the previous period, Ut-1  1 - N1,t-1 - N2,t-1 , look for a full-
time job at time t. Equation (13) then states that all agents who were unemployment at
the beginning of the period and did not find a full-time job, then search in the part-time
sector.
    The introduction of distinct full-time and part-time sectors creates some subtle issues
regarding how workers are compensated in case they are unemployed or "under-employed".
We assume that a worker who finds no employment in either sector, and is hence remains
unemployed in period t, receives a benefit b2,t that corresponds to monetary unemployment
benefits as well any other time-use benefits they might accrue from not working. In
addition, a worker employed in the part-time sector receives not just a wage, but also a
flow t that corresponds to the benefits (e.g., of home production) from the additional
time made available by part-time work.
    Because the representative household self-insures, aggregate household earnings each
period are thus:

                  Etl = W1,t N1,t + (W2,t + t )N2,t + b2,t (1 - N1,t - N2,t ).         (14)

The implicit ranking of labor-market outcomes implied by the sequence of search imposes
restrictions on t and b2,t . To ensure that full-time work is preferred to part-time, t
cannot be too large. Meanwhile, to ensure that part-time work is preferable to unemploy-
ment, b2,t must also not be too large; we verify both conditions in all of our simulations.

Firms

The representative firm seeks to maximize the present discounted value of its cash flows,

                                                         l           l
                  Dt = Yt - W1,t N1,t + W2,t N2,t - It - 1 ,t v1,t - 2,t v2,t ,        (15)

by choosing employment for the two types of contracts, N1,t and N2,t , vacancies, v1,t and
                                                                    l
v2,t , capital, Kt+1 , and investment, It . The variables Wi,t and i,t denote the real wage
and the vacancy posting cost for the labor contract of type i  {1, 2}, all of which the
firm takes as given.
      The firm discounts cash flows using the stochastic discount factor consistent with the




                                               17
household problem above. Its objective is to maximize
                                     
                                           Vt /Ct+s
                                Et                      Dt+s ,                        (16)
                                     s=0
                                           Vt /Ct

subject to the production function,

                                  Yt  (Kt ut ) (Zt Nt )1- ,                           (17)

the labor aggregator,
                                                                      
                                               -1           -1        -1
                           Nt = (1 - )N1,t
                                         
                                           + N2,t
                                                
                                                                           ,          (18)

the capital accumulation equation,

                                                                 2
                                             K      It
                     Kt+1 =     1 -  (ut ) -           -               Kt + It ,      (19)
                                             2      Kt

and the laws of motion for employment as perceived by the firm,

                              N1,t = (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 + 1,t v1,t ,                      (20)
                              N1,t = (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 + 2,t v2,t .                      (21)

Depreciation depends on utilization via the following functional form:

                                                       2
                         (ut ) =  + 1 (ut (i) - u) +     (ut (i) - u)2 .              (22)
                                                       2

In the above constraints, Zt is an exogenous labor-augmenting technology, and i,t is the
probability of filling a type-i vacancy.
    We follow Jermann (1998) by assuming the representative firm finances a percentage
of its capital stock each period through debt. Like in Gourio (2012), this financing occurs
with multi-period riskless bonds. Firm debt evolves according to

                                       c        c
                                      Bt +1 = dBt + Lt ,                              (23)

where the parameter d  [0, 1) is the portion of outstanding debt that does not mature
                                                                                 1
in the current period, and hence determines the effective duration of a bond as 1- d
                                                                                     . The
                                            c
net amount of new borrowing each period, Qt Lt = Kt+1 , is proportional to the quantity
of capital owned by the firm. Under these assumptions, the steady-state leverage ratio of


                                             18
the firm is given by B c /K   = /(1 - d). The price of the multi-period bond (Qc
                                                                               t ) is
determined by the pricing equation

                                        Qc                c
                                         t = Et Mt,t+1 (dQt+1 + 1) .                                       (24)

   Total firm cash flows are thus divided between payments to bond holders and equity
holders as follows:
                                  E          c
                                Dt  = Dt - Bt  + Kt+1 .                          (25)

Since the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem holds in our model, leverage does not
affect firm value or optimal firm decisions. Leverage makes the price of equity more
volatile, however, and allows us to map the model concept of equity returns to the data.
    The value of a type-i labor match for a firm, Ji,t , in equilibrium is given by:

                            Ji,t = M P Li,t - Wi,t + (1 - i )Et {Mt,t+1 Ji,t+1 } .                         (26)

Equation (26) states that the value a of match is equal to the current surplus the firm
extracts from it, given by the marginal product of the worker (M P Li,t ) net of the wage
payment, plus the discounted continuation value if the worker does not separate from the
firm. Solving this condition forward, we can rewrite the value of a match as:
                                                       
                 (1 - i )j Et (M P Li,t+j - Wi,t+j )
 Ji,t =                          R
                                                     +      (1 - i )j Covt (Mt,t+j , M P Li,t+j - Wi,t+j ), (27)
          j =0
                               Rt,t +j                 j =1

                           cash flow                                    risk premium

where we have imposed the transversality condition that limj  Et [Mt,t+j Ji,t+j ] = 0.
    The asset-pricing equation (27) expresses the value of a match as the sum of two
terms. The first term is the present value of cash-flows, in this case surplus from the
                                                                                    R
match from the view point of the firm, discounted with the relevant risk-free rate Rt,t+j =
Et [Mt,t+j ]-1 . The second term is a risk adjustment. Assets whose dividend streams
covary negatively with the stochastic discount factor, and positively with consumption,
have lower prices or higher risk premia, since holding those assets gives the investor a
more volatile consumption stream. In this particular context, labor relationships whose
future firm's surplus covary more negatively with the stochastic discount factor will carry
a higher risk premium.




                                                        19
Wage-setting

We make a set of assumptions about wage determination that simplify our equilibrium
computations and serve as a realistic baseline for examining the quantitative importance
of our mechanism. First, we assume that wages for the full-time sector are sticky, and
equal each period to their previous value plus an adjustment for the change in the level
of productivity (to be described momentarily). The initial value of the wage is the Nash
bargained wage that would emerge in a non-stochastic steady-state with Z = 1:
                                                                      1
                                                        
                                                 uK          N        
                                                                            l
                W1 = 1 (1 - )(1 - )                                       + 1 1 + (1 - 1 )b1 ,         (28)
                                                  N          N1

                            v1
where 1  [0, 1] and 1 = S    1
                               denote the workers' bargaining power and the steady-state
labor market tightness in the full-time sector, while b1 represents the value of the worker's
outside option when negotiating for a wage.
    Given the sequential nature of the search in the two sectors, the outside option for the
full-time sector is
                                     m                    m
                              b1  P 2  (W2 + ) + (1 - P2    )b2 ,                       (29)
                                                                                         m
In case the worker declines a full-time job, they find a part-time job with probability P2 ,
earning a wage W2 plus  units of additional home production made possible by part-time
                                m
work. With probability (1 - P2    ), the worker becomes fully unemployed, earning formal
unemployment benefits plus home production valued of b2 .12
    Wages in the part-time sector are flexible, and equal to the Nash wage that would
emerge in every period in this sector:
                                                                  1
                                                     
                                            ut Kt          Nt     
                                                                        l
               W2,t = 2 (1 - )Zt                                      + 2 ,t 2,t + (1 - 2 )b2,t .      (30)
                                            Z t Nt         N2,t

where 2  [0, 1] and 2,t denote the workers' bargaining power and the labor market
tightness in the part-time sector. As can be seen explicitly in equation (27), the differences
in duration of employment spells (2 > 1 ) and in the wage flexibility result in different
risk profiles of the two labor contracts and can therefore give rise to asymmetric responses
to changes in risk appetite.
 12
      Because of sticky wages in sector 1, time variation in b1 would have no effect on equilibrium.




                                                      20
Government

The government finances a stream of expenditures, which are exogenous but only gradually
catch-up with the trend in the economy. The initial value of the government expenditure
in a non-stochastic steady-state with Z = 1 is

                                           G=g
                                             ¯Y.                                         (31)

Government expenditures and the pecuniary component of unemployment benefits are
financed using a purely lump-sum tax instrument. As a result, government bonds remain
in zero-net supply, Bt = 0, for all t.

Market clearing

At the aggregate level, the labor workforce at time t in the two sectors is:

                               N1,t = (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 + M1,t ,                            (32)
                               N2,t = (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 + M2,t ,                            (33)

where M1,t and M2,t represent the matches from the CES matching functions of the full-
time and part-time sectors, respectively. These matching functions take the form:

                                     Mi,t = i vi i Si1- i ,                              (34)

for i  {1, 2}. The corresponding job-finding and vacancy-filling probabilities as a function
                                      v                         m                       i -1
of the labor markets tightness i,t = Si,t
                                        i,t
                                            are respectively: Pi,t = i i,t
                                                                        i
                                                                           and i,t = i i,t   .
    Finally, the aggregate resource constraint in the economy is given by

                                          l           l
                           Yt = Ct + It + 1 ,t v1,t + 2,t v2,t + Gt .                    (35)

In order to ensure our model satisfies the usual accounting identity, we follow den Haan
and Kaltenbrunner (2009) by including job posting costs in defining our model analogue
                              ~t  It +  l v1,t +  l v2,t .
to measured investment, i.e., I          1,t      2,t




                                              21
Exogenous Processes

The economy is perturbed by two exogenous disturbances. The first is technology, Zt ,
which we assume is integrated of order one and follows an AR(1) in log-growth rates:

                               log(Zt ) = z log(Zt-1 ) + z z
                                                           t.                                  (36)

The second is risk aversion, t , with dynamics governed by an AR(2) processes in logs:

                 log(t /ss ) = 1, log(t-1 /ss ) + 2, log(t-2 /ss ) +  t.                       (37)

    Because our economy has a unit root in productivity, we impose additional assump-
tions to ensure that the model has a balanced growth path. In particular, we assume that
the cost of vacancy posting, the outside options, the sticky full-time wage, and govern-
ment expenditure are all cointegrated with technology, with a common error-correction
rate of  . Specifically, for each variable X  {1,t , 2,t , b1,t , b2,t , W1,t , Gt }, we assume that
Xt = t X ¯ where X ¯ is the deterministic steady-state value, and

                                                  1-
                                         t+1 = t Zt  .                                         (38)

When the parameter   [0, 1) is close to one, which turns out to be the case in our
estimation, the variables "catch-up" with the (non-stationary) changes in productivity
slowly, but are nevertheless cointegrated with productivity.
    In particular, the process for the full-time wage is given by

                                               Zt-1 1-
                                    W1,t = (       ) W1,t-1 .                                  (39)
                                               t-1
Thus, the wage is sticky in the sense it only partially adjusts for the change in productivity,
to the extent to which  > 0. If  = 1, then the wage is perfectly rigid at its steady state
value, and if  = 0, it adjusts fully with changes in productivity.


4     Quantifying the Mechanism
We quantify the potential of our model to match our empirical evidence via an impulse-
response matching exercise, where we match the model-implied IRF to a risk-aversion
shock, t , to the empirical impulse responses to the "risk-premium" shock we identified
in Section 2. In addition, we also further discipline the model by matching several uncon-


                                                 22
                             Table 3: Calibrated Parameters
                Name      Description                                Value
                          Discount rate                               0.994
                          Intertemporal elasticity of substitution    2.500
                          Capital share                               0.300
                          Capital depreciation rate                   0.025
                2         Cap. util. cost × 100                       0.030
                g
                ¯         Steady-state G/Y                            0.200
                d         Corporate bond duration                     0.975
                          Labor Markets
                1         Separation Rate - FT                        0.044
                2         Separation Rate - PT                        0.354
                1         HH's bargaining power - FT                  0.500
                2         HH's bargaining power - PT                  0.200
                          Exogenous Processes
                z         Std. dev. of tech shock                     0.006



ditional moments in the data. Thus, the estimation exercise is restricted with numerous
and different kinds of data moments, leading to a highly over-identified system and tight
parameter estimates as we report below.
    We solve the model using a third-order perturbation, and compute impulse responses
by comparing the path of the economy over an extended period in which the realizations
of all shocks are identically zero to the counter-factual path in which a single one-standard
deviation shock to t is realized.


4.1    Calibrated Parameters and Steady-State Targets
To begin, we calibrate a set of standard parameters ex ante to values that are consistent
with the literature, as summarized in Table 3. Namely, we set  = 0.994 to be consistent
with a non-stochastic steady-state annual real interest rate around 2.4%. The capital
share is set to a standard value of 0.3 in the production function. Because the estimated
model includes risk, this will imply an unconditional capital income share that is slightly
less than 0.3. We use a standard long-run depreciation rate of  = 0.025. The relatively
low curvature parameter of the capital depreciation function, 2 = 0.0003, implies that
adjustments in utilization are relatively inexpensive, consistent with the values used by
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005). Finally, we assume that on average govern-
ment expenditures are 20% of GDP and fix the bond duration parameter d = 0.975, so

                                             23
as to imply corporate debt has a 10-year maturity, as in Gourio (2012).
    The elasticity of intertemporal substitution plays an important role in models that
target asset pricing facts, and we set this parameter to  = 2.5. This value is relatively
high compared to the standard macro literature that focuses on quantities only, but
is in-line with values used by macro-finance papers that target asset pricing moments
(Schorfheide et al., 2018). Nevertheless, the overall qualitative patterns we estimate do
not rely on any restriction on  and can still emerge, for example, even when  <
1. Our primary motivation for choosing a high elasticity is that this choice allows our
model to match fairly large responses of consumption to our shock without generating
counterfactually-large changes in safe interest rates (which is also the same basic tension
that has led the previous asset-pricing literature to use  > 1).
    In terms of labor market parameters, the key calibrated parameters are the separation
rates, 1 and 2 . We pick these values to satisfy two features of the data. First, separation
rates for employees in the part-time and other temporary positions are much higher than
those with full-time permanent positions. Second, the average separation rate in the US
economy is around 10% (Yashiv, 2008). To capture the first requirement, we fix 2 /1 = 8,
in line with recent estimates of the relative separation rates of part-timers to full-timers
from the longitudinal dimension of the U.S. Current Population Survey (Lariau, 2017).
We then fix the level of separations in the full-time sector so that the aggregate quarterly
separation rate is 10%. We also choose standard values for the Nash bargaining parameters
(and generally find that alternative choices for these parameters play a small role in our
results).
    Finally, we use the Basu et al. (2006); Fernald (2014) data on utilization-adjusted
U.S. TFP to calibrate the process for productivity. Over our sample period, we find that
productivity is an almost perfect random walk and it has standard deviation in growth
rates of 0.6%, implying z = 0 and z = 0.006.
    The remaining parameters are estimated by matching the impulse-responses to a risk-
aversion shock, and also eight addition unconditional moments, which we report in Table
4. Our approach is to place extremely high weight on the unconditional moment targets
in the estimation procedure (described below), with the idea being to get as good of a
match as possible in terms of unconditional moments, and then see how the model does
in terms of conditional dynamics. As we can see from the third column in Table 4, the
model can indeed match the unconditional targets perfectly.
    The first three entries, the average equity premium, the share of part-time workers,
and the average unemployment rate are easily observed and we match their average values


                                            24
                         Table 4: Unconditional Target Moments
                     Description                       Data Model
                     Equity risk premium               0.064    0.063
                     Share of part-time                0.180    0.182
                     LR unemployment                   0.060    0.061
                     Vancancy Rate                     0.035    0.035
                     Hiring cost/GDP                   0.010    0.010
                     PT earn./FT earn.                 0.500    0.497
                     Std. Dev. HP log(Emp/Pop)         0.011    0.011
                     Std. Dev. HP log(vacan.)          0.117    0.117



over our sample period. The vacancy rate of 3.5% is fixed to be consistent with the full-
sample average of the JOLTS dataset, which starts in 2000. In turn, we assume that the
ratio of hiring costs to GDP is 1%, in-line with Blanchard and Gal´   i (2010).
     Next, we target a ratio of full-time to part-time earnings of 0.5, This ratio should
account not just for any hourly wage differential, but should also include the lower number
of hours worked by people in part-time positions. The wage and hourly data is not
sufficiently disaggregated to directly speak to this moment, but we have found that our
results change very little if we make a different choice here.
     Finally, we also target the standard-deviations of (HP-filtered) employment and va-
cancies (using the series created by Barnichon, 2010), in order to ensure that the model
delivers a reasonable Beveridge curve. We also note that since the model is indeed suc-
cessful at matching both of these moments, this implies it also does not suffer from the
Shimer puzzle.


4.2    Estimation Procedure
Aside from the additional long-run target moments in Table 4, our impulse response
matching exercise is standard. The estimation targets are the impulse responses of output,
consumption, investment, total employment, part-time employment, equity returns, and
the real interest rate. We denote the set of parameters we estimate with , and those
includes the steady-state risk aversion parameter  , the capital adjustment cost parameter,
                                                                     l       l
K , the aggregate leverage ratio  , the vacancy posting costs, 1       and 2   , the value of
outside options b1 and b2 , the production share of part-time labor , the four parameters
governing the aggregate matching technologies, the cointegration parameter  , and the


                                             25
                                            Table 5: Estimated Parameters
          Name          Description                                                        Point Est.           Std Err.
          ss            Steady-state risk aversion                                             79.123              11.508
          k             Capital Adj. Cost                                                      12.478               2.210
                        Leverage Ratio                                                          0.822               0.024
                        Labor Markets
           l
          1             Vacancy posting cost - FT                                               4.092               0.442
           l
          2             Vacancy posting cost - PT                                               0.144               0.020
          b1            Value if no perm posit.                                                 1.108               0.045
          b2            Value if unemployed                                                     0.645               0.006
                        Labor contrib. of PT                                                    0.172               0.008
                        Elas. between FT & PT                                                   1.715               0.108
           1            Matching elasticity - FT                                                0.329               0.023
           2            Matching elasticity - PT                                                0.514               0.016
          1             Matching technology - FT                                                0.794               0.051
          2             Matching technology - PT                                                0.959               0.020
                        Cointegration parameter (i.e. wage adj.)                                0.968               0.009
                        Risk Aversion Process
          1,            AR(1) risk av. shock                                                   1.960                0.026
          2,            AR(2) risk av. shock                                                   -0.966               0.025
                        Std. dev. of risk av. shock                                            0.025                0.010
Note: Standard errors computed via bootstrap, by restimating model parameters targeting N=100 different (bias-corrected) impulse responses
drawn from the VAR bootstrap procedure.




parameters of the risk aversion shock, 1, , 2, and  .
   Let  ^ denote the column vector stacking the point estimates of each impulse response
variable across all horizons along with our unconditional target moments. The objective
function of our estimation is then given by

                                          L()  (^ -  ()) W (^ -  ()).                                                              (40)

In the above, the matrix W is a diagonal weighting matrix consisting of the inverse of
the bootstrapped variances of each impulse response in ^, plus very large weights for our
unconditional target moments. Given the extreme weights on our eight unconditional
targets, we are essentially targeting 7 × 30 = 210 impulse response moments with just
nine degrees of freedom.




                                                                   26
4.3     Estimation Results
Table 5 reports the estimated values  along with standard errors for the estimates. The
estimation procedure finds a global interior optimum, and the corresponding parameters
value are quite plausible. For example, the estimated value for the average level of risk
aversion,  = 79.9, is high but remains similar to or lower than the values found/used by
several quantitive papers focused on matching risk-premia facts in business cycle models
(e.g., Piazzesi and Schneider, 2006; Rudebusch and Swanson, 2012; Basu and Bundick,
2017; Caggiano et al., 2021).
    Figure 4 shows that the impulse responses implied by the estimated model (blue-dot
lines) do an excellent job of matching the data, and in particular generate the familiar
aggregate comovement pattern that traditionally defines the standard business cycle. On
the macroeconomic side, the changes in output, consumption and employment track the
data quite closely. The change in investment on impact exactly matches the sharp fall
we observe in the data, and although the model then undershoots modestly for several
subsequent periods it remains within the standard error bands of the data.
    In addition to the macro variables, the model does an excellent job capturing two
central features of asset prices. First, the model closely captures the persistent increase
in the 5-year equity risk premium, which was central to our identification of the empirical
shock and is similarly central for disciplining the risk-aversion shock in the model. Second,
the model also matches the pattern of realized equity returns very well, with a steep fall
in stock returns on impact, followed by a long period of above-average returns (which
generate the expected excess return underlying the elevated risk-premium). Thus, the
model is successful at capturing both the business cycle comovements and the counter-
cyclical risk-premium that we found in the data.
    Perhaps the key and most surprising result is that our model predicts a substantial
and long-lived decline in investment, despite the increase in desired saving implied by the
risk aversion shock.13 How can this happen? Barro and King (1984) show that generating
the typical comovement of macroeconomic variables in response to non-technology shocks
is quite difficult. Indeed, a rise in risk aversion leads to a precautionary behavior that
reduces consumption and increases desired savings, which typically leads to an increase
in investment in equilibrium. Put differently, absent aggregate supply shifters, output
normally does not to fall enough to drive a joint decline in consumption and investment.
  13
    Recall from eq. (35) that investment in our model includes both investment in capital and in vacancy
posting. Each contributes roughly half of the fall in measured investment, with the fall in vacancies
contributing more early on and the fall in capital investment contributing more after the first year.



                                                  27
Figure 4: Impulse responses to VAR-identified risk premium shock along with model-implied
responses.


    In our model, the above intuition is more subtle because firms have several ways to
invest: either in physical capital or in one of two-types of long-lived labor relationships.
As it would in standard real business cycle model, the increase in risk aversion gives rise to
precautionary motives that reduce consumption and increases overall savings. However,
because agents in our economy have many savings technologies, precautionary motives
also induce a reallocation of savings towards safer assets.
    Focusing first on the choice between labor and capital: If labor is sufficiently risky, the
firms' investment composition shifts away from labor relationships (i.e. vacancies) and
towards physical capital. This reallocation of investment induces a fall in new vacancies,
which can be strong enough so that employment itself falls sharply. This has two effects,
first it lowers the marginal product of capital and second also lowers equilibrium output,
and if strong enough, these two effects can combine to drive equilibrium investment down
with the other macroeconomic variables. In Section 4.5 we discuss in detail what makes
labor sufficiently risky in our estimation.
    Since the bulk of labor is in long-term relationships, reallocation between long-term

                                              28
Figure 5: Impulse responses to VAR-identified risk premium shock along with model-implied
responses.


labor and capital is the crucial channel determining the qualitative effects of the change in
risk aversion. Nevertheless, the quantitative effects of the shock also depend importantly
on the re-allocation between the two types of labor. In particular, firm willingness to
substitute the shorter-term, part-time hires for longer-term, full-time hires depends on
the relative riskiness of the two types of relationships. Since our calibration choices
imply, intuitively, that short-term labor relationships are relatively less risky, due to both
a flexible wage and shorter duration, an increase in risk aversion induces firms to shift
their vacancy postings towards the safer, part-time sector. This amplifies the effects of
the re-allocation from capital to labor, because it turns out that at our estimation the
part-time labor has a lower marginal product that full-time labor, and hence re-allocation
within labor leads to a further drop in output.
    The first row of Figure 5 captures the model's implications for the re-allocation within
labor types. In the first panel, we show the model's implications for part-time employment,
and the second panel shows the response of the (logged) ratio of part-time to full-time
employment. These figures show that the model not only captures the patterns of total

                                             29
employment, but also captures very well the concurrent reallocation between the full-time
and part-time sectors that is also a significant feature of the data. The third panel of the
first row plots the impulse response of hours-per-worker in the data and model. Since our
model does not include an intensive margin within jobs, we construct this response by
assuming that hours of a part-time worker are exactly half the hours of full-time workers.
This panel shows that the (extensive margin) reallocation of workers across worker types
can account for a portion, but not all, of the fall in hours-per-worker seen in the data.
    The bottom left panel of the figure reports the model implied dynamics of the real
interest rate. While the model implies a somewhat larger fall in real interest rates in
response to the shock, the economic significance of the difference is modest. The limited
response of the real interest rate in the model highlights that in our model recessions are
driven by varying risk premia, and the associated re-allocation of savings towards safer
assets rather than by intertemporal substitution of present for future consumption. This
business-cycle narrative is consistent with the central lesson of the macro-finance literature
summarized in Cochrane (2017). Overall, we conclude, the model does a remarkably good
job of matching the quantitative patterns in the data.


4.4    Risk Premia
Above, we discussed the basic intuition that underlies our model's ability to deliver re-
alistic macroeconomic comovements based on differences in the relative risk profile of
capital and labor. Our argument requires labor to be sufficiently risky, and more risky
than capital investment, in order for aggregate variables to all decline together. We now
verify these patterns hold in our estimation by measuring in the model the risk premia
associated with the the three types of available investment assets: capital, full-time and
part-time vacancies.
    We begin by defining the equity premium as the extra return on a share of the rep-
resentative firm relative to the risk free rate. Specifically, we define the return on equity
and the equity risk premium as:
                                             E       E
                                     E    Dt +1 + Pt+1
                                    Rt +1 =             ,
                                               PtE
                                                E
                                               Rt +1
                                    EPt = Et      R
                                                      .
                                               Rt

The return reflects the cash flow generated by the stock plus the change in the market
price of equity.

                                              30
   Analogous measures of returns can be derived for the other assets in this economy.
For example, we can define the excess return on physical capital as

                                                      ~t
                                                      R K
                                                         +1
                                       KPt = Et          R
                                                            ,
                                                      Rt

where
                                            -1
                                ut+1 Kt+1
                       ut+1     Zt+1 Nt+1
                                                 + qt+1 (1 -  (ut+1 ) - adj.costs)
               ~K 
               R                                                                     ,   (41)
                t+1
                                                      qt
can be derived by rearranging the capital Euler equation. In (41) the return on capital
reflects the net cash flow of a unit of capital, equal to its marginal product plus the change
in the market price net of depreciation and adjustment costs.
    Similarly, the vacancy posting condition of a firm can be re-cast in terms of a return
on a dollar invested in vacancies:

                                                      R             l
                                   (M P Li,t - Wi,t )Rt + (1 - i ) i,t +1
                        L                                          i,t+1
                       Ri,t +1 =                      l
                                                      i,t
                                                                            ,
                                                      i,t


which then allows us to define the risk-premium of this type of investment too:

                             L
                            Ri,t +1                                             1
               LPi,t = Et      R
                                      = 1 - (1 - i )i,t Covt Mt,t+1 ,                ,
                             Rt                                             i,t+1

where M P Li,t denotes the marginal product of labor in sector i. The definition of the
return reflects the net cash flow from a filled vacancy, equal to the marginal product
of labor minus the wage plus the change in the value of a job. The latter equals the
vacancy cost, il , times the duration of the typical vacancy, Q1 m . In contrast to capital,
                                                                 i,t
which becomes productive with a one-period delay, the labor generates the cash flow
                                                                                  R
immediately, so the first term in the numerator of the return is multiplied by Rt   .
    The labor market premium is higher when the covariance between tightness and the
stochastic discount factor is more negative. Intuitively, a tighter labor market indicates
that the vacancy filling probability is low or that the marginal value of the workers to
the firm is high. Thus, if tightness increases when the the stochastic discount factor is
high (i.e., in a recession), it means that workers of this type are a good hedge: they are
most valuable when marginal utility is high. Conversely, if in a recession the tightness of
a particular labor market is low, it means that the job filling probability is high or that


                                                 31
                         Table 6: Steady-state Annualized Risk Premia
                             Description                      Value (%)
                             Capital premium                        0.5
                             Full-time labor premium               18.7
                             Part-time labor premium               4.1



the marginal value of these workers is low. These workers are poor hedges and, therefore,
command a risk premium.
    Table 6 reports the (annualized) steady state premia implied by our model. Our
estimated baseline model implies an average capital premium of 0.5% over the safe interest
rate, and an average full-time labor premium of 18.7%, several times larger than our target
equity premium and much larger than the capital premium. Finally, the part-time labor
premium of 4.1% captures the crucial features of the part-time sector as having (i) flexible
wages and (ii) a shorter duration ­ this makes the part-time labor less risky than full-time
labor, and thus makes it an attractive alternative to full-time positions during periods of
heightened risk aversion.
    Assessing the quantitative realism of the labor and capital premia is a daunting task,
as empirical counterparts of these objects are not readily available.14 Nevertheless, we
can try to map them into a measurable object by recognizing that the overall value of
firm equity in the model reflect the market value of installed capital plus the value of
the established relationships with workers. In this way, our use of the targeted equity
premium, which is much less difficult to measure in the data, provides the most direct
empirical discipline on the values reported here.
    In addition to the unconditional levels of risk-premia, it is also interesting to ask
whether the model implies realistic variability of excess returns. To answer this question,
we compute the famous Sharpe (1994) ratio using quaterly returns:

                                                       E       b
                                              E [log (Rt +1 /Rt )]
                                     SR =                E       b
                                                                   .                                 (42)
                                             std log (Rt  +1 /Rt )


The annualized Sharpe ration implied by our model is 0.45, which is quite close to the
empirical value of 0.41 in our sample. Similarly, the model-implied standard-deviation of
  14
     A first attempt of decomposing firm value in the contribution of the inputs of production using firm-
level data on U.S. publicly traded firms is Belo et al. (2019), who indeed find a significant contribution
of "installed" labor to firm value, in-line with our theory.



                                                   32
      1.2                         0.04                            2

       1
                                  0.03                           1.5
      0.8

      0.6                         0.02                            1

      0.4
                                  0.01                           0.5
      0.2

       0                            0                             0
               10    20      30            10        20    30             10      20      30


   Figure 6: Impulse responses of risk premia in the model following a risk appetite shock.

the (annualized) 5-year risk premium is 100 × std(rpt,t+20 ) = 6.68%, which is very similar
to the corresponding realized standard-deviation in our data sample of 6.41%. These
results provide additional confirmation that our model provides a quantitatively realistic
match to the data, including a variety of important moments related to risk premia.
    Figure 6 reports the responses of the risk premia to the risk aversion shock in our
estimated model. The figure shows that, as suggested by our discussion above, the risk
premia for the full-time sector rises substantially more than that of the part-time sector
and capital, conditional on an aggregate increase in risk-aversion. The last panel of
the figure shows the patterns of the one-quarter and the five-year expected equity risk
premia. The figure emphasizes that the bulk of the increase in the longer-term risk premia
occurs because of expected excess returns that occur a year or more after the arrival of
the shock. This feature is also consistent with our reduced-form evidence that shows
statistically significant excess stock returns beginning a year after the identified shock.


4.5         Inspecting the Mechanism
To examine what features of the model are crucial for our results, and why, we perform
a set of counter-factual experiments changing one parameter or one feature at a time,
otherwise using the estimated values for the other parameters of the model.
    Figure 7 plots the resulting impulse responses when we counter-factually fix capacity
utilization (circle lines), against the IRFs implied by the baseline estimation (blue lines).
The key observation is that capital utilization plays an important amplification role,
where without it the model does not generate a sufficient fall in output and employment
on impact. Specifically, without the drop of capital utilization in our benchmark model,
the MPL of labor remains relatively high, which mutes the fall in employment. In turn,


                                                33
   1.4                                   0                                 0.2

   1.2                                 -0.1                                0.1

    1                                                                        0
                                       -0.2
   0.8                                                                     -0.1
                                       -0.3
   0.6                                                                     -0.2
                                       -0.4
   0.4                                                                     -0.3

   0.2                                 -0.5                                -0.4

    0                                  -0.6                                -0.5
         5   10   15    20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30




    0                                    0                                   1

  -0.2                                 -0.1                                  0

  -0.4                                 -0.2                                 -1

  -0.6                                 -0.3                                 -2

  -0.8                                 -0.4                                 -3

   -1                                  -0.5                                 -4

  -1.2                                 -0.6                                 -5
         5   10   15    20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30


                       Figure 7: Model responses with fixed capacity utilization.

output falls by less as well, and hence either consumption or investment must fall by less
than under our baseline calibration. In this case, it turns out that consumption actually
rises on impact and only falls after subsequent changes in the capital shock and labor push
down output to the point where the model once-again achieves the usual business-cycle
comovement patterns.
    By contrast, Figure 8 displays the counterfactual responses when all wages are flexible
and set according to Nash bargaining period by period. The figure shows that wage
stickiness is crucial for the strength of our mechanism. Without sticky wages, our model
faces a classic Shimer (2005) puzzle of negligible changes in employment (although in
contrast to Shimer (2005), here we consider a shock to risk aversion, not TFP). The
reason is that wage stickiness is crucial for generating a high risk premium on full-time
labor relationships. With flexible wages, such labor relationships are much safer, hence
the re-allocation of investment conditional on risk-aversion shocks, which drive the fall in
labor and output in our benchmark model, is largely absent. As a result, the risk-aversion
shocks are no longer able to generate meaningful fluctuations in aggregate quantities, a
finding that emphasizes that the Shimer puzzle extends beyond shocks to productivity to
other potential sources of aggregate fluctuations, including second-moment shocks.

                                                       34
   1.4                                0.1                                 0.1

   1.2                                  0                                   0

    1                                 -0.1
                                                                          -0.1
   0.8                                -0.2
                                                                          -0.2
   0.6                                -0.3
                                                                          -0.3
   0.4                                -0.4

   0.2                                -0.5                                -0.4

    0                                 -0.6                                -0.5
         5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30




   0.2                                  0                                   1

    0                                 -0.1                                  0

  -0.2
                                      -0.2                                 -1
  -0.4
                                      -0.3                                 -2
  -0.6
                                      -0.4                                 -3
  -0.8

   -1                                 -0.5                                 -4

  -1.2                                -0.6                                 -5
         5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30


                       Figure 8: Model responses with Nash-bargained wages.

    Our next counterfactual exercise demonstrates, directly, the fundamental role of risk
premia in driving business cycle comovements in our estimated model. Equation (27) in
Section 3 has shown that the value of a match to a firm is the sum of the discounted
cash flows associated with the match plus a risk premium. Figure 9 shows the responses
to a risk aversion shock in a counterfactual economy where the risk-premium effect on
either full-time or part-time labor is shut down so that firms value this type of workers
only according to the cash-flow effect. The picture shows that when we eliminate the risk
premium associated with full-time workers, our model fails to reproduce business cycle
comovements and delivers only negligible changes in all aggregate variables, including
employment. By contrast, shutting down the risk premium on part-time workers leaves
the dynamic responses to the risk aversion shock virtually unchanged relative to our
baseline.
    We thus conclude that it is the high riskiness of the full-time workers that allows the
model to match the aggregate responses to changes in risk premia. The reason is two-
fold. On the one hand, the part-time sector is relatively small as it accounts for 18% of
total employment, and on the other hand, the risk-premium of the part-time sector in
the benchmark model is only moderately higher than that of capital. Therefore, if that

                                                      35
   1.5                                0.1                                 0.1

                                        0                                   0

                                      -0.1
    1                                                                     -0.1
                                      -0.2
                                                                          -0.2
                                      -0.3
   0.5                                                                    -0.3
                                      -0.4

                                      -0.5                                -0.4

    0                                 -0.6                                -0.5
         5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30




   0.2                                0.1                                   1

    0                                   0                                   0

  -0.2                                -0.1                                 -1

  -0.4                                -0.2                                 -2

  -0.6                                -0.3                                 -3

  -0.8                                -0.4                                 -4

   -1                                 -0.5                                 -5

  -1.2                                -0.6                                 -6
         5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30          5   10   15   20   25   30


                            Figure 9: Model responses without risk premia.

was the only risk-premium on labor, there would very little resulting re-allocation from
investment in vacancies to investment in physical capital, and hence only a small fall in
current output would be due to such rebalancing of savings.
    By showing that the effect of the risk-aversion shock dissipates when full-time workers
are safe, this exercise not only clarifies the role of wage stickiness in our model but also
sets it apart from previous contributions. In Hall (2005), wage stickiness resolves the
Shimer (2005) puzzle because it makes the value of matches more volatile. The volatility
comes from the large movements in the cash flows associated with these matches following
productivity shocks when wages are sticky.
    By contrast, our last two counterfactuals demonstrate that in our model sticky wages
generate volatility in the value of full-time matches by means of variation in the risk
premia associated with these matches, not in the volatility of their cash flows. The key
is the different type of shock we consider. Intuitively, a risk-aversion shock has only a
muted impact on future labor productivity (only indirectly, through the equilibrium fall in
capital and utilization), unlike a direct shock to the level of TFP. Hence, a risk-premium
shock, even with sticky wages, does not lead to meaningful variation in the cash flows of
any given labor match. It does, however, have a significant impact on the pricing of these

                                                      36
cash flows, by making firms much more sensitive to the uncertainty involved with future
surpluses from labor matches.
    In this sense, we uncover a new way in which wage stickiness can help deliver large
changes in the value of workers and thus resolve the Shimer (2005) puzzle: by driving
large changes in the risk premia associated with employment.


5    Conclusions
This paper shows that fluctuations in risk premia can be major drivers of macroeconomic
fluctuations. Our empirical analysis suggests the possibility of a major causal pathway
flowing from risk premia to macroeconomic fluctuations, and our theory embodies one
such a pathway. In our model, heightened risk premia cause recessions because they drive
reallocation of saving towards safer stores of value, which simultaneously have low instan-
taneous marginal products. Thus, our theory contrasts with many business cycles models
that emphasize the effects of intertemporal substitution, and instead puts risk premia and
their effects on precautionary saving at the center of macroeconomic propagation. In this
respect, our model bridges a gap between the tradition of risk-driven business cycles ` a la
Keynes and the central lessons of modern macro-finance summarized in Cochrane (2017).
    To focus attention on this particular propagation mechanism, we abstract throughout
from many other ingredients that may contribute to risk-driven macroeconomic comove-
ment, including nominal rigidities (Basu and Bundick, 2017), financial frictions (Chris-
tiano et al., 2014), uninsurable idiosyncratic risk (Di Tella and Hall, 2020), and heteroge-
nous asset valuations (Caballero and Simsek, 2020). All of these features likely play a
role in generating the data. Nevertheless, our quantitative analysis demonstrates that
the savings reallocation channel is sufficiently powerful to drive a substantial portion of
macroeconomic fluctuations on its own.
    Our theory emphasizes the labor market implications of savings reallocation primarily
because our empirical results suggest a flight to safety in those markets. Nevertheless,
the same patters should apply to other forms of saving available in the economy (risky
private investments versus safe government bonds, foreign investment for open economies,
etc.) Future research should continue to look for similar patterns of savings reallocation
in other markets, and explore the business cycle consequences of that mechanism in those
contexts as well.




                                            37
References
Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2020, October). Business-cycle anatomy.
 American Economic Review 110 (10), 3030­70.

Bansal, R. and A. Yaron (2004). Risks for the long run: A potential resolution of asset
  pricing puzzles. The Journal of Finance 59 (4), 1481­1509.

Barnichon, R. (2010). Building a composite help-wanted index. Economics Letters 109 (3),
  175 ­ 178.

Barro, R. J. (2006, 08). Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century*.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (3), 823­866.

Barro, R. J. and R. G. King (1984). Time-separable preferences and intertemporal-
  substitution models of business cycles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (4),
  817­839.

Basu, S. and B. Bundick (2017). Uncertainty shocks in a model of effective demand.
  Econometrica 85 (3), 937­958.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006). Are Technology Improvements Con-
  tractionary? The American Economic Review 96 (5), pp. 1418­1448.

Bayer, C., R. L¨  utticke, L. Pham-Dao, and V. Tjaden (2019). Precautionary savings,
  illiquid assets, and the aggregate consequences of shocks to household income risk.
  Econometrica 87 (1), 255­290.

Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2006, September). Stock prices, news, and economic fluctua-
  tions. American Economic Review 96 (4), 1293­1307.

Bekaert, G., E. C. Engstrom, and N. R. Xu (2019). The time variation in risk appetite
  and uncertainty. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Belo, F., V. Gala, J. Salomao, and M. A. Vitorino (2019, July). Decomposing firm value.
  Working Paper 26112, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blanchard, O. and J. Gal´
                        i (2010, April). Labor markets and monetary policy: A new key-
  nesian model with unemployment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2),
  1­30.


                                          38
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3), 623­685.

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2018). Really
  uncertain business cycles. Econometrica 86 (3), 1031­1065.

Borovicka, J. and K. Borovickov´
                               a (2018). Risk premia and unemployment fluctuations.
  Manuscript, New York University .

Caballero, R. J. and A. Simsek (2020, 03). A Risk-Centric Model of Demand Recessions
  and Speculation*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (3), 1493­1566.

Cacciatore, M. and F. Ravenna (2020, October). Uncertainty, wages, and the business
  cycle. Working Paper 27951, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Caggiano, G., E. Castelnuovo, and G. Pellegrino (2021). Uncertainty shocks and the great
  recession: Nonlinearities matter. Economics Letters 198, 109669.

Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By force of habit: A consumption-based
  explanation of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2),
  205­251.

Challe, E., J. Matheron, X. Ragot, and J. F. Rubio-Ramirez (2017). Precautionary saving
 and aggregate demand. Quantitative Economics 8 (2), 435­478.

Christiano, L., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014). Risk shocks. American Economic
 Review 104 (1), 27­65.

Christiano, L. J., M. Eichenbaum, and C. L. Evans (2005). Nominal Rigidities and the
 Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy. Journal of Political Economy 113 (1),
 1­45.

Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates.       The Journal of Fi-
  nance 66 (4), 1047­1108.

Cochrane, J. H. (2017). Macro-finance. Review of Finance 21 (3), 945­985.

den Haan, W. J. and G. Kaltenbrunner (2009). Anticipated growth and business cycles
  in matching models. Journal of Monetary Economics .

Di Tella, S. and R. E. Hall (2020, January). Risk premium shocks can create inefficient
  recessions. Working Paper 26721, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                          39
Edge, R. M. and R. S. G¨urkaynak (2010). How useful are estimated dsge model forecasts
  for central bankers? [with comments and discussion]. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity , 209­259.

Faia, E. and V. Pezone (2018). Monetary policy and the cost of heterogeneous wage
  rigidity: Evidence from the stock market.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1989). Business conditions and expected returns on stocks
  and bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 25 (1), 23 ­ 49.

Fernald, J. (2014). A quarterly, utilization-adjusted series on total factor productivity.
  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Fern´
    andez-Villaverde, J., P. Guerr´
                                  on-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ram´
                                                                           irez (2015,
  November). Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity. American Economic Re-
  view 105 (11), 3352­84.

Freund, L. and P. Rendahl (2020). Unexpected effects: uncertainty, unemployment, and
  inflation.

Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2014). Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
  investment dynamics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gourio, F. (2012). Disaster risk and business cycles. American Economic Review 102 (6),
 2734­66.

Hall, R. E. (2005, March). Employment fluctuations with equilibrium wage stickiness.
  American Economic Review 95 (1), 50­65.

Hall, R. E. (2017, February). High discounts and high unemployment. American Economic
  Review 107 (2), 305­30.

Ilut, C. L. and M. Schneider (2014, August). Ambiguous business cycles. American
   Economic Review 104 (8), 2368­99.

Jermann, U. J. (1998). Asset pricing in production economies. Journal of Monetary
  Economics 41 (2), 257 ­ 275.

Kehoe, P. J., P. Lopez, V. Midrigan, and E. Pastorino (2019, December). Asset prices
  and unemployment fluctuations. Working Paper 26580, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

                                           40
Kilic, M. and J. A. Wachter (2018, 01). Risk, Unemployment, and the Stock Market: A
  Rare-Event-Based Explanation of Labor Market Volatility. The Review of Financial
  Studies 31 (12), 4762­4814.

Kurmann, A. and C. Otrok (2013, October). News shocks and the slope of the term
 structure of interest rates. American Economic Review 103 (6), 2612­32.

Lariau, A. (2017). Underemployment and the business cycle. Unpublished manuscript,
  Boston College .

Leduc, S. and Z. Liu (2016). Uncertainty shocks are aggregate demand shocks. Journal
  of Monetary Economics 82, 20­35.

L´
 opez-Salido, D., J. C. Stein, and E. Zakrajsek (2017, 05). Credit-Market Sentiment and
  the Business Cycle*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (3), 1373­1426.

Martin, I. (2017, 10). What is the Expected Return on the Market?*. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 132 (1), 367­433.

Mitra, I. and Y. Xu (2019, 10). Time-Varying Risk Premium and Unemployment Risk
 across Age Groups. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (8), 3624­3673.

Modigliani, F. and M. H. Miller (1958). The cost of capital, corporation finance and the
 theory of investment. The American Economic Review 48 (3), 261­297.

Mortensen, D. T. and C. A. Pissarides (1994). Job creation and job destruction in the
 theory of unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies 61 (3), 397­415.

Mukoyama, T., M. Shintani, K. Teramoto, et al. (2018). Cyclical part-time employment
 in an estimated new keynesian model with search frictions. Technical report.

Nekarda, C. J. and V. A. Ramey (2013). The cyclical behavior of the price-cost markup.
  Working Paper 19099, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Pflueger, C., E. Siriwardane, and A. Sunderam (2020, 03). Financial Market Risk Percep-
   tions and the Macroeconomy*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (3), 1443­1491.

Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2006). Equilibrium yield curves. NBER Macroeconomics
  Annual 21, 389­472.

Rotemberg, J. J. and M. Woodford (1999). The cyclical behavior of prices and costs.
  Volume 1 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, Chapter 16, pp. 1051 ­ 1135. Elsevier.

                                          41
Rudebusch, G. D. and E. T. Swanson (2012, January). The bond premium in a dsge
 model with long-run real and nominal risks. American Economic Journal: Macroeco-
 nomics 4 (1), 105­43.

Schorfheide, F., D. Song, and A. Yaron (2018). Identifying long-run risks: A bayesian
  mixed-frequency approach. Econometrica 86 (2), 617­654.

Sharpe, W. F. (1994). The sharpe ratio. The Journal of Portfolio Management 21 (1),
  49­58.

Shimer, R. (2005, March). The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and va-
  cancies. American Economic Review 95 (1), 25­49.

Uhlig, H. (2003). What moves real GNP? Unpublished manuscript .

Uhlig, H. (2004). Do technology shocks lead to a fall in total hours worked? Journal of
 the European Economic Association .

Yashiv, E. (2008). U.S. Labor Market Dynamics Revisited. Scandinavian Journal of
  Economics 109 (4).




                                          42
Appendix
A      Model
This section contains a detailed derivation of the real business cycle model that we use in
our main analysis.


A.1     Households
The economy is populated by a representative household with a continuum of members of
unit measure. In period t, the household chooses aggregate consumption (Ct ), government
                                                  c
bond holdings (Bt+1 ), corporate bond holdings (Bt +1 ), and firm share holdings (Xt+1 ), to
maximize lifetime utility
                                                                             1
                                                                    1-1/   1-1/
                                         1-1/                  -t
                     Vt = max (1 -     )Ct       +     (Et Vt1
                                                             +1 )
                                                                     1-t                        (A.1)

subject to the period budget constraint, denoted in terms of the consumption numeraire,

                                          1
    Ct + Pte Xt+1 + Qc   c       c
                     t (Bt+1 - dBt ) +       B  (Dt
                                           r t+1
                                                  e               c
                                                    + Pte ) Xt + Bt + Bt + Etl .                (A.2)
                                          Rt
                                                                                              -1
In the above, Qc t is price of a multi-period corporate bond with average duration (1 - d) ,
   r
Rt   is the one-period safe real interest rate, Pte is the price of a share of the representative
                                       e
firms that pays a real dividend Dt       , and Etl is the household's total labor earnings (de-
tailed below). Risk aversion is denoted by t , while  is the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution.
     Epstein-Zin preferences imply the following stochastic discount factor:

                                            1-1/                                    1/ -t
                Vt /Ct+1             Ct+1              Ct                Vt+1
    Mt,t+1 =                  =                                                 1           .   (A.3)
                Vt /Ct                Ct              Ct+1     (Et Vt1 -t 1-
                                                                     +1 )
                                                                            t



The first order conditions for the households yield

                                      r
                                 1 = Rt Et Mt,t+1 ,
                              PtE = Et Mt,t+1 Dt
                                               E        E
                                                 +1 + Pt+1           ,
                               Qc                c
                                t = Et Mt,t+1 (dQt+1 + 1) .




                                               43
A.2     Firms
The representative firm chooses N1,t , N2,t ,v1,t , v2,t , Kt+1 , and It to maximize its discounted
cash flow:                              
                                              Vt /Ct+s
                             max Et                             Dt+s ,                        (A.4)
                                       s=0
                                               V    t /C   t

subject to the production function:

                                    Yt  (Kt ut ) (Zt Nt )1- ,                                (A.5)

and the labor aggregator:
                                                                       
                                                 -1          -1        -1
                              Nt = (1 - )N1,t + N2,t
                                                             
                                                                            ,                (A.6)

The capital accumulation equation is

                                                                  2
                                               K      It
                       Kt+1 =     1 -  (ut ) -           -              Kt + It ,            (A.7)
                                               2      Kt

and the laws of motion for employment in the full-time and part-time sectors are given
by

                                N1,t = (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 + 1,t v1,t ,                           (A.8)
                                N2,t = (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 + 2,t v2,t .                           (A.9)

where 1 and 2 are exogenous separation rates. The cash flows of of the firm are given
by
                                                      l           l
               Dt = Yt - W1,t N1,t - W2,t N2,t - It - 1 ,t v1,t - 2,t v2,t .   (A.10)

The problem of the firms yields the following equilibrium conditions:


                      K
    qt =Et Mt+1 ut+1 Rt +1 +
                                                      2
                                    K    It+1                     It+1              It+1
          + qt+1   1 -  (ut+1 ) -             -           + K          -                   (A.11)
                                    2    Kt+1                     Kt+1              Kt+1




                                                44
                                                  1                   It
                                                     = 1 - K             - ,                                     (A.12)
                                                  qt                  Kt
                                     K
                                    Rt ut Kt = (Kt ut ) (Zt Nt )1- ,                                             (A.13)
                                                   K
                                      qt  (ut ) = Rt ,                                                           (A.14)

and finally
                                                                1
    l                                                                                                   l
    1 ,t                                 ut Kt         Nt                                     (1 - 1 )1   ,t+1
         = (1 - )(1 - )Zt                                           - W1,t + Et      Mt,t+1        m
                                                                                                                  ,
    1,t                                  Z t Nt        N1,t                                       Q1,t+1
                                                                                                                 (A.15)
                                                       1
    l                                                                                          l
    2 ,t                      ut Kt           Nt                                     (1 - 2 )2   ,t+1
         = (1 - )Zt                                        - W2,t + Et        Mt,t+1      m
                                                                                                          .      (A.16)
    2,t                       Zt Nt           N2,t                                       Q2,t+1

                             m (S   ,v    )
In equilibrium i,t = i vi,ti,t
                               i,t
                                   where mi is the Cobb-Douglas matching function for
sector i. The equilibrium wages in each sector are given by:
                                                                     1
                                                       
                                                  uK          N      
                                                                           l
      W1,t = t 1 (1 - )(1 - )                                            + 1 v1 /S1 + (1 - 1 )t b1 ,             (A.17)
                                                   N          N1
                                                                1
                                                   
                                      ut Kt            Nt       
                                                                      l
      W2,t = 2 (1 - )Zt                                             + 2 ,t v2,t /S2,t + (1 - 2 )b2,t .           (A.18)
                                      Zt Nt            N2,t

    Workers search sequentially in the two sectors. All unemployed workers at the begin-
ning of period t first try to find a job in sector one. If the search is unsuccessful, a given
worker searches in the second sector. Accordingly, the mass of searchers in the two sectors
is given by

                             S1,t = 1 - (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                                        (A.19)
                             S2,t = 1 - N1,t - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                                                  (A.20)

where the total labor force has been normalized to unity.


A.3       Equilibrium
An equilibrium of the economy is a sequence for {Yt , Ct , It , Gt , Kt , ut , v1,t , v2,t , Nt , N1,t , N2,t ,
               K         r
S1,t , S2,t , Rt , qt , Rt                                  E
                           , Mt , Vt , W1,t , W2,t , PtE , Dt    c
                                                              , Bt , Qc
                                                                      t , t } that satisfies the following con-




                                                           45
ditions:

              Yt =(ut Kt ) (Zt Nt )1- ,                                                                                   (A.21)
                                                          
                                  -1                -1    -1
             Nt = (1 - )N1,t + N2,t
                                                    
                                                               ,                                                          (A.22)

            N2,t =(1 - 1 )N2,t-1 + m2 (S2,t , v2,t ),                                                                     (A.23)
            N1,t =(1 - 2 )N2,t-1 + m1 (S1,t , v1,t ),                                                                     (A.24)
             S1,t =1 - (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                                                                  (A.25)
             S2,t =1 - N1,t - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                                                                            (A.26)
                                                                                1
      l                                                  
     1  ,t v1,t                              ut Kt                 Nt           
                    =(1 - )(1 - )Zt                                                 - W1,t +                              (A.27)
  m1 (S1,t , v1,t )                          Zt Nt                 N1,t
                                               l
                                     (1 - 1 )1   ,t+1 v1,t+1
                   + Et     Mt,t+1                                          ,
                                      m1 (S1,t+1 , v1,t+1 )
                                                                   1
      l                                        
     2  ,t v2,t                      ut Kt           Nt            
                    =(1 - )Zt                                          - W2,t +                                           (A.28)
  m2 (S2,t , v2,t )                  Zt Nt           N2,t
                                               l
                                     (1 - 2 )2   ,t+1 v2,t+1
                   + Et     Mt,t+1                                          ,
                                      m2 (S2,t+1 , v2,t+1 )
                                                                                1
                                                            
                                                    uK                 N        
                                                                                      l       v1
            W1,t =t  (1 - )(1 - )                                                   + 1          + (1 -  )t b1 ,          (A.29)
                                                     N                 N1                     S1
                                                                        1
                                                     
                                           ut Kt          Nt            
                                                                              l             v2,t
            W2,t = (1 - )Zt                                                 + 2 ,t               + (1 -  )b2,t ,          (A.30)
                                           Zt Nt          N2,t                              S2,t
                                1-1/                                                          1/ -t
                       Ct+1                  Ct                        Vt+1
           Mt,t+1 =                                                                 1                 ,                   (A.31)
                        Ct                  Ct+1         (Et Vt1 -t 1-
                                                               +1 )
                                                                      t


               PtE = Et Mt,t+1 Dt
                                E        E
                                  +1 + Pt+1                    ,                                                          (A.32)
                Qc                c
                 t = Et Mt,t+1 (dQt+1 + 1) ,                                                                              (A.33)
                   r
               1 =Rt Et Mt,t+1 ,                                                                                          (A.34)
                                -1
              K        ut Kt
             Rt =                      ,                                                                                  (A.35)
                       Zt Nt
              K
             Rt =qt  (ut ),                                                                                               (A.36)
                                K
              qt =Et Mt+1 ut+1 Rt +1 +                                                                                    (A.37)
                                                                                        2
                                              K                It+1                                   It+1         It+1
                   + qt+1      1 -  (ut+1 ) -                       -                       + K            -                 ,
                                              2                Kt+1                                   Kt+1         Kt+1


                                                         46
                                                                    2
                                     K                It
              Kt+1    = 1 -  (ut ) -                     -                 Kt + It ,                                     (A.38)
                                     2                Kt
                  1                   It
                     =1 - K              - ,                                                                             (A.39)
                  qt                  Kt
                  Yt =Ct + It + 1 v1,t + 2 v2,t + Gt ,                                                                   (A.40)
                 Gt =¯
                     g Yt ,                                                                                              (A.41)
                 E                                    l           l           c
                Dt =Yt - W1,t N1,t - W2,t N2,t - It - 1 ,t v1,t - 2,t v2,t - Bt + Kt+1 ,                                 (A.42)
               c       c          c
              Bt +1 =dBt + Kt+1 /Qt ,                                                                                    (A.43)
                                                                                          1
                                                                                1-1/    1-1/
                                                       -t
                  Vt = max (1 -  )(Ct )1-1/ +  (Et Vt1
                                                     +1 )
                                                                                 1-t           ,                         (A.44)
                       1-
               t+1 =t Zt  .                                                                                              (A.45)


A.4        Stationary Equilibrium
The model economy follows a balanced-growth path driven by the technology process, Zt ,
which we assume is integrated of order one and follows an AR(1) in log-growth rates:

                                         log(Zt ) = z log(Zt-1 ) + z z
                                                                     t,                                                  (A.46)

To describe the dynamics of the model in terms of stationary variables, we stationarize
any of the trending variables, Xt , by defining their stationary counterpart, X                                        ^ t  Xt .
                                                                                                                               Zt-1
The equilibrium of the economy in terms of these stationary variables is a sequence for
 ^t , C
{Y               ^ t, K
            ^t , G
       ^t , I         ^ t, u
                           ^t , v                                               K
                                ^1,t , v2,t , Nt , N1,t , N2,t , S1,t , S2,t , Rt         r
                                                                                  , qt , Rt        ^t , W
                                                                                            , Mt , V            ^ 2,t , P
                                                                                                        ^ 1,t , W             ^ E,
                                                                                                                         ^E , D
                                                                                                                          t     t
^ c , Qc , 
B           ^ t } that satisfies the following conditions:
 t      t


                 ^t =(ut K
                 Y       ^ t ) (Zt Nt )1- ,                                                                              (A.47)
                                                               
                                          -1            -1     -1
                Nt = (1 - )N1,t + N2,t                  
                                                                    ,                                                    (A.48)

              N2,t =(1 - 1 )N2,t-1 + m2 (S2,t , v2,t ),                                                                  (A.49)
              N1,t =(1 - 2 )N2,t-1 + m1 (S1,t , v1,t ),                                                                  (A.50)
               S1,t =1 - (1 - 1 )N1,t-1 - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                                                               (A.51)
               S2,t =1 - N1,t - (1 - 2 )N2,t-1 ,                                                                         (A.52)
                                                                                   1
    ^ t  l v1,t
                                                          ^t
                                                       ut K                 Nt     
        1
                    =(1 - )(1 - )Zt                                                     ^ 1,t +
                                                                                       -W                                (A.53)
  m1 (S1,t , v1,t )                                    Zt Nt                N1,t



                                                               47
                                  (1 - 1 ) ^ t+1  l v1,t+1
                                                  1
                 + Et   Mt,t+1 Zt                                    ,
                                    m1 (S1,t+1 , v1,t+1 )
                                                           1
 ^ t 2
     l
       ,t v2,t
                                    ^t
                                 ut K               Nt     
                  =(1 - )Zt                                     ^ 2,t +
                                                               -W                                  (A.54)
m2 (S2,t , v2,t )                Zt Nt              N2,t
                                  (1 - 2 ) ^ t+1  l v2,t+1
                                                  2
                 + Et   Mt,t+1 Zt                                    ,
                                    m2 (S2,t+1 , v2,t+1 )
                                                                1
                                         uK^           N                  v1
        ^ 1,t =
        W      ^ t  (1 - )(1 - )                                      l
                                                                    + 1      + (1 -  )^ t b1 ,     (A.55)
                                          N            N1                 S1
                                                                1
                                          ^t
                                       ut K            Nt                    v2,t
        ^ 2,t = (1 - )Zt
        W                                                           +^ t l        + (1 -  )^ t b2 , (A.56)
                                                                        2
                                       Zt Nt           N2,t                  S2,t
                                1-1/                                               1/ -t
                    ^t+1 Zt
                    C                          ^t
                                               C                     ^t+1
                                                                     V
      Mt,t+1 =                                                             1               ,       (A.57)
                       ^t
                       C                 ^t+1 Zt
                                         C                         ^t1
                                                               (Et V   -t 1-
                                                                     +1 )
                                                                             t


           ^tE = Et Mt,t+1 Zt D
           P                  ^tE     ^E
                                 +1 + Pt+1                 ,                                       (A.58)

             Qc                c
              t = Et Mt,t+1 (dQt+1 + 1) ,                                                          (A.59)
              r
          1 =Rt Et Mt,t+1 ,                                                                        (A.60)
                              -1
                       ^t
                    ut K
         K
        Rt     =                   ,                                                               (A.61)
                    Zt Nt
         K
        Rt =qt  (ut ),                                                                             (A.62)
                              K
          qt =Et Mt,t+1 ut+1 Rt +1 +                                                               (A.63)
                                                                                                   
                                                                     2
                                        K I^t+1                                  ^t+1
                                                                                 I             ^t+1
                                                                                               I
                 + qt+1 1 -  (ut+1 ) -           -  + K                                -                ,
                                        2 K^ t+1                                 ^ t+1
                                                                                 K             ^ t+1
                                                                                               K
                                            
                                          2
                              K I    ^t         K^t   ^t
                                                      I
       ^ t+1
       K       = 1 -  (ut ) -           -           +    ,                                         (A.64)
                              2     K^t        Zt Zt

          1               ^t
                          I
             =1 - K          - ,                                                                   (A.65)
          qt              ^t
                          K
         ^t =C
         Y    ^t + I
                   ^t + ^ t 1 v1,t + ^ t 2 v2,t + Zt g
                                                     ¯Y,                                           (A.66)
         ^ t =Zt g
         G        ¯Y,                                                                              (A.67)
                                                                               ^ t+1
                                                                               K
        ^t
        D  E
             =Y    ^ 1,t N1,t - W
              ^t - W            ^ 2,t N2,t - I
                                             ^t - t (1
                                                     l        l
                                                       v1,t + 2          ^t
                                                                v2,t ) - B c
                                                                             +       ,             (A.68)
                                                                               Zt
       ^t
       B c      ^c            ^
          +1 =dBt /Zt +  Kt+1 /Qt ,
                                       c
                                                                                                   (A.69)


                                                48
                                                                          1
                                                                 1-1/   1-1/
            V                ^t )1-1/ + Zt1-1/  (Et V
            ^t = max (1 -  )(C                      ^t1 -t
                                                      +1 )
                                                                  1-t          ,       (A.70)
          ^ t+1 =
                 ^t (Zt )
                          -
                            .                                                          (A.71)


A.5     Labor Market Search
We assume that workers in the economy search for a job sequentially, first in the full-time
and, if they fail to find a full-time job, then in the part-time sector. In what follows,
we derive conditions under which this sequence is optimal. We verify ex post that these
conditions hold in our estimated model.
   Let us define the value of a matched worker in sector 1 and 2 and the value of unem-
ployment as:

           W1                             1            1      2
            t = W1,t + Et Mt,t+1 (1 - 1 )Wt+1 + 1 max{St+1 , St+1 , Ut+1 }         ,   (A.72)
    W2                                    2            1      2
     t = (W2,t + t ) + Et Mt,t+1 (1 - 2 )Wt+1 + 2 max{St+1 , St+1 , Ut+1 }         ,   (A.73)
                                   Ut = b2 + Et Mt,t+1 max{S1      2
                                                            t+1 , St+1 , Ut+1 } ,      (A.74)

where S1         2
         t and St are, respectively, the expected value of searching in both sectors sequen-
tially or just in the part-time sector:

                                S1    m    1         m     2
                                 t = P1,t Wt + (1 - P1,t )St .                         (A.75)
                                S2    m    2         m
                                 t = P2,t Wt + (1 - P2,t )Ut .                         (A.76)

Equations (A.72)-(A.74) reflect the assumption that as soon as workers separate from
their employers, they can immediately begin to search. A worker will always prefer to
search at least in the part time sector instead of foregoing search if

                                          S2
                                           t  Ut .                                     (A.77)

Looking the definition of Ut makes clear that this condition will be satisfied if b2,t is not
too large. In other words, the monetary compensations from not searching at all cannot
be too high. We verify this condition ex post and we assume it for the rest of the argument
so that max{S1        2                   1      2
               t+1 , St+1 , Ut+1 } = max{St+1 , St+1 }. For a worker to weakly strictly prefer
to search in both sectors we need:
                                           S1
                                            t  St .
                                                   2
                                                                                       (A.78)

Inspection of the above equations reveals that a necessary condition for this to hold is


                                             49
that t be not too large. That is, the non-wage compensation from working only part-
time should not be too high. If both these conditions are satisfied, we can replace the
definitions in (A.72)-(A.74) with

                        W1                             1        1
                         t = W1,t + Et Mt,t+1 (1 - 1 )Wt+1 + 1 St+1           ,          (A.79)
                 W2                                    2        1
                  t = (W2,t + t ) + Et Mt,t+1 (1 - 2 )Wt+1 + 2 St+1           ,          (A.80)
                                                   Ut = b2 + Et Mt,t+1 S1
                                                                        t+1 ,            (A.81)

Equations (A.79)-(A.81) together with (A.75)-(A.76) define the variables {W1       2    1    2
                                                                              t , Wt , St , St ,
Ut } under the assumption that conditions (A.77)-(A.78) hold.
    We verify the inequalities above in our estimated model and find that they each hold
in the (non-stochastic) steady-state of our economy. Since our model is estimated locally,
this is all that is required for our procedure to be coherent. As an additional check,
however, we verified the conditions also hold in the stochastic steady-state of the model.
Finally, across a long simulation of the economy, we find each conditions holds in at least
95% of realizations.


B      Data Construction
Our baseline VAR specification consists of output, consumption, investment, employ-
ment, ex-post real stock returns, ex-post real bond returns, and the dividend price ratio.
Our auxiliary series include measures of part-time employment, hours-per-worker, bond
returns, and bond-risk premia.
    Quantity variables were downloaded from the FRED database of the St. Louis Fed-
eral Reserve Bank and are included in seasonally-adjusted, real, per-capita terms. Our
population series is the civilian non-institutional population ages 16 and over, produced
by the BLS. We convert our population series to quarterly frequency using a three-month
average and smooth it using an HP-filter with penalty parameter  = 1600 to account for
occasional jumps in the series that occur after census years and CPS rebasing (see Edge
and G¨ urkaynak, 2010). Our deflator series is the GDP deflator produced by the BEA
national accounts.
    For output, we use nominal output produced by the BEA. Our investment measure
is inclusive: we take the sum of nominal gross private domestic investment, personal
expenditure on durable goods, government gross investment, and the trade balance (i.e.
investment abroad). Consumption consists of nominal personal consumption expenditures


                                              50
on non-durables and services.
    Our measure of employment is Total Nonfarm Employees (FRED code: PAYEMS)
produced by the BLS and divided by population. The measure of part-time employment
is the number of people "employed, usually part-time work" (FRED code: LNS12600000)
produced by the BLS and again divided by our population series. This series includes a
large discrete jump in the first month of 1994, associated with a reclassification of part-
time work. We splice the series by assuming there was no change in employment between
1993M12 and 1994M1. Our measure of hours is Non-farm Business Sector: Hours of All
Persons (FRED code: HOANBS).
    Our asset return series are all based on quarterly NYSE/AMEX/NASDAQ value-
weighted indexes from CRSP. Asset returns are computed inclusive of dividends, and are
also deflated by the GDP deflator. Our measure of bond risk premia comes from Moody's
corporate bond yield relative 10-year treasury bonds (FRED code: BAA10YM).




                                            51
