                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WAGE FLEXIBILITY UNDER SECTORAL BARGAINING

                                         David Card
                                       Ana Rute Cardoso

                                      Working Paper 28695
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28695


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We are very grateful to Laura Giuliano, Atilla Lindner, Patrick Kline and seminar participants at
UC Berkeley and the CESIfo Labour Webinar for helpful comments. We also thank Xianjun
Zhang, Rafael Cardoso and Jose Garcia-Louzao for outstanding research assistance. We thank the
National Statistical Office and the Ministry of Labor of Portugal for data access. Cardoso
acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, through the
Severo Ochoa Programme for Centres of Excellence in R&D (CEX2019-000915-S) and grant
PID2019-108144GB-100. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David Card and Ana Rute Cardoso. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Wage Flexibility Under Sectoral Bargaining
David Card and Ana Rute Cardoso
NBER Working Paper No. 28695
April 2021
JEL No. J31,J41,J51

                                         ABSTRACT

Sectoral contracts in many European countries set wage floors for different occupation groups. In
addition, employers often pay a wage premium (or wage cushion) to individual workers. We use
administrative data from Portugal, linked to collective bargaining agreements, to study the
interactions between wage floors and wage cushions and quantify the impact of sectoral wage
floors. Although wages exhibit a "spike" at the wage floor, a typical worker receives a 20%
premium over the floor, with larger cushions for older and better-educated workers and at higher-
productivity firms. Cushions also allow wages to covary with firm-specific productivity, even
within sectoral agreements. Contract negotiations tend to raise all wage floors proportionally,
with increases that reflect average productivity growth among covered firms. As floors rise,
however, cushions are compressed, leading to an average passthrough rate of only about 50%.
We find no evidence of employment responses to floor increases. Finally, we use a series of
counterfactual simulations to show that real wage reductions during the recent financial crisis
arose through reductions in real wage floors, reductions in real cushions, and a re-allocation of
workers to lower wage floors. Offsetting these effects was a rapid rise in education of new
cohorts, which in the absence of other factors would have led to rising real wages.


David Card
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu

Ana Rute Cardoso
IAE (CSIC) and Barcelona GSE
08193 Bellaterra
Barcelona
Spain
anarute.cardoso@iae.csic.es
    How does collective bargaining affect wages? Much of the existing research on this issue
focuses on the U.S. (e.g., Freeman and Medoff, 1984; Lewis, 1986; Farber et al., 2020), where
union contracts set wages for jobs. In this setting an increase in negotiated wage rates trans-
lates directly to an increase in wages for workers who remain in the same job. Collective
bargaining agreements in many European countries work differently: these agreements spec-
ify a set of wage floors for different occupation groups. Employers can (and often do) pay
idiosyncratic wage premiums on top of the floors.1 These premiums --which Cardoso and
Portugal (2005) labeled "wage cushions"-- partly undo the wage-standardizing features of
U.S.-style collective bargaining, contributing to within- and between-group pay inequality.2
Premiums can also adjust when floors change (or are frozen), providing a degree of wage
flexibility that is absent in the U.S. setting.3
    In this paper we explore the relationship between collectively bargained wage floors and
actual wages in Portugal, using individual wage records linked to collective bargaining agree-
ments from 2008 to 2016. The Portuguese system of sectoral bargaining is broadly similar to
the systems in Spain, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, and France (see Schulten, 2016). More-
over, the prevalence of pay rates in excess of negotiated wage floors parallels the situation
in other countries. Thus, we believe there are general lessons to be drawn from a study of
Portugal. The setting is also interesting because as part of a 2011 debt relief package, a
Troika of international agencies pushed for legislative changes that would reduce the cover-
age of sectoral bargains.4 This effort largely failed. Nevertheless, as we will show, significant
downward real wage adjustments occurred within the framework of the existing bargaining
system.
    The key to our analysis is the ability to link individual workers in the annual census of
employees in Portugal --known as Quadros de Pessoal (QP)-- to the collective bargaining
   1
      See Holden (1989, 1998) for the case of Norway; Calmfors and Nymoen (1990) for a broader discussion
of the Nordic countries; H¨  ubler and Jirjahn (2003) and Jung and Schnabel (2009) for the case of Germany;
Ordine (1995) for Italy; Dolado et al. (1997) for Spain; Butter and Eppink (2003) for The Netherlands, and
Cardoso and Portugal (2005) and Bastos et al. (2009) for earlier analyses of Portugal.
    2
      Freeman (1980) noted that the variance of wages is lower in the union sector than the non-union sector
and credited this in part to the elimination of idiosyncratic wage variation within jobs. Similarly, Ashenfelter
(1972) noted that unions raise wages of black workers relative to whites and suggested that this arose in
part because of standardization policies that reduce racial wage gaps within jobs. See Card, Lemieux and
Riddell (2004) for more discussion.
    3
      This fact is widely recognized in the literature on "wage drift" --Phelps Brown (1962) presents an early,
informative analysis. See also Calmfors (1993).
    4
      See Blanchard et al. (2013) for a discussion of the IMF's recommendations, which appear to have been
adopted in the Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of Portugal and the European
Commission (EC), European Central Bank (ECB), and International Monetary Fund (IMF).



                                                       1
agreements (CBA) and wage floors that apply to their jobs. This is made possible by
two institutional facts. First, the QP identifies the CBA for each worker covered by a
union contract, as well as a job title that in principle specifies their wage floor. Second,
information on all newly negotiated CBA's, including tables of wage floors for different
occupational groups, is published by the Ministry of Labor. Setting aside difficulties in
matching, it is therefore possible to assign wage floors to covered workers observed in the
QP in October of each year. While many previous studies have attempted to link subsets
of workers to their associated wage floors (e.g., Cardoso and Portugal (2005) for Portugal;
Card, Devicienti and Maida (2014) for Italy; Deelen and Euwals (2014) for Netherlands;
Diez-Catalan and Villanueva (2014) for Spain) we believe this is the most comprehensive
panel data set assembled to date that combines information on collectively bargained wage
floors and actual wages.
     Two initial questions, highlighted by the goals of the Troika, are: How did the share of
workers covered by CBA's change between 2008 and 2016? And how do uncovered workers
compare to covered workers? Consistent with other recent studies (e.g., Addison, Portugal,
and Vilares, 2017) we show that the fraction of full-time workers in QP covered by CBA's
fell only slightly, from 90% in 2008 to 87% in 2016. We also show that uncovered workers in
Portugal earn significantly higher wages than covered workers, contrary to the situation in
countries such as the U.S. or U.K.
     We then present a descriptive analysis of the role of wage floors in between- and within-
group wage variation. We show that the log of an individual's total monthly wage can be
decomposed into four components: (i) the minimum wage; (ii) the worker's relative wage
floor (i.e. the floor relative to the minimum wage); (iii) the gap between the base wage and
the wage floor (i.e., the wage cushion); and (iv) regular supplementary payments (including
meal subsidies and shift premiums).5 As was documented by Cardoso and Portugal (2005)
using QP data for 1999, we find that differences in relative wage floors and differences in
mean wage cushions both contribute to inter-group wage differences. For example, about
30% of the wage gap between men and women is attributable to higher wage floors for men,
and 60% to higher mean wage cushions for men. We also show that wage inequality within
skill groups reflects variation in both wage floors and wage cushions, as well as the covariance
between them.
     Within a given sectoral agreement firms have some latitude in assigning workers to dif-
   5
    Meal allowances are widespread in Portugal, in part because they are tax exempt up to a fairly generous
level (currently up to 7.63 Euros per day).



                                                    2
ferent floor categories, and even more latitude in determining wage cushions. Both factors
contribute to the cross-sectional variation in wages within CBA's. Classifying firms into
deciles of average value added per worker, we show that mean base wages at top decile firms
are over 40 log points higher than mean base wages at bottom decile firms in the same
sectoral agreement. Around 10% of this effect is attributable the assignment of workers to
higher wage floors at top decile firms, while 90% is attributable to higher wage cushions.
Thus, wage cushions play a particularly large role in within-CBA wage flexibility.
    Next, we study the renegotiation process for wage floors. We show that all the floors in
a given CBA adjust by virtually the same percentage when the contract is renegotiated. We
then relate this average floor adjustment factor to measures of productivity growth among
firms covered by the contract. We focus on two closely related questions: (1) Are wage
outcomes driven by average productivity growth of covered firms, or by the high- or low-
performers in the covered set? (2) How sensitive are negotiated wage floors to productivity
growth of covered firms? We find that floor adjustments respond to the central tendency
of growth in value added per worker among covered firms, rather than to upper- or lower-
tail growth, with an elasticity of around 0.10 --as big or bigger than the typical elasticities
estimated in the micro rent sharing literature (see Card et al., 2018).
    The net effect of wage floor adjustments depends on how wage cushions respond to these
adjustments. If employers react to keep the same wage cushion as a floor is raised, then
wage floor increases will pass through fully to actual wages. If cushions are compressed as
floors rise, however, the passthrough rate will be lower. To estimate passthrough rates we
calculate the change in base wages that would occur if each worker maintained the same
gap between their wage and the wage floor as floors are changed. We then regress actual
wage increases on these simulated increases, using both OLS and an instrumental variables
approach that takes the average simulated increase in wages for all workers at the same firm
as an instrument for the worker-specific effect of the floor increase.
    We find that the average passthrough rate of floor increases is around 50%, with a higher
passthrough rate for workers with smaller wage cushions. This pattern is similar to the
spillover effect of a minimum wage increase (e.g., Cengiz et al., 2019; Fortin, Lemieux and
Lloyd, forthcoming), though we find that the impact of wage floor increases extends further
up the distribution. We also test for but find no evidence of asymmetry of responses to
real wage floor changes arising from new contract negotiations versus those attributable to
inflation.
    We also examine the effect of wage floor adjustments on employment. Specifically, us-


                                              3
ing the same instrumental variable we use to study the passthrough of floors to individual
wages, we relate firm-wide employment changes to the simulated increase in base wages of
its employees caused by changes in wage floors. Our estimates suggest that employment is
unaffected by higher wage floors, though we cannot reject small negative impacts.
     In the final section of the paper we conduct a simulation analysis to understand how
changes in wage floors and wage cushions, as well as movements of workers between jobs
with different wage floor categories, contributed to the adjustment of real wages between 2010
and 2016, as Portugal suffered through a prolonged recession. We begin by computing mean
real wages for workers in different gender-education-age groups in 2010. We then increment
all wage floors to incorporate renegotiations between 2010 and 2016, but keep each worker in
the same floor category and hold constant their wage cushions and supplementary payments.
The comparison between this counterfactual and the 2010 baseline summarizes the net effect
of wage floor adjustments, and shows a 2.5 ppt reduction in average real wages attributable
to the erosion in real floors over the 6 years. Next, we reweight skill groups in 2010 to their
2016 shares to measure the effects of demographic change. Driven by a rapid rise in shares
of better-educated workers, this yields a 7.4 ppt increase in mean real wages in the economy
as a whole that would have occurred if wage floors, wage cushions, and the assignment of
workers to floors had remained constant.
     We then consider a counterfactual based on workers observed in 2016, using their actual
wage floors as of 2016 but simulating the wage cushion each worker would have earned in 2010
(by drawing from the distribution of cushions in 2010). Relative to the previous simulation,
this counterfactual reveals the net effect of the reallocation of workers across wage floor
groups that occurred between 2010 and 2016, and yields a 4.8 ppt reduction in mean real
wages for workers as a whole. Finally, we give each worker their actual wage cushion in 2016
(rather than a simulated 2010 wage cushion). This final step shows that changes in wage
cushions within wage floor categories led to a further 2.5 ppt reduction in mean real wages.
     Despite concerns that sectoral bargaining limits the responsiveness of real wages to neg-
ative shocks, our simulations suggest that real wages fell substantially during the debt crisis.
The declines were particularly large for university-educated workers, whose mean real wages
fell by 16 ppt between 2010 and 2016, reflecting a combination of declining real wage floors
(-4.4 ppt), declining real cushions (-6.2 ppt), and a reallocation of jobs toward lower wage
floor categories (-8.4 ppt). Real wage cuts for lower-paid workers were smaller but still sig-
nificant: young high school-educated females and males, for example, experienced declines
of 4.8 ppt and 5.6 ppt, respectively.


                                               4
    Our findings contribute to three separate strands of research. First, we contribute to a
macro-oriented literature that compares different collective bargaining systems (e.g., Calm-
fors and Driffill, 1988; Calmfors, 1993; Nickell and Layard, 1999). This literature often
assumes that sectoral agreements set wages for covered firms, ignoring employer-determined
wage cushions --a simplification that overstates the rigidity of Portuguese wage setting.
    Second, we contribute to the micro-oriented literature linking union-wage setting to wage
inequality (Freeman, 1980; Card, 1992; DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux, 1996; Farber et al.,
2020). Building on Cardoso and Portugal (2005), we show that in a European setting,
idiosyncratic wage premiums are important determinants of within-group and between-group
inequality. The size and distribution of these premiums helps explain why, despite high CBA
coverage rates, Portugal also has relatively high wage inequality.
    Finally, we contribute to the "micro Phillips curve" literature (e.g., Riddell, 1979; Card,
1990; Christofides and Oswald, 1992) that examines the determinants of negotiated wage
outcomes using union contract data. Our data allow us to examine the full set of wage floors
within a contract, rather than just the "base wage" for lower skilled workers that is usually
analyzed in this literature. We also study how multi-employer agreements are impacted by
the distribution of firm-specific productivity growth among covered firms. Finally, we show
how collectively bargained wage floors affect individual wage outcomes as well as within-
and between-group wage inequality.


1       Setting and Conceptual Framework
Sectoral Bargaining in Portugal and Reforms During the Debt Crisis

In the system established in Portugal in the 1970s and still in place today, employer asso-
ciations representing firms in a particular industry (and in some cases region) sign CBA's
with one or more trade unions.6 Although these agreements technically cover only union
members, in practice employers extend the agreements to their entire workforce, regardless
of membership status.7 Under the laws and practices that were largely in place in 2010,
the bargaining parties would often file a request with the Directorate-General for Employ-
    6
     There are two main union confederations in Portugal - the Uni~  ao Geral de Trabalhadores (UGT) and the
more radical Confedera¸  c~
                          ao Geral dos Trabalhadores Portugueses (CGTP). Often an employer association
will have separate agreements with affiliates of both confederations, but the terms will be identical. In our
analysis below we treat such parallel agreements as a single CBA.
   7
     We verified this directly by looking at the distribution of the fraction of employees classified as covered
by a CBA in the QP. This distribution is effectively comprised of a mass at 100% and a smaller mass at 0%.



                                                       5
ment and Labor Relations to extend the agreement to other firms in the same sector --a
request that was normally granted (see Naumann, 2018). Contract provisions could also be
voluntarily adopted by employers in the industry.
    Each CBA contains a variety of clauses prescribing work rules and practices, as well as a
set of wage floors that prevail during the term of the contract. Figure 1 presents an example
of the table of wage floors from a typical agreement --in this case a 2016 agreement between
the Association of Hotel and Restaurant Employers and the Union of Service Workers. This
wage table distinguishes between two subgroups of employers (groups A and B) and 12
different wage floors, ranging from 440 to 960 Euros per month.8
    Collectively bargained wage clauses almost always have a nominal duration of one year.
In case a new agreement has not been negotiated, however, the old agreement remains in
force, and in the early years of our sample (2008-2009) a typical new agreement was updating
a contract that was negotiated about two years earlier (see Section 2.1, below). Prior to 2003
the Labor Code required that any new agreement be at least as favorable to workers as the
old agreement and also prevented firms from withdrawing from a CBA. These rules were
relaxed by amendments in 2003 and 2009 that allowed new agreements to loosen work rules
and lower wage floors. The 2003 and 2009 amendments also created a process for CBA's to
expire, though procedures governing the granting of extensions were unchanged.9
    At the peak of the financial crises in 2011, the Portuguese government signed a memo-
randum of understanding (MOU) with the European Commission (EC), European Central
Bank (ECB) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) --the so-called Troika -- committing
to a wide range of policy reforms, including revisions of the contract extension framework
that were intended to reduce the coverage of sectoral agreements and encourage firm-level
bargaining.10 Ultimately these reforms ran into legal challenges, as well as opposition from
   8
      These are monthly salaries for full time workers, net of payroll taxes. By law, workers receive 14 monthly
salaries. As of 2016 (for which the floors apply) the minimum wage was 530 Euros, so group III has a floor
at the national minimum wage. The two bottom groups are apprentices, who face a minimum of 80% of the
regular minimum wage.
    9
      The number of collective bargaining agreements that were determined to have expired under these rules
is low: a total of 15 expiration notices were published in 2009; and over the period from 2010 to 2016 another
17 expiration notices were published (Portugal, CRL, 2020: 58; Portugal, MTSS, 2016: 374). The number of
agreements that actually expired may have been somewhat smaller because of subsequent Court decisions.
   10
      A key goal for the Troika was to reduce the coverage of sectoral agreements and encourage firm-specific
agreements negotiated by works councils (see European Commission, 2011, p. 54). The Troika agreement
ignored the fact that the Portuguese Constitution gives trade unions the exclusive right to bargain for workers.
Two other practical problems were that there were less than 200 works councils in the entire country (MTSS,
2006), and that the vast majority of Portuguese firms are very small and have limited capacity for bargaining
on their own.



                                                       6
employer associations, many of which supported the existing extension framework (see Nau-
mann, 2018). After Portugal exited the financial aid program in 2014, the new center-left
government adopted a series of revisions that more or less restored the pre-crisis bargaining
framework.

Wage Setting Under Sectoral Bargaining

The wage floors in Portuguese CBA's set a lower bound on basic pay for workers in each
occupational category. As in other European countries, however, firms can and do offer
many workers a wage that is higher than the minimum for their category. This differs
from the typical situation in the U.S., where a union contract specifies a grid of wages for
different jobs, and all workers in the same job receive the same pay --a wage standardizing
property that is arguably a defining feature of unionized wage setting in a U.S.-style system
(Ashenfelter, 1972; Freeman, 1980). In addition, most workers in Portugal receive regular
"supplementary" payments, including tax-free meal subsidies, that are the same from month
to month and may be impacted by collective negotiations.
    To clarify the role of these various components, let Wit represent the net monthly base
wage for worker i in year t and let Fi,t represent the wage floor that applies to that worker.
Let Hit = Wit - Fit represent the absolute gap between the base wage and the wage floor,
and let Sit represent the regular monthly supplemental payments received by worker i in year
t.11 Then we can decompose the base monthly wage and the corresponding total monthly
          T
wage (Wit   ):

                                         Wit = Fit + Hit
                                          T
                                        Wit = Fit + Hit + Sit

   For most of our analysis below we work with logarithms of wages rather than levels.
                                                                     T        T
Letting wit  ln Wit represent the log of the monthly base wage, and wit  ln Wit represent
the log of the monthly total wage, we can write:

                                          T
                                         wit = fit + hit + sit                                        (1)
  11
    In Portugal (as elsewhere in Continental Europe) wages are normally expressed as monthly full-time
rates, net of any employee payroll taxes. Wage floors in CBA's and the national minimum wage are similarly
expressed. Moreover, workers receive 14 monthly salaries per year.




                                                    7
where fit  ln Fit is the log of the wage floor for worker i in year t,

                                                Wit  Hit
                                      hit  ln       
                                                Fit  Fit

is the proportional wage premium received by the worker over his or her wage floor (which
we refer to as the worker's "wage cushion"), and

                                             Wit + Sit  Sit
                                   sit  ln             
                                               Wit      Wit

represents his or her regular supplementary payments, expressed as a share of the base wage.
    In the presence of a national minimum wage, it is helpful to decompose the log wage floor
into the sum of the log of the minimum wage (mt  ln Mt ) and the gap between the floor
and the minimum wage:
                                       fit = mt + rfit

where
                                                     Fit
                                         rfit = ln       .
                                                     Mt
Substituting into equation (1) we get a simple four component model of log wages:

                                   T
                                  wit = mt + rfit + hit + sit                             (2)

that expresses the log total wage for individual i in year t as the sum of the minimum wage,
the relative wage floor for the worker's job, her wage cushion, and her regular supplementary
payments. This additive structure is very convenient for decomposing the variance of the log
of total wages (see Section 3, below), for addressing the causal question of how actual wages
respond to adjustments in wage floors (see section 5), and for considering counterfactual
scenarios, such as one in which floors are raised and all wage cushions remain constant, so
each worker maintains a fixed (proportional) pay premium over his or her floor (see Section
7).


2    Assigning Wage Floors to Workers
In this section we describe our data base of workers with assigned wage floors. We begin
with an overview of our data base of CBA's. We then discuss the Quadros de Pessoal (QP)
and our procedure for assigning wage floors to workers in QP.

                                                8
2.1       Data on Collective Agreements ­ BTE
All newly negotiated CBA's in Portugal are published in the Labor Bulletin (Boletim do
Trabalho e Emprego, BTE) and are available in an online archive (http://bte.gep.msess.
gov.pt). We began our data assembly process by extracting information for agreements
published between 2008 to 2016 that included a salary clause or wage table. For each
agreement we extracted:

        the names of the union(s), employer association(s) and other information that formally
         identifies the contract

        the type of agreement (sectoral agreement, company agreement, multi-company agree-
         ment, government directive)12

        the starting date; expiration date; and reference information on the preceding agree-
         ment.

We also collected information on the categories and wage floors in the wage tables. The
system for designating floor categories varies widely across contracts but in most cases we
are able to devise a list of job titles/occupations included in each category, and construct a
longitudinal data base of wage floors for each CBA and floor category.
    There are a number of issues that have to be addressed in constructing an accurate
panel of wage floors. One is that we only observe wage floors when a contract is actually
updated. Thus, the first observation for each CBA/floor category occurs at the time of the
first contract renegotiation after January 1, 2008. A second issue is that floor increases are
sometimes back-dated. Since our interest is in the effect of wage floors on the current (flow)
cost of labor, we measure the prevailing wage floor as of October of each year (the reference
date of the QP survey), ignoring any back payments awarded by subsequent agreements.
A third issue is that increases in the national minimum wage can over-ride wage floors
for lower-paid workers, particularly if the contract has not been renegotiated recently. In
accordance with the labor law, we update all wage floors to meet the minimum wage as of
the reference date of the QP. A fourth complication is that some agreements (such as the one
underlying the wage table in Figure 1) specify separate wage floors for subgroups of firms
(e.g., based on revenues), or workers (e.g., based on tenure). We keep track of the subgroup
  12
     Multi-company agreements (acordo coletivo) are legally distinct from sectoral agreements (contrato co-
letivo ) and are particularly common in the finance and utility sectors. Government directives are mandated
agreements imposed in the absence of any other collective agreement (portaria de condi¸ c~
                                                                                         oes de trabalho) or
in case of an unresolved dispute (decis~
                                       ao arbitral ).

                                                     9
classification system and attempt to assign the correct floor to a worker, though that is not
always possible.
    A final issue is that an employer or employer association will often sign separate but
essentially identical agreements with different unions --typically, one affiliated with UGT
and another affiliated with CGTP. We consolidate such duplicate agreements, reducing the
total number of agreements over the 2008-2016 period from 1,467 to 1,061 (See Appendix A
and Appendix Table A1). We also drop agreements covering firms in agriculture or fisheries,
or those in Madeira or the Azores. We are left with 988 new consolidated agreements that
form our basic CBA data set. Around 50% of these are sector-wide contracts, just over 10%
are multi-company contracts, and the remaining 38% are CBA's covering a single firm (see
Appendix Tables A2 and A3).
    Column 1 of Table 1 shows the number of unduplicated new agreements in our basic
CBA data set by year of renegotiation, while column 2 shows the share of those agreements
that were sectoral CBA's.13 Close to 200 (consolidated) agreements were reached in 2008.
The number then began to fall off, reflecting the tendency for renegotiations to slow down
in the face of worsening economic conditions. In 2012 and 2013 the number was particularly
low, driven by the severe recession and uncertainty over collective bargaining institutions in
the aftermath of the MOU with the Troika. Following the nascent recovery and legislative
changes in 2014 that re-established the framework for contract extensions, the number of
new agreements rose to around 90 per year in 2014-2016.
    Although nearly all collective bargaining agreements in Portugal (97% in our sample) have
a nominal one-year duration, an existing CBA remains in force until a new one is negotiated
(or in very rare cases when an employer exits the agreement). As shown in column 3 of
Table 1, in 2008 the mean elapsed time since the publication date of the previous agreement
was 20 months --implying a delay of about 8 months between the expiration of the old
contract and the publication date of the new one. By 2015 the time since last agreement
had risen to 37 months, implying a delay of over 2 years between the expiration date and
the renegotiation date. The increase in delay time was particularly pronounced for sectoral
contracts, driven by the near-collapse in renegotiation of these agreements in 2012 and 2013.
As a consequence of these long delays, by 2014 many workers were covered by floors that
were 2-3 years old, a situation that was only partly remedied by the upswing in negotiations
  13
    We emphasize that the numbers of agreements shown represent counts after consolidating duplicated
agreements. The numbers of agreements prior to this adjustment are shown in Appendix Table 3. A typical
sectoral agreement covers firms in multiple regions: weighting by employment, 86% of sectoral agreements
include workers in all 5 NUTS2 regions of Portugal.



                                                  10
in 2015 and 2016.


2.2     Quadros de Pessoal
Quadros de Pessoal (QP) is an annual census of employers conducted by the Ministry of
Employment. Firms with at least one wage earner are required to submit their full roster
of employees as of the reference week in October, as well as a variety of other information
(including annual sales). They are also required to post their employee roster (with names,
job titles, and monthly pay) inside their premises, reducing the likelihood of misreporting
or under-reporting. The Ministry distributes an electronic version of the data set that has
longitudinal identifiers for each firm and each worker. We use QP data for the period from
2008 to 2016.
    The data for each worker include gender, age, education, occupation, date of hire, nation-
ality, monthly earnings (split into several components), hours of work (normal and overtime),
as well as the name of the CBA that the worker is covered by (if any). Unfortunately, the
QP does not report the actual wage floor for the worker or the name of the floor category as
used in the BTE. Instead, it reports a job title or professional category of the worker, which
in many cases can be matched to the list of job titles or occupations reported for the floor
categories in BTE.
    In addition to the information collected by the QP itself, we also have access to matched
income statement/balance sheet information for most employers, linked to the QP by the
National Statistical Office.14
    Starting from the universe of observations in QP we exclude workers under the age of 18 or
over 64, those in Madeira and the Azores, and those employed in agriculture and fisheries (see
Appendix A). We also exclude apprentices (3.5% of the relevant sample), workers who are not
employed full time (15.1%), and those with missing information on wages (8.9%, including
unpaid family members and firm owners) or education/date of hire (0.1%). Columns 4-6 of
Table 1 report the resulting number of workers in our QP sample each year, the fraction
that are reported as covered by a CBA, and the fraction covered by sectoral agreements.
On average we have about 1.85 million workers per year, with a dip during the most severe
recessionary years and a partial recovery by 2016. The collective bargaining coverage rate
starts at 90% in 2008, remains relatively steady until 2011, then declines slightly each year
thereafter, ending at 87%. On average 81% of covered workers are covered by a sectoral
  14
     The Integrated Business Accounts System ­ IBAS (Sistema de Contas Integradas das Empresas ­ SCIE)
covers the non-financial business sector. The linked QP data are distributed in an anonymized format.


                                                 11
agreement, a fraction that fell slightly over our sample period, from 83% to 80%.
    In Appendix B we use a simple dynamic model to decompose the year-to-year changes in
collective bargaining coverage in our QP sample, focusing on worker-level transitions between
three states: employed and covered by a CBA, employed and not covered by a CBA, and
not employed (i.e., not included in QP in a given year). There are no major changes over
time in the probability that people retain their coverage status, or in transition rates into
or out of jobs covered by a CBA (see Appendix Table B1). There was a slowdown in the
probability that people entered the workforce in 2011-2014, and a slight reduction in the
fraction of new entrants starting a job covered by a CBA. Together these factors account for
most of the (relatively modest) losses in coverage after 2011.


2.3     Assigning Wage Floors to Workers in QP
We used a two-step process to assign wage floors to workers in QP. We first matched contracts
in QP to those in our BTE database. We then attempted to match the wage floor groups
within a contract in BTE to the job category codes reported in QP.
    The matching of contracts was done by hand since the CBA names in the two data sources
can differ and the QP often uses outdated names. Broadly, the steps included: inspection of
the text of each agreement to identify likely matches; construction of consistent longitudinal
information on the renegotiation dates of each agreement and on the reported numbers of
covered workers and firms to confirm matches; inspection of longitudinal information on
workers in QP to identify likely CBA name changes; searches on the web pages of trade
unions or employer associations; and telephone or email contacts with trade unions. With
these steps we were able to match nearly all contracts mentioned in QP to an agreement in
BTE.
    Matching of the wage floors in BTE to the worker categories in QP was also done by
hand, and was more difficult. We began by inspecting the text of each agreement in BTE to
find a list of all jobs/job titles in each floor group.15 Next, we matched the BTE floor groups
in a given CBA to the QP worker categories for the same CBA, again by direct inspection
of the possible m  n matches for each CBA. In agreements setting different wage floors for
workers depending on their date of hire, tenure, or skill, we attempted to use information
in QP to assign workers to the correct wage floors. Likewise, whenever the applicable wage
floor depended on firm attributes reported in QP, such as the firm's industry or employment,
  15
     We often had to track past agreements to find the full list of job titles in each floor group because in
some cases --such as that shown in Figure 1-- only a group code is reported.


                                                     12
we matched the worker category in QP to its wage floor accordingly. Appendix A provides
further details on the process of matching.
    Despite our best efforts we were only able to match about half of all workers in QP
covered by a CBA to their wage floor (see Appendix Table A2). The main obstacles were (1)
lack of information on the variables needed to assign workers to specific floors within a CBA;
(2) too many sub-floors for each occupational category; (3) lack of obvious matches between
the occupations or job types specified in BTE and the job titles used in QP. Columns 7-9
of Table 1 present some information on the subset of workers in QP that were successfully
assigned a floor. The fraction of matched workers rises from 32% in 2008 to 44% in 2010
and is more or less stable thereafter. The lower rate at the start of our sample is due to
the fact that many workers in QP in October 2008 or 2009 were covered by floors that were
last renegotiated in 2006 or 2007, prior to the start of our BTE database. By the time of
the 2010 QP most workers in QP were covered by an agreement that was updated between
January 2008 and September 2010. We note that in a typical year after 2010 our matched
database includes about 2,500 separate wage floors.16


2.4     Comparisons of Workers by Coverage and Floor Assignment
        Status
Before proceeding with an analysis based on the subset of workers with matched floors we
examine two questions: How do covered workers with a matched floor compare to those for
whom we were unable to assign a floor? And how do workers who are uncovered by CBA's
compare to covered workers?
    Table 2 presents some simple data that address these questions: we show characteristics
and wage outcomes for all workers, for those who are covered and uncovered by a CBA, and
for covered workers with and without a matched wage floor. Focusing first on the data in
columns 4 and 5, we conclude that covered workers who can be assigned a wage floor are
broadly similar to those who cannot. In particular their gender, education, experience, job
tenure and mean log wages are quite similar. Importantly, this similarity is also true year-
by-year (see Appendix Table C1), suggesting that we can draw broader conclusions from an
analysis of data for workers with assigned wage floors.
  16
    Martins (2021) claims that there are 30,000 minimum wage floors in Portugal. His analysis counts all job
categories within the CBA's identified in QP, without taking into account the duplication of CBA's or the
fact that a typical wage floor group in BTE actually incorporates roughly 4 job categories in QP. Together
these corrections imply that there are only about 5,000 separate wage floors at any point in time, roughly
half of which we are able to match to a wage floor published in BTE.


                                                    13
    On the other hand, comparisons between columns 2 and 3 show that workers with and
without CBA coverage are substantially different. Uncovered workers are much more likely
to have a university-level education (38% versus about 17% for covered workers), have some-
what fewer years of experience and job tenure than covered workers, and have about 20%
higher wages. The wage advantage of uncovered workers is not only a result of their higher
education: controlling for gender, education, experience, and 1-digit industry effects, a simple
Mincerian wage model shows a 10% wage premium for uncovered workers. Not surprisingly,
                                                                    T
wages are also more variable among uncovered workers, with  (wit      ) about 12% higher than
for covered workers.
    An examination of coverage patterns within firms reveals that nearly all firms either
have no covered workers or 100% union coverage. Firms with no coverage tend to be larger
than covered firms (mean employment is 8.4 workers versus 6.1 for covered firms), and have
substantially higher annual sales per worker (~74,800 versus ~39,900 for covered firms). They
are also more likely to be located in Lisbon and to be in the non-financial services sector
(42% versus 20% for uncovered firms).
    The positive wage advantage for uncovered workers in Portugal stands in sharp contrast to
the patterns in the U.S., the U.K., and Canada, where union coverage is positively correlated
with wages. For example, data presented by Card, Lemieux and Riddell (2004) show that
the difference in mean log hourly wages between workers who are covered by collective
agreements and those who are not is between 15 and 30 percent in all three countries (and
between 5 and 25 percent controlling for gender, education, and experience).


3     Proximate Analysis of the Components of Wages
We now turn to a descriptive analysis of the role of the wage floors, wage cushions, and
supplementary payments in determining wage differentials between groups and overall wage
inequality. For this analysis (and all analysis in the remainder of the paper) we focus on the
sample of person-year observations in QP with assigned wage floors, described in columns
7-9 of Table 1.
    Figure 2 shows the distributions of relative wage floors and wage cushions by gender,
pooling across all years of our sample. Panel a shows that many wage floors (especially for
female workers) are within 5 percentage points of the minimum wage, though there is a long
upper tail of floors. In contrast, the distributions of cushions in panel b are more bell-shaped,
with only modest spikes in the range of 0-5% (affecting about 4 percent of workers), and


                                               14
modes at around 20-25 percent.
    Figure 3 shows how the mean values of the three individual-specific components of wages
highlighted in equation (2) vary over time for different groups of workers. Figure 3a presents
mean relative floors, cushions, and supplements by gender; Figure 3b present similar data
by education level; and Figure 3c presents mean floors and cushions for workers employed
at firms in different quartiles of the distribution of value added per worker. Finally, Figure
3d shows the mean values of wage floors, cushions, and supplements by age for female and
male workers (pooling across all years in our sample).
    In interpreting these figures it is helpful to keep two points in mind. First, our samples in
2008 and 2009 are slightly less representative than in later years, due to the lack of data on
wage floors that were renegotiated one or two years ago prior to 2010. Second, the real value
of the minimum wage rose relatively sharply between 2008 and 2010 (with a +6% adjustment
in 2009 and a +4% adjustment in 2010). Thereafter the real minimum drifted downward
for three years before raises of +4% in 2014 and +4% in 2016. Consequently between 2010
and 2016 the real minimum was relatively stable, ending up only 3 log points higher in 2016
than in 2010. Given these two factors we focus most of our attention on changes from 2010
to 2016 throughout this paper.
    Examination of Figures 3a-3c shows that across most subgroups, mean relative wage
floors fell during our sample period. The declines were partly driven by increases in the
minimum wage, particularly in 2014 and 2016 (see Figure 3a). The declines were much
larger for better-educated groups, but even for those with less than a high school education
the mean gap between their wage floor and the minimum wage fell from about 15 log points
in 2010 to 10 log points in 2016. As we show in Section 7 (below) a lot of the decline in
relative wage floors for highly educated workers arose through a re-allocation of workers
to jobs with lower wage floors. Such re-allocations were less important for lower-educated
groups, in part because their floors were clustered closer to the minimum wage even in 2010.
    In contrast to the erosion in relative floors, the mean values of cushions and supplements
were more stable, though there was a clear decline in mean cushions for workers with a
university-level education. Figure 3c also shows that mean floors and cushions declined for
workers at firms in the top quartile of value added per worker, leading to some narrowing
of between-firm wage differentials --the opposite of the pattern documented for Germany
(Card et al., 2013) and the U.S. (Song et al., 2019).
    The age profiles in Figure 3d reveal that young workers tend to be employed in jobs with
very low wage floors, and to receive small wage cushions. By age 25 or so, however, mean


                                               15
floors are in the 15 percent range and mean wage cushions are 5-8 percentage points, and by
age 40 a typical female has a wage floor of around 25 log points and a cushion of 15 points,
while a typical male has a wage floor of nearly 30 points and a cushion of over 25 points.
Thus, both floors and cushions contribute to the life cycle profile of wages.
    Table 3 presents a more systematic summary of the net contributions of relative wage
floors, cushions, and supplements to the levels and variances of wages, for all workers and
by gender, education, and firm value-added quartile. The first 5 columns decompose the
means of log salary, while columns 6-10 pertain to variances. In the first row, for example,
we show the mean log real monthly wage for all workers, the mean wage differential relative
to the minimum wage (61 log points), and the mean contribution of relative wage floors (24
log points), wage cushions (19 log points) and supplements (17 log points). As shown by the
numbers in parentheses just below the row entries, these three terms contribute 40.2%, 31.4%
and 28.4%, respectively, to the mean log gap between monthly salaries and the minimum
wage.
    For the decomposition of variances we show var[rfit ], var[hit ], var[sit ], and 2cov [rfit , hit ]
(2 times the covariance of relative floors and wage cushions) which is nearly all cases the
largest of the covariance terms arising from a decomposition of var[wit ] based on equation
(2). For the workforce as a whole, relative floors contribute 32.3% of the overall variance in
log total salaries, cushions contribute 42.1%, supplements contribute 9.1%, and the positive
covariance of floors and cushions across workers contributes 15.6%. Together these 4 terms
account for 99.2% of the total variance.
    The next set of rows in Table 3 show similar statistics for males, females, and for the
gender gaps in mean log wages and the variance of wages. Males have higher and more
variable wages than females, differences that are attributable to the both higher and more
variable floors (30% of the gender gap in mean wages, 22% of the gap in variance of wages)
and to higher and more variable cushions (60% of the gender gap in mean wages, 75% of
the gap in variance of wages). Similar conclusions apply to the wages of more versus less
educated workers. For example, 58% of the 27 log point gap in mean wages between high
school graduates and those with less than a high school education is attributable to higher
floors, while 31% is attributable to higher cushions.
    As shown in the bottom three rows of the table, differences in mean wage cushions also
play a significant role in explaining the mean wage gap between firms in the top and bottom
quartile of value added per worker: just over one-half of the 68 log point gap in mean wages
is explained by higher average cushions at more productive firms. This suggests that the


                                                  16
wage cushions at a firm are correlated with the firms' ability to pay, consistent with models
of firm-specific wage setting (e.g., Card et al., 2018).
     To investigate this more fully we conducted a simple analysis of wage floors, wage cush-
ions, and log base wages, controlling for the specific CBA covering each worker. Specifically
we fit models of the form
                                             10
                        yit = 0 + x Xit +          d Id(i,t) + CBA(i,t) + uit                  (3)
                                             d=2


where yit represents either the wage floor, wage cushion, or log base wage of worker i in
year t, Xit is a set of worker characteristics (gender, education and age), d(i, t) is an index
function that maps the worker to the value-added deciles of his/her employer in year t, Id is
a dummy for the dth decile of value added, CBA(i, t) is another index function that maps
the worker to the specific collective bargaining agreement he or she is covered by in year
t, and C represent a set of CBA fixed effects. The results are presented in Table 4. For
reference we show models for the 3 outcomes with and without CBA effects. A comparison
of the estimated x and d coefficients between these models allows us to assess how much of
the overall variation in each outcome across workers and firms is preserved within collective
agreements.
    The wage floor models in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 summarize the assignment process
between workers and floors in the labor market as whole (column 1) and within CBA's
(column 2). The coefficients of the worker-specific characteristics suggest that women are
assigned to lower floors, while better-educated and older workers are assigned to higher
floors: these matching effects are only somewhat attenuated within CBA's. The value added
decile effects show that wage floors are higher at firms with higher value added per worker.
Unlike the pattern for worker characteristics, however, the cross-firm gradient in floors is
substantially flatter within CBA's than in the market as a whole. As emphasized by Boeri
et al. (2020), this could be a cause for concern if less profitable firms are covered by collective
agreements with relatively high floors.
    The wage cushion models in columns 3 and 4 suggest that mean cushions vary across
gender, education and age groups more or less the same within CBA's as they do in the
labor market as a whole. In contrast, mean cushions are more responsive to firm profitability
within CBA's, partly undoing the relatively flattening of differences in wage floors within
agreements.
    As a consequence, looking at the models for log base wages in columns 5 and 6 we see


                                                  17
that about 85% of the market-level variation in mean base wages across value-added deciles
is preserved within CBA's.17 In other words, sectoral agreements appear to only modestly
dampen the sensitivity of wages to firm profitability.
    The importance of cushions as a source of flexibility is summarized in columns 7 and 8.
Since the base wage is just the sum of the wage floor and the wage cushion, we can calculate
the share of the  coefficients reported in columns 5 and 6 that is attributable to the variation
in cushions. This is around 60% for gender, education and age, regardless of whether we
condition on CBA effects on not. It is closer to 70% for the coefficients associated with firm
profitability deciles when we do not condition on CBA effects, but rises to around 90% when
we look at wages within CBA's. Descriptively, then, wage cushions play a relatively large
role in maintaining wage flexibility in the presence of sectorally bargained wage floors.


4       Determinants of Negotiated Wage Floors
In this section we turn to an analysis of the determinants of negotiated wage floor increases.
Our first goal is to try to understand how the wage floors within a given CBA move relative
to each other. To foreshadow our results, we find that in nearly all cases the floors are
adjusted proportionally, so there is a single number --representing the mean increment in
wage floors-- that fully summarizes the negotiation results. Our second goal is to study how
the rate of adjustment of wage floors responds to demand conditions at the firms covered by
the CBA.


4.1       Simple models of wage floor adjustment
As a starting point, consider a series of increasingly rich models for the change in the real
wage floor of group g when CBA c is renegotiated in year t :

                                        fcgt = t +      cgt                                            (4a)
                                              = t + Zct Z +      cgt                                   (4b)
                                              = ct +      cgt                                          (4c)
                                              = ct + Rcgt R +      cgt                                 (4d)
 17
      This estimate comes from regressing the estimated decile effects in column 6 on those in column 5.




                                                     18
(Note that fcgt involves a change over different numbers of years, depending on when con-
tract c was last negotiated). Model (4a) includes only year effects: the fit of such a model
allows us to assess how far are CBA renegotiations in Portugal from the "fully centralized"
benchmark that is often taken as a normative ideal by macroeconomists (e.g., Calmfors and
Driffill, 1988). Model (4b) adds some contract-specific characteristics Zct --most impor-
tantly, the duration of time since the last negotiation, which can range from 1 year to 3
years, or even longer in a few cases. Model (4c) includes a set of contract-specific fixed
effects, which fully absorb any CBA×year factors, like industry-wide demand shocks or
changes in local labor market conditions that affect workers in the contract. The fit of this
model allows us to assess the extent to which all floors within a given CBA move together.
Finally, model (4d) adds a set of characteristics Rcgt of the workers covered by wage floor
c, g , and asks whether there is any evidence that floors within the same CBA are adjusted
to reflect the characteristics of the covered workers in different floor groups, controlling for
the mean contract-level change in floors (captured by ct ).
     Table 5 presents adjusted R2 statistics for variants of these 4 sets of models, estimated
using the changes in mean real wage floors for workers in our matched QP-BTE data base.18
We estimate the models by weighted OLS, using as weights the number of workers in floor
group g of CBA c.
     The fit of fully centralized model (4a) (row 1) is surprisingly good, with an adjusted R2
statistic of close to 80%, suggesting that most of the variation in wage floor adjustments
is explained by just 7 year effects. Adding controls for industry, worker characteristics and
time since last negotiation (row 4) raises the adjusted R2 to 85%; adding industry×year
effects (row 5) raises it to nearly 90%.
     The specification in row 6 adds contract-year effects (i.e., model 4c). These increase the
adjusted R2 to 98%, leaving almost no unexplained within-contract variation in wage floors.
Adding controls for the mean fraction female, mean age and mean education of workers
covered by each floor (model 4d) increases the fit only very slightly. These variables have
very small but statistically significant effects, showing slightly faster growth in floors that
cover a higher share of women, older workers, and less-educated workers.
     Overall we reach three conclusions from this simple analysis. First, nearly 80% of the
variation in average negotiated wage floors across our sample is explained by year effects.
Second, about one half of remaining variation is explained by industry-specific shocks, work-
  18
     Note that we exclude wage floors that are set at exactly the minimum wage, since adjustments for such
floors are presumably insensitive to firm, industry, or worker characteristics.



                                                   19
force demographics, and the lag since the last negotiation. Third, nearly all the remaining
variation is explained by CBA-specific effects, meaning that in a typical negotiation all the
floors are adjusted by the same percentage.


4.2     Modeling contract-wide mean changes in floors
Building on the findings in Table 5, we turn to an analysis of the determinants of the mean
wage floor adjustment, ct in a given sectoral contract negotiation (estimated from a model
like equation 4c). Our main focus is on the question of how wage floor increases are affected
by changes in productivity/profitability of firms covered by the CBA. In particular, we
are interested in whether firms with faster productivity growth exert a stronger influence
on negotiations than less profitable firms (Boeri et al., 2019; Fanfani, 2020), potentially
threatening the survival of the latter firms. We proceed by examining the effects of changes
in the mean and various quantiles of the distribution of value added per worker among the
firms affected by the contract.
    Let m(V Act ) represent the mean of log value added per worker in year t for firms covered
by sectoral CBA c, and let q (V Act ) represent the employment-weighted q th quantile (e.g., the
25th or 50th) of the distribution of log value added among these firms. Assume that contract
c is renegotiated in year t and was last renegotiated in t - (so = 1, 2, 3 is the years since
last renegotiation). Then the changes in productivity relevant for the renegotiation can be
summarized by:

                              DmV Act = m(V Ajct-1 ) - m(V Ajct- -1 )
                               DqV Act = q (V Ajct-1 ) - q (V Ajct- -1 ).

Note that we lag the financial information by a year, reflecting the fact that a contract that
is updated in year t will have been negotiated before financial information from the current
year is realized.19
    Our first set of models for floor adjustments in contract c, presented in Table 6, take the
form:
                              ct = 0 + 1 DxV Act + 2 Zct + ect                              (5)
  19
    Note that we use the change in the qth quantile of V Ajct , rather than the qth quantile of the change
in V Ajct , to summarize the distribution of demand shocks among firms covered by a given contract. Under
the rank invariance assumption that is widely used in the quantile treatment effects literature (e.g., Firpo
2007) these are the same.




                                                    20
where DxV Act is the change in the mean (x = m) or some quantile (x = q ) of the distribu-
tion of value added per worker among relevant firms, and Zct are a set of contract-specific
covariates, including time effects, dummies for the number of years since the last renego-
tiation, a measure of cumulative inflation since the last negotiation, and measures of the
share of females, the share of university graduates, and the mean age of workers covered by
the contract. Column 1 shows a model using DmeanV Act as the measure of demand-side
factors, while columns 2-6 replace this with DqV Act based on the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th,
and 90th quantiles.
    Judging by the adjusted R-squared statistic, the change in the mean of value added among
firms covered by a CBA is the best predictor of negotiated wage floor changes, though the
median is a close second. The magnitude of the estimated 1 coefficient suggests that wage
floors are relatively responsive to the central tendency in industry-wide productivity growth,
with an elasticity of wages to mean or median changes in value added of around 0.06-0.07.
There also appears to be some limited "catch up" for past inflation: the model in column 1,
for example, implies that real wages recover about one-fifth of their lost value arising from
inflation since the last negotiation.20 Finally, consistent with the evidence in Figures 3a
and 3b, floors covering a higher share of female workers tended to rise more quickly in the
2010-2016 period, while floors covering a higher share of university-educated workers tended
to fall slightly.
    A potential concern with the models in Table 6 is that changes in firm-specific value
added contain transitory fluctuations (and/or measurement errors) that are not completely
eliminated by using the industry-wide means or medians. Such fluctuations/errors may play
an outsize role in driving measured changes in the upper and lower quantiles. To address
this issue, we conducted a complementary analysis of longer-run changes in contractual wage
floors. Specifically, for all CBA's that were renegotiated at least once between 2010 and 2016,
we constructed the average change in wage floors from 2010 to 2016, then fit a series of models
relating this longer-run change to corresponding changes in the mean and quantiles of value
added per worker for firms covered by the CBA. The results are presented in Table 7. We
present specifications with no other controls in the upper panel, and models that control for
the modal industry of the covered firms (with a total of 7 dummies) in the lower panel.
    As expected, these models show a somewhat higher elasticity of wage floors with respect
to productivity changes among covered firms, with a point estimate of 0.134 for the effect
  20
    Since all the models in Table 6 include year effects and dummies for the number of years since the last
negotiation, the identification of the lagged inflation effect relies on differences in inflation over different time
windows in our sample period, similar to Card (1990).


                                                         21
of the change in mean log value added when major industry dummies are exclude from the
model and 0.093 when they are included. As in Table 6, the best fitting models are those
that relate changes in wage floors to changes in the central tendency of productivity change
among covered firms. Moreover, if we estimate models that include both the median (or
mean) change in value added and one of the other quantiles (see Appendix Table D1), we
find that all the explanatory power comes from the median or mean change.
    The magnitudes of the estimated elasticity of wage floors with respect to mean or median
changes in value-added in Table 7 are comparable or larger than typical estimates in the rent
sharing literature (see Card et al., 2018). We note, however, that if changes in wage floors
lead to some compression of wage cushions (as we find to be the case in the next section)
then the impact of value added changes on average wages will be smaller than the impact
on wage floors. In fact, we find that only about one-half of a rise in wage floors is passed
on to wages --the other half is absorbed by reductions in wage cushions. Assuming a 50%
passthrough the implied elasticity of workers' wages with respect to rises in productivity
among firms covered by the relevant CBA is between 4.6 and 6.7 percent --closer to the
middle of the range of estimates in the rent-sharing literature.


5    Effect of Wage Floors on Wages
In this section we turn to an analysis of the effect of changes in wage floors on the actual
wages of workers. Conceptually, our approach builds on standard techniques for studying the
passthrough of an increase in sales taxes to the final price paid by consumers. Specifically,
we relate actual wage changes for workers at a firm to the simulated changes that would
occur if floors were adjusted but all other components of wages remained fixed.
    Consider the set of employees at a given firm j in year t - 1. Let fit represent the
percentage change in the real wage floor between t - 1 and t for worker i in this set. If the
CBA covering the worker was renegotiated in the past year then fit is just the negotiated
floor adjustment in that contract (adjusted for inflation). If the CBA was not renegotiated
then fit is minus the percentage change in the price deflator between t - 1 and t. Using
the notation introduced in section 2, let Wit-1 represent the level of the monthly base wage
of the worker in year t - 1 and let Fit-1 represent the level of her wage floor. We define:

                          
                         wit  ln(Wit-1 + Fit-1 fit ) - ln(Wit-1 )                         (6)
                                (Fit-1 /Wit-1 )fit ,


                                             22
which is just the simulated increase in the log base wage of worker i if her wage floor were
increased by the proportion fit and there was no change in the gap between her base wage
and her wage floor.
    The actual change in the worker's base wage includes the change in Hit , the gap (in
Euros) between her base wage and her floor:

                         wit = ln(Wit-1 + Fit-1 fit + Hit ) - ln(Wit-1 )
                                 (Fit-1 /Wit-1 )(fit + Hit /Fit-1 )
                                   
                                = wit (1 + it )                                                           (7)

where it = Hit /Fit is the ratio of the change in the absolute cushion component for
worker i to the absolute change in her wage floor. To illustrate the implications of this
equation, consider two limiting cases. At one extreme, suppose that Hit remains constant
                                                                       
as the wage floor changes (as is assumed in the construction of wit      ). Under this scenario
                                             
it = 0, and (7) implies that wit = wit . At the opposite extreme, suppose that the base
wage Wit remains constant as the wage floor is raised (a situation that can only happen if
Wit-1 > Fit --i.e., the initial base wage is above the new floor). Under this scenario, it = -1
and wit = 0 --i.e., an increase in floors is fully offset by a reduction in the worker's wage
cushion.21 Note that we can also construct a parallel measure of the effect of floor increases
on a worker's total wage under the assumption that the gap between the worker's total wage
                                                                                        T
and her floor stays constant, and compare that to the change in her total wage, wit       .
                                                                          
    To proceed, consider a simple regression model relating wit to wit and a set of controls
(Xit ):
                                                   
                                 wit = 0 + 1 wit     + x Xit + it                            (8)

We focus on estimating this model for the set of workers who remain at the firm between
t - 1 and t and stay in the same wage floor group --a group we refer to as the "firm stayers."
The coefficient 1 provides a measure of the effect of wage floors on the base wage of stayers.
A salient null hypothesis is 1 = 1, which corresponds to the hypothesis that increases in
wage floors are passed through fully to workers. If rising wage floors are partially absorbed
by a reduction in wage cushions, however, then 1 < 1, and in the limiting case in which
floor increases have no effect on wages, 1 = 0.
    A potential concern in estimating a model of wage changes for stayers is that workers
  21
    A third scenario is one in which each worker's proportional cushion hit remains constant as floors change.
In this case wit = fit .


                                                     23
who remain with the firm and in the same floor category may be selected in a way that
is correlated with their potential wage increase, leading to selection bias in the error term
it . To address this, and to set the stage for the employment growth models we present in
the next section, we present instrumental variable (IV) estimates that use w        jt (the mean
       
of wit across all Njt-1 employees of the worker's firm in year t - 1, including stayers and
non-stayers) as an instrument for the worker-specific simulated wage increase.
    Estimation results for a variety of specifications of equation (8) are presented in Table 8.
Columns 1-4 present models for the effect of floors on base wages while columns 5-8 present
a parallel set of models for total wages.
    As a point of departure, columns 1 and 5 present simple OLS models based on equation
(8). The control variables include year effects and dummies for female gender and university
education, as well as a linear term in the worker's age. We also add the change in log real
value-added per worker at the employer. This is meant to control for firm-specific demand
shocks that may be jointly correlated with the unexplained component of base wage increases
(i.e., it ) and the increase in wage floors affecting the firm.
    The models for base wages (column 1) and total wages (column 5) yield estimates of
1  0.45; in both cases the estimates are relatively precise. Corresponding IV models
that use w                                            
               jt as an instrumental variable for wit are presented in columns 2 and 6. The
estimated first stage effects of w               
                                       jt on wit are reported in the second last row of the
table: in both cases the first stage coefficients are close to 1.0 in magnitude and highly
significant. Interestingly, the IV estimates of 1 are about 15% larger in magnitude than the
                                                                        
OLS estimates, suggesting that it is negatively correlated with wit      (perhaps reflecting the
omission from the sample of workers who get promoted to a higher floor group).
    Given that the first stage coefficient of w     jt is close to 1, the IV estimates of 1 in
columns 2 and 5 are (approximately) equal to the reduced form effects of w             jt on wit
        T
or wit . Moreover, in the absence of individual-level covariates these reduced-form effects
would be numerically equivalent to the effects obtained from a firm-level regression model
relating the average wage increase for all stayers at the firm (wjt ) to w     jt and controls:


                              wjt = 0 + 1 wjt + x Xjt +  jt                                 (9)

Our individual-level models include individual-specific gender, education and age controls so
we cannot quite reproduce the micro-level estimates from the firm level regression. However,
as shown in columns 3 and 7, when we estimate equation (9) using firm-wide averages of the
covariates as controls we find, as expected, that the estimates of 1 are approximately equal

                                              24
to the corresponding IV estimates of 1 .22
    Finally, the specifications in columns 4 and 8 interact w      jt with a variable indicating
the fraction of all workers at the firm whose wage floor was renegotiated between t - 1 and
t. (For the 90% of firms in which all workers are covered by a single CBA, this fraction is
either 0 or 1, depending on whether the CBA was recently renegotiated or not, but for firms
where different occupation groups are covered by different CBA's it can be strictly between
0 and 1). This interaction term allows us to check whether the responsiveness of wages to
floor changes is the same when wage floors are explicitly adjusted upward by a contract
renegotiation as when they are passively adjusted (typically downward) by inflation.23 The
estimated interaction effects are statistically indistinguishable from 0, providing no evidence
of asymmetry in the passthrough of wage floor changes.
    The estimates in Table 8 suggest that on average only about one-half of the implied
increases in wages arising from changes in wage floors are passed through to workers. The
balance is offset by reductions in wage cushions, with relatively small effects on supplemen-
tary wage payments, given the similarity of the passthrough effects on base wages and total
wages. The ability of any particular worker's wage cushion to absorb an increase in wage
floors, however, depends on the size of their wage cushion. In the minimum wage literature,
for example, a typical finding is increases in minimum wages have large effects on workers
whose wage is below or close to the new minimum but smaller or even zero effects on those
earning substantially above the minimum.24
    We explore the heterogeneity in the degree of passthrough of wage floor increases in Table
9. Each row represents a different skill group (classified by gender, education, and age). For
each group we report the share of all firm stayers in the group, the mean relative wage
floor, mean wage cushion and mean supplements for members of the group (as measured in
year t - 1), and group-specific estimates of the passthrough effect based on the aggregated
reduced form model of equation (9). We exclude results for people age 18-24 with a university
education because for both genders this group is extremely small.
    As expected, the estimated passthrough rates tend to be larger for groups with lower
wage cushions. For example, females with less than high school education who are between
25 and 44 have an average wage cushion of roughly 8 log points, and estimated passthrough
  22
      The standard errors are about the same too, which is expected given that we cluster the standard errors
by firm.
   23
      During our sample period there were two years with negative inflation in Portugal.
   24
      See Fortin, Lemieux, and Lloyd (forthcoming) and Cengiz et al. (2019) for overviews of the existing
literature and evidence on spillover effects of minimum wages in the U.S. labor market.



                                                     25
rates of 0.71 (st. err=0.02) using base wages or 0.63 (st. err=0.07) using total monthly
wages. By comparison, females in the same age range with a university education have an
average wage cushion of roughly 48 log points, and estimated passthrough rates of 0.31 (st.
err=0.05) and 0.37 (st. err=0.08).
    This relationship is illustrated in Figure 4, where we plot the estimated passthrough rate
for each demographic group (estimated using base wages) against the mean wage cushion
for the group. We draw two conclusions from this graph. First, even for low-cushion groups
the passthrough rate is less than 1, suggesting that the modest floor increases typically
negotiated during our sample period (in the range of 1-3 percent) were partly absorbed
by compressing wage cushions. Second, in contrast to the pattern found in the minimum
wage literature, wage floor increases in collective bargaining agreements appear to have some
positive "spillover" effect even on relatively high-cushion groups.


6      Effect of Wage Floors on Employment
Although increases in wage floors are partly absorbed by the compression of wage cushions,
they still lead to some increase in workers' base wages and total salaries. This opens up the
question of whether firms use reductions in employment as another channel of adjustment to
higher floors. Such employment effects might be expected if employment and wage outcomes
lie on a traditional downward-sloping employment demand function. To the extent that
wages are endogenously set by firms with market power, however, the equilibrium relationship
is less clear and may even be upward-sloping.
    Building on the results in Table 8 we fit a series of simple models of the form:

                                 ln Ejt = 0 + 1 wjt + x Xjt + jt                                     (10)

where Ejt is the total number of employees of firm j in year t and w       jt is the average
simulated change in total base wages of employees present at the firm in period t - 1. We
estimate this model for all firms, and separately for the subset where the modal worker
is covered by a sectoral CBA.25 For the latter set of firms wage floors are arguably more
exogenous to firm-specific conditions.
    The results are presented in Table 10. We show a specification with only year effects and
  25
    As noted, about 90% of firms have only a single CBA, but for firms where workers are covered by 2 or
more different CBA's we assign sectoral coverage status based on the characteristics of the agreement that
covers the largest number of workers.


                                                   26
a control for the increase in real value added per worker at the firm in columns 1 and 4, a
second model with controls for gender, fraction of university educated workers, and mean
age of workers in columns 2 and 5, and a specification that allows for an interaction between
w   jt and the share of workers with a renegotiated wage floor in columns 3 and 6.
    The estimation results are quite similar for the models estimated on all firms and on the
subset covered by sectoral contracts, and point to three main conclusions. First, increases in
firm-specific productivity (as measured by the change in real value added per worker) have
a significant positive effect on employment growth, about 10× larger in magnitude than the
effect on wages.
    Second, none of the models show a negative effect of floor increases on employment
growth. The model in column 2, for example, yields an estimate of   ^1 = 0.165 for the effect of
floor-induced base wage increases on employment. If one assumes that firms set employment
taking wages as exogenous then one could convert this into an estimated demand elasticity
by dividing by the estimate of 1 from equation (9). Using the estimate of 1 from column
2 of Table 8 yields an estimate of the elasticity of employment with respect to base wages
of 0.30, with a standard error of approximately 0.33. While this point estimate is positive,
a 95% confidence interval ranges from -0.36 to 0.96, so we cannot rule out small negative
employment responses.
    A third finding, consistent with the results in Table 8, is that there is no evidence of
asymmetry in reactions to actively renegotiated wage floor changes versus changes in real
wage floors arising from inflation.
    The models in Table 10 describe employment outcomes for all workers. The results in
Table 9, however, suggest that the wage impacts of wage floor increases vary across groups.
To check whether there is similar heterogeneity in the employment impacts, we estimated
models like (10) by gender, education, and age group. The results are presented in Appendix
Table E1, alongside the corresponding estimates of the wage effects for each group from
Table 9. Ten of the 16 estimated employment effects are positive while six are negative.
Moreover, apart from a relatively large negative employment effect for the relatively small
group of young women with less than a high school education, the general pattern is for the
employment effects to be more negative for groups with higher wage cushions --the opposite
of the pattern that would be expected if wage floor increases are choking off employment for
groups with low wage cushions.26
  26
    The correlation of ^1 and ^1 across the 16 groups is 0.21, rising to 0.67 if we exclude women age 18-24
with less than high school education.



                                                    27
    Since young workers have small average wage cushions (see Figure 3d), the findings in
Table 9 suggest that their wages may have been pushed up relatively more by increases in
wage floors over the past decade, preventing firms from hiring them in the first place --an
effect that may be hard to discern from models of employment growth such as equation (10).
While a full analysis of this concern is beyond our scope, Appendix Figure E1 shows data
on the fractions of young men and young women (age 16-24) who were not in employment,
education or training in Portugal and 6 other countries (Italy, U.S., Spain, France, U.K., and
Germany) over the 2004-2019 period. The so-called "NEET" rates for both gender groups
in Portugal track the rates in other countries fairly closely: there is not much evidence
of a relative rise in the post-crisis era. For example, comparing Portugal to the U.S., the
difference in differences of NEET rates for 2017-2019 versus 2004-2007 is -0.3% for males
and +1.4% for females. Parallel differences of differences relative to the U.K. are -4.4% for
young men and -3.7% for young women. The only country that did appreciably better than
Portugal (and virtually all other countries) was Germany.


7    Decomposing Changes in Real Wages, 2010-2016
In this section we combine the insights from the previous sections and document how the
various components of wages contributed to overall changes in wages for the economy as
a whole and for different groups over the 2010-2016 period. Our approach builds on the
methodology developed by DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996) --hereafter DFL-- for an-
alyzing the effects of trade unions and minimum wages on trends in U.S. wage inequality.
Specifically, we conduct a series of counterfactual simulations --summarized in Table 11--
that provide a step-by-step decomposition of the changes in mean total monthly real wages
for different groups of workers.
    We start with scenario A, which takes all workers in our matched QP-BTE sample in
2010. Outcomes in this sample represent the actual distribution of wages in 2010. Next, in
scenario B, we increment the wage floor that applies to each worker in 2010 by the percentage
change of that floor between 2010 and 2016, holding constant the worker's (proportional)
wage cushion and (proportional) wage supplements. A comparison of outcomes between
scenario B and the baseline scenario A allows us to assess what would have happened if
floors adjusted as they did between 2010 and 2016, but all workers remained in their same
floor categories, and received the same cushions and supplements as they did in 2010.
    In scenario C, we reweight the observations in scenario B by the relative probability that


                                             28
workers in a given gender/education/age cell were present in the labor market in 2016 versus
2010. Following the logic of DFL, this reweighting allows us to assess how the changing
demographic composition of the workforce would have affected wage outcomes, holding con-
stant the assignment of workers to their 2010 wage floor groups, with their 2010 cushions
and supplements, but with 2016 floors.
    In scenario D, we take all workers in our matched QP-BTE sample in 2016, but assign
each worker in a given wage floor group a randomly drawn wage cushion and wage supplement
from the distributions of the same wage floor group in 2010 .27 Relative to scenario
C (which has 2010 workers in their 2010 floor groups but assigned the 2016 floors) scenario
D captures any reallocation of workers across wage floor groups, while holding constant
wage floors at their 2016 values, and the distributions of wage cushions and supplements for
workers in a given floor group at their 2010 distributions.
    We note that this reallocation effect reflects a combination of within-job effects, between-
job effects, and entry effects. Within jobs, a change in the rate at which workers are promoted
to higher wage floor categories will lead workers in a given age range in 2016 to be assigned
to better or worse wage floor groups than they would have been assigned to in 2010. For job
changers, any shift in the probabilities of moving up or down the "job ladder" (as measured
by the level of the wage floors at the origin and destination job) will likewise lead to a
change in the assignment of workers to wage floors. Finally, any change in the assignment
of labor market entrants (or re-entrants) to wage floor groups will contribute to the overall
reallocation effect.
    In scenario E, we adjust scenario D by assigning each worker his or her actual wage
cushion in 2016. A comparison with scenario D allows us to assess the impact of changes in
the distribution of wage cushions within a given wage floor group. Finally, Scenario F just
takes the distribution of workers in 2016 with their 2016 floors, cushions and supplements.
This differs from scenario E by the updating of the distribution of wage supplements from
2010 to 2016, allowing us to quantify the impact of changing wage supplements.
    Table 12 summarizes the comparisons across these different scenarios for the overall
population of workers and various subgroups. We begin by showing the mean log total
monthly wage in 2010 (column 1) and the components of this total, as described by equation
(2) (columns 2-4). Next we show the actual change in mean log wages between 2010 and
2016, which was -1.7% for workers as a whole, but ranged between -20% (for some university-
  27
   This re-assignment approach builds on DFL, who assessed the effect of a national changing minimum
wage by assigning the lower tail of wages from one year to the distribution of wages in another year.



                                                 29
educated groups) to +0.7% (for women with less than high school education who were
between 25 and 44).
    Column 6 shows the difference in mean log wages between scenario B and scenario A,
and summarizes the impact of changing wage floors. On average real wage floors declined
by about 2.2%, but the mean floors affecting young and less educated workers actually rose
slightly, reflecting the influence of the minimum wage, which increased in real value by 3.5%
between 2010 and 2016, pushing up some of the lowest wage floors in the economy.
    Column 7 shows the effect of demographic changes captured by the difference between sce-
nario C and scenario B. (Note that within any of the narrowly defined gender/education/age
groups in the bottom panel of the table this difference is 0). Average education levels were
rising quickly in Portugal between 2010 and 2016, a trend that would have increased wages
by about 7.4% in the absence of other factors.
    Offsetting the rise in education was a reallocation of workers across floor groups, the
effects of which are captured by the differences in mean wages between scenarios D and
C, presented in column 8. On average workers were being reallocated to lower-paying job
over our sample period, leading to a nearly 5% reduction in real wages. The effects of this
downgrading were particularly large for older university-educated and high-school educated
workers, and were negligible for younger, less educated workers who were already working
at jobs with the lowest wage floors.
    Finally, columns 9 and 10 show the effects of changes in wage cushions and wage sup-
plements. On average wage cushions declined over the course of the financial crisis, with
larger declines for groups that were initially earning larger average cushions. In contrast, the
value of wage supplements was relatively stable, though groups with the largest declines in
floors and cushions experienced small increases in the value of their supplemental payments.
This reflects the fact that some components of supplementary payments are expressed in
absolute terms (such as meal allowance payments), and as the base wage of a group declines
the relative value of their supplementary payments will rise.
    The general pattern of the different components in columns 7-10 is illustrated in Figure 5.
We plot the overall change in log wages for each of the 18 demographic groups highlighted in
Table 12 against their mean log wage in 2010, along with the contributions of floor updates,
changes in cushions and supplemental payments, and the effect of re-allocations across floor
groups. The figure shows that the large reductions in real wages for higher-paid groups in
the Portugal between 2010 and 2016 reflected the combined effects of falling wage floors,
reduced wage cushions, and re-allocations to lower-paying floor categories.


                                              30
    One way to summarize the relative contributions of these different components to the
between-group pattern of wage changes is to compute cov [wT                      T
                                                               s , z ks ]/var [w s ],where w s
                                                                                              T

represents the change in the real average total wage of skill group s between 2010 and 2016,
and z ks is the mean change in the kth component for skill group s. Since wT      s =    k z ks
these terms sum to 1. Following this approach we estimate that changes in real wage floors
accounted for 24% of the between-skill group variation in real wages reductions, changes in
real wage cushions accounted for 26%, re-allocation across floor group accounted for 56%,
and changes in real supplemental payments accounted for -6%.


8    Conclusions
In this paper we have tried to provide a simple framework for thinking about the effect of
"European style" sectoral wage contracts on wage inequality and patterns of wage changes for
different individuals and groups over time. Our approach builds on earlier work by Cardoso
and Portugal (2005). As they (and many subsequent authors) have noted, a key feature
that distinguishes European style contracts from union contracts in the U.S. is that most
workers receive an idiosyncratic wage cushion that "tops up" their wage over the contractual
wage floor. We therefore adopt some of the methods that have been developed to study the
effect of minimum wages --specifically models of wage spillovers -- to the study of sectoral
wage floors. We also extend the seminal approach of DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux (1996)
to develop a series of counterfactuals that allow us to show how changes in wage floors,
changes in wage cushions, and re-allocations of workers across different floor categories all
contributed to wage adjustments over the past decade in Portugal.
    Since wage cushions are set by the employer, rather than by the sectoral bargain itself,
they introduce an important source of wage flexibility both to the cross-sectional wage distri-
bution at a point in time, and to changes in wages for individuals and groups over time. We
show that variation in wage cushions contributes significantly to many of the standard "wage
gaps" in the labor market, including differences by gender, education, age, and between more
and less profitable employers. The variation in wage cushions is particularly important in
allowing wages to vary between more and less profitable firms covered by the same sectoral
agreement, addressing a concern about sectoral bargaining that is widely raised by policy
analysts (e.g., Boeri et al., 2019).
    We also show that when wage floors are renegotiated in a sectoral wage bargain, only
about one-half of the increase is passed through to workers' wages. The other half is absorbed


                                              31
by a reduction in wage cushions. As has been well documented in the study of minimum
wages, the passthrough effect of sectoral wage floors is larger for workers whose wages are
closer to the floor (i.e., those with a smaller wage cushion), but in our case we find some
degree of passthrough even for workers whose wages are far above the floor for their job
category.
    We do not find any evidence that employers adjust to rising wage floors by cutting
employment. This may not be too surprising in a setting where the vast majority of workers
are receiving an employer-determined wage cushion that places their wage above the floor:
a growing body of evidence suggests that when wages are set by employers the effect of
minimum wage increases is small.
    Our counterfactual analysis of wage changes from before to after the recent financial
crisis in Portugal shows that the remarkable declines in real wages for many groups were
accomplished by a combination of declining real wage floors, declining real wage cushions,
and a re-allocation of workers across wage floor categories. The re-allocation effect was
particularly important for higher-educated groups, who entered new jobs at lower floors
than would have been expected prior to the crisis and were also promoted less quickly to
higher wage floor categories.
    An important limitation of our study is that we only have data for one country. It is
possible that some of the flexibility we document in the Portuguese labor market is absent
in other labor markets. Indeed, the Portuguese labor market has long been characterized by
relatively high levels of wage inequality. In other countries, institutional or legal restrictions
may make it impossible for firms to reduce wage cushions when sectoral wage floors are
increased. Providing evidence on how floors and cushions interact in other countries would
clearly be helpful for future policy-making.




                                               32
   References
Addison, John T., Pedro Portugal, and Hugo Vilares. (2017) "Unions and Collective Bar-
gaining in the Wake of the Great Recession: Evidence from Portugal." British Journal
of Industrial Relations 55 (3): 551-576.
    Ashenfelter, Orley. (1972) "Racial Discrimination and Trade Unionism." Journal of
Political Economy 80 (3 - Part 1): 435-464.
    Bastos, Paulo, Natalia P. Monteiro, and Odd Rune Straume. (2009) "Firm Heterogeneity
and Wages in Unionised Labour Markets: Theory and Evidence." Labour Economics 16
(4): 440-450.
    Blanchard, Olivier J., Florence Jaumotte, and Prakash Loungani. (2013) "Labor Market
Policies and IMF Advice in Advanced Economies during the Great Recession." IMF Staff
Discussion Notes 13/02. International Monetary Fund, Washington DC.
    Boeri, Tito, Andrea Ichino, Enrico Moretti and Johanna Posch. (2019) "Wage Equal-
ization and Regional Misallocation: Evidence from Italian and German Provinces." NBER
Working Paper 25612. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
    Butter, Frank A. G. Den, and Florian V. Eppink. (2003) "The Influence of Labour
Flows on Wage Drift: An Empirical Analysis for The Netherlands." Applied Economics
Letters 10 (3): 139-142.
    Calmfors, Lars. (1993) "Lessons from the Macroeconomic Experience of Sweden." Eu-
ropean Journal of Political Economy 9 (1): 25-72.
    Calmfors, Lars, and John Driffill. (1988) "Bargaining Structure, Corporatism and Macroe-
conomic Performance." Economic Policy 3 (6): 14-61.
    Calmfors, Lars, and Ragnar Nymoen. (1990) "Real Wage Adjustment and Employment
Policies in the Nordic Countries." Economic Policy 5 (11): 397-448.
    Card, David. (1990) "Unexpected Inflation, Real Wages, and Employment Determination
in Union Contracts." American Economic Review 80 (4): 669-688.
    Card, David. (1992) "The Effect of Unions on the Distribution of Wages: Redistribution
or Relabelling?" NBER Working Paper 4195. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
    Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. (2018) "Firms and
Labor Market Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics
36 (S1): S13-S70.
    Card, David, Francesco Devicienti, and Agata Maida. (2014) "Rent-sharing, Holdup,
and Wages: Evidence from Matched Panel Data." Review of Economic Studies 81 (1):

                                            33
84-111.
    Card, David, Joerg Heining, and Patrick Kline. (2013) "Workplace Heterogeneity and
the Rise of West German Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics , 128 (4):
967­1015.
    Card, David, Thomas Lemieux, and W. Craig Riddell. (2004) "Unions and Wage In-
equality." Journal of Labor Research 25: 519-559.
    Cardoso, Ana Rute, and Pedro Portugal. (2005) "Contractual Wages and the Wage
Cushion under Different Bargaining Settings." Journal of Labor Economics 23 (4):
875-902.
    Cengiz, Doruk, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer. (2019) "The Effect
of Minimum Wages on Low-Wage Jobs." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3):
1405-1454.
    Christofides, Louis N., and Andrew J. Oswald. (1992) "Real Wage Determination and
Rent-Sharing in Collective Bargaining Agreements." Quarterly Journal of Economics
107 (3): 985-1002.
    Deelen, Anja, and Rob Euwals. (2014) "Do Wages Continue Increasing at Older Ages?
Evidence on the Wage Cushion in the Netherlands." IZA Discussion Papers 8467. Institute
for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.
    Diez-Catalan, Luis and Ernesto Villanueva. (2014) "Contract Staggering and Unemploy-
ment during the Great Recession: Evidence from Spain." Bank of Spain Working Paper
1431. Bank of Spain, Madrid.
    DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. (1996) "Labor Market Insti-
tutions and the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach." Econo-
metrica 64 (5): 1001-1044.
    Dolado, Juan J., Florentino Felgueroso, and Juan F. Jimeno. (1997) "The Effects of
Minimum Bargained Wages on Earnings: Evidence from Spain." European Economic
Review 41 (3-5): 713-721.
    European Commission. (2011) The Economic Adjustment Programme for Por-
tugal . Brussells: European Commission Directorate-General for Economic and Financial
Affairs.
    Fanfani, Bernardo. (2020) "The Employment Effects of Collective Bargaining." Depart-
ment of Economics and Finance Working Paper 95. Milano: Universit`   a Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore.
    Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. (2020) "Unions


                                           34
and Inequality Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data." NBER
Working Paper 24587. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
    Firpo, Sergio. (2007) "Efficient Semiparametric Estimation of Quantile Treatment Ef-
fects." Econometrica 75 (1): 259-276.
    Fortin, Nicole M., Thomas Lemieux, and Neil Lloyd. (forthcoming) "Labor Market
Institutions and the Distribution of Wages: The Role of Spillover Effects." Journal of
Labor Economics .
    Freeman, Richard B. (1980) "Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages." Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 34 (1): 3-23.
    Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. (1984) What Do Unions Do? New York:
Basic Books.
    Holden, Steinar. (1989) "Wage Drift and Bargaining: Evidence from Norway." Eco-
nomica 56 (224): 419-432.
    Holden, Steinar. (1998) "Wage Drift and the Relevance of Centralised Wage Setting."
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 100 (4): 711-731.
    H¨ubler, Olaf, and Uwe Jirjahn. (2003) "Works Councils and Collective Bargaining in
Germany: The Impact on Productivity and Wages." Scottish Journal of Political
Economy 50: 1-21.
    Jung, Sven, and Claus Schnabel. (2009) "Paying More than Necessary? The Wage
Cushion in Germany." IZA Discussion Papers 4278. Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn,
Germany.
    Lewis, H. Gregg. (1986) Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
    Martins, Pedro. (2021) "30,000 Minimum Wages: The Economic Effects of Collective
Bargaining Extensions." British Journal of Industrial Relations , forthcoming 2021.
    Naumann, Reinhard. (2018) "Reregulating the Extension of Collective Agreements in
Portugal: A Case Study." In Susan Hayter and Jelle Visser (eds.) Collective Agreements:
Extending Labour Protection . Geneva: ILO.
    Nickell, Stephen, and Richard Layard. (1999) "Labor Market Institutions and Economic
Performance." In Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Eco-
nomics , Volume 3, Part C. Amsterdam: Elsevier, p. 3029-3084.
    Ordine, Patrizia. (1995) "Wage Drift and Minimum Contractual Wage: Theoretical
Interrelationship and Empirical Evidence for Italy." Labour Economics 2 (4): 335-357.
    Phelps Brown, E. Henry (1962). "Wage Drift." Economica 29 (116): 339-356.


                                          35
    Portugal, CRL. (2020) Relat´  orio Anual Sobre a Evolu¸     c~
                                                                 ao da Negocia¸  c~
                                                                                  ao Co-
letiva em 2019 . Lisboa: Minist´     erio do Trabalho e da Solidariedade Social, Centro de
Rela¸co
      ~es Laborais.
    Portugal, MTSS. (2006) Livro Verde das Rela¸     c~
                                                      oes Laborais. Lisboa: Minist´ erio do
Trabalho e da Solidariedade Social.
    Portugal, MTSS. (2007) Livro Branco das Rela¸      c~
                                                        oes Laborais. Lisboa: Minist´  erio
do Trabalho e da Solidariedade Social.
    Portugal, MTSS. (2016) Livro Verde sobre as Rela¸      c~
                                                            oes Laborais. Lisboa: Min-
ist´
   erio do Trabalho e da Solidariedade Social.
    Riddell, William Craig. (1979) "The Empirical Foundations of the Phillips Curve: Evi-
dence from Canadian Wage Contract Data." Econometrica 47 (1): 1-24.
    Schulten, Thorsten. (2016) "The Meaning of Extension for the Stability of Collective
Bargaining in Europe." ETUI Policy Brief 4. European Trade Union Institute, Brussels,
Belgium.
    Song, Jae, David H. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom, and Till von Wachter (2019).
"Firming Up Inequality." Quarterlty Journal of Economics 134 (1): 1-50.




                                            36
Appendix A: Assigning Wage Floors from BTE to Workers in QP
We assigned workers in the linked employer-employee dataset (QP) to wage floors published
in the Labor Bulletin (Boletim do Trabalho e Emprego, BTE). Appendix Table A1 reports
the constraints on the collective bargaining agreements (CBA's) published in BTE that we
imposed to define our analysis sample. In turn, Appendix Table A2 reports the constraints
we imposed on the QP dataset.
    A total of 1,467 contracts including wage clauses were published in BTE between January
2008 and December 2016. Parallel agreements were signed by different trade unions with
the same employer(s), presenting exactly the same contents. We identified 406 such redun-
dant contracts, leaving 1,061 "consolidated" CBA's eligible for analysis. Fifty contracts fall
outside the set of industries under study, whereas 23 fall outside the geographic scope of the
analysis. Hence we consider 988 non-duplicate contracts within the scope of our analysis.
    However, a few contracts (two) were never enforced over the period October 2008 to
2016; another 22 agreements do not appear to have any covered workers in QP in the 2008-
2016 period. An additional 267 contracts defined wage floors conditional on information
that cannot be identified in QP. In some cases this information pertains the worker (such
as academic grades, subjective evaluations of CV or performance, type of schedule, or her
progression along a set of occupational "steps"); in other cases this information pertains
to the firm (such as the category of the establishment in accommodation, food and leisure
services, or the average corporate income tax paid in the recent past). Therefore, the analysis
set includes 697 collective bargaining agreements.
    We restricted the QP dataset to wage-earners aged 18 to 64, with non-missing base wage,
education and date of hire, reported working full-time; we also excluded agriculture and fish-
eries, those working in Madeira and the Azores, apprentices, and workers in accounting firms.
These constraints resulted in a dataset of 16.6 million observations worker-year. Eleven per-
cent of these workers were reported not covered by a CBA. Another 7% were reported as
covered by a CBA but the job category was not specified. For 10%, no renegotiation of the
collective bargaining contract took place between 2008 and 2016; and for a residual 1% a
floor update was identified, but its dates of enforcement fell outside our analysis period.
    For approximately one fourth of the workforce, we were unable to assigned a wage floor,
either because: we could not find the worker's floor group in BTE, even though we found
her contract (3% of the observations); or the identified wage floor was actually enforced
retrospectively and the wage floor at the time of QP was unknown (~ 1% of observations);
or the wage floor depended on information that could not be identified in QP. Hence our


                                              37
analysis sample includes 7.3 million observation worker-year.




Appendix B: Dynamics of CBA coverage
In a given year, individuals can be classified into 3 states: c = employed in covered job;
n = employed in uncovered job; o = out of work (i.e., not in QP). Let N ij (t) represent
the number of workers who move from state i to state j between t - 1 and t, let N ·j (t)
represent the number in state j in period t (aggregating across all previous states) and let
N i· (t - 1) represent the number in state i in year t - 1 (aggregating across all subsequent
states). Finally, let E (t) = N ·c (t) + N ·n (t) represent the number of employed workers in year
t. Then the coverage rate in year t is:

                                N ·c (t)
                       C (t) 
                                 E (t)
                                N nc (t) + N cc (t) + N oc (t)
                              =
                                              E (t)
                                         nc
                                       N (t)           N nc (t) + N nn (t)
                              =                     ×
                                N nc (t) + N nn (t)            E (t)
                                           cc
                                         N (t)          N (t) + N cn (t)
                                                            cc
                                + cc                 ×
                                  N (t) + N cn (t)              E (t)
                                           oc
                                         N (t)          N (t) + N on (t)
                                                            oc
                                + oc                  ×
                                  N (t) + N on (t)              E (t)

Now let
                                                    N no (t)
                                     n (t - 1) =
                                                   N n· (t - 1)
represent the fraction of noncovered workers in year t - 1 who are out of employment in year
t, and similarly let
                                     c           N co (t)
                                     (t - 1) = c
                                                N (t - 1)
represent the fraction of covered workers in year t - 1 who are out of employment in year t.
Then we can write:

                 N nc (t) + N nn (t)   N n· (t - 1)(1 -  n (t - 1)) E (t - 1)
                                     =                             ×
                        E (t)                    E (t - 1)            E (t)
                                                              n
                                       (1 - C (t - 1))(1 -  (t - 1))
                                     =
                                                E (t)/E (t - 1)


                                               38
                     N cc (t) + N cn (t)   N c· (t - 1)(1 -  c (t - 1)) E (t - 1)
                                         =                             ×
                            E (t)                    E (t - 1)            E (t)
                                                            c
                                           C (t - 1)(1 -  (t - 1))
                                                 E (t)/E (t - 1)

Finally, let
                                                N oc (t) + N on (t)
                                       µ(t) =
                                                       E (t)
represent the fraction of the employed workforce in period t who were not employed in t - 1.
   Then

               C (t) = nc (t)(1 - C (t - 1))w1t + cc (t)C (t - 1)w2t + oc (t)µ(t) (B 1)

where

                                                   N nc (t)
                                    nc (t) =
                                             N nc (t) + N nn (t)
                                                   N cc (t)
                                    cc (t) =
                                             N cc (t) + N uc (t)
                                                   N oc (t)
                                    oc (t) =                     ,
                                             N oc (t) + N on (t)

                                                (1 -  n (t - 1))
                                        w1t =
                                                E (t)/E (t - 1)
                                                (1 -  c (t - 1))
                                       w2t =                     .
                                                E (t)/E (t - 1)
The term nc is the transition rate from an uncovered job in t - 1 to a covered job in t,
while cc is the retention rate from a covered job in t - 1 to a covered job in t. The terms
w1 and w2 are adjustment factors that account for transitions out of work, and for overall
employment growth between periods. Note that if there is no flow of workers in or out of
employment between periods then w1t = w2t = 1, and µ(t) = 0, so equation (B1) becomes
the simple flow equation:

                           C (t) = nc (t)(1 - C (t - 1)) + cc (t)C (t - 1).

   Appendix Table B1 shows employment counts in the current and past year, the transition
rates nc (t), cc (t), oc (t), the attrition rates  n (t - 1),  c (t - 1), the share of current employees
who were not working last year, µ(t), and the adjustment factors w1t , w2t for equation (B1).

                                                   39
Figure 1: Example of Wage Table from BTE


 Contrato coletivo entre a Associação da Hotelaria, Restauração
 e Similares de Portugal (AHRESP) e o Sindicato dos Trabalhadores
 e Técnicos de Serviços - SITESE - Alteração salarial e outras

                   Níveis             Grupo A                    Grupo B
                     XII                        960,0                      930,0 
                     XI                         895,0                      887,0 
                      X                         770,0                      735,0 
                     IX                         700,0                      670,0 
                     VIII                       630,0                      610,0 
                     VII                        585,0                      575,0 
                     VI                         540,0                      540,0 
                      V                         532,0                      532,0 
                     IV                         531,0                      531,0 
                     III                        530,0                      530,0 
                      II                        450,0                      450,0 
                      I                         440,0                      440,0 
Figure 2: Distributions of Relative Wage Floors and Wage Cushions by Gender

     a. Relative Wage Floors
        0.45

        0.40

        0.35
                                                                                                              Males
        0.30
                                                                                                              Females
Frequency




        0.25

        0.20

        0.15

        0.10

        0.05

        0.00
                   0.025   0.125   0.225   0.325   0.425   0.525   0.625   0.725   0.825   0.925   1.025   1.125   1.225   1.325   1.425   1.525

                                   Relative Wage Floor (FloorMin. Wage) (midpints of 0.05 bins)


       b. Wage Cushions
            0.12

            0.10

                                                                                                               Males
            0.08
                                                                                                               Females
 Frequency




            0.06

            0.04

            0.02

            0.00
                   0.025   0.125   0.225   0.325   0.425   0.525   0.625   0.725   0.825   0.925   1.025   1.125   1.225   1.325   1.425   1.525

                                                     Wage Cushion (midpoints of 0.05 bins)
Figure 3a: Components of Mean Wages (relative to minimum wage) for Females and Males    



 a. Females                                                         b. Males
     0.35                                                              0.35

              0.30                                                           0.30
                                                                                                                               Floor (rel.
                                                                                                                               to min)
              0.25                                                           0.25

                                                                                                                               Cushion
 Log points




                                                                Log points
              0.20                                                           0.20

              0.15                                                           0.15
                                                                                                                               Regular
                                                                                                                               suppl's
              0.10                                                           0.10

              0.05                                                           0.05

              0.00                                                           0.00
                 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016                   2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Figure 3b: Components of Mean Wages (relative to minimum wage) by Education Group

a. Less than High School Education                                        b. High School Education
              0.7                                                                       0.7

              0.6                                                                       0.6

              0.5                                                                       0.5
 Log points




                                                                           Log points
              0.4                                                                       0.4

              0.3                                                                       0.3

              0.2                                                                       0.2

              0.1                                                                       0.1

              0.0                                                                       0.0
                2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016              2008    2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016


c. University Education
     0.7

              0.6                                                                       Floor (rel. to
                                                                                        min)
              0.5
 Log points




              0.4
                                                                                        Cushion
              0.3

              0.2
                                                                                        Regular
              0.1                                                                       suppl's

              0.0
                2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016
Figure 3c: Mean Floor (relative to minimum wage) and Mean Cushion by Quartile of Firm Value Added/Worker   

               a. Mean Floor Relative to Minimum Wage                                    b. Mean Cushion
              0.45                                                                       0.45
              0.40                                                                       0.40
              0.35                                                                       0.35                                                               Quartile 4
              0.30                                                                       0.30
                                                                                                                                                            Quartile 3
 Log points




                                                                            Log points
              0.25                                                                       0.25
              0.20                                                                       0.20                                                               Quartile 2
              0.15                                                                       0.15
              0.10
                                                                                                                                                            Quartile 1
                                                                                         0.10
              0.05                                                                       0.05
              0.00                                                                       0.00
                 2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016               2008   2009    2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016

                                         Year                                                                            Year
Figure 3d: Components of Age Profile of Mean Wages (relative to minimum wage) for Females and Males    

 a. Females                                                    b. Males
    0.35                                                          0.35

             0.30                                                          0.30
                                                                                                                                Floor (rel.
             0.25                                                          0.25                                                 to min)
Log points




                                                              Log points
             0.20                                                          0.20                                                 Cushion

             0.15                                                          0.15
                                                                                                                                Regular
             0.10                                                          0.10                                                 suppl's

             0.05                                                          0.05

             0.00                                                          0.00
                    18   24   30   36     42   48   54   60                       18   24   30   36         42   48   54   60

                                    Age                                                               Age
                               Figure 4: Estimated Passthrough Rates of Floor Increases to Base Wages, 
                                                             by Group 
                         1.0


                         0.8
Wage Floor Passthrough




                         0.6


                         0.4


                         0.2


                         0.0
                               0.0           0.2            0.4           0.6           0.8               1.0
                                                   Mean Wage Cushion of Group (log points)
    Note: based on estimates in Table 8. Fitted OLS line shown, Rsquared = 0.49.
                                        Figure 5: Components of Change in Mean log Real Wages Across Groups, 20102016

                                      0.05

                                                                                                                        Adjustment of
Change in Component (in log points)




                                      0.00                                                                              Supplements

                                                                                                                        Update of
                                      0.05                                                                              Floors

                                                                                                                        Adjustment of
                                      0.10                                                                              Cushions

                                                                                                                        Reallocation
                                      0.15
                                                                                                                        across Floors

                                      0.20                                                                              Overall
                                                                                                                        Change in log
                                                                                                                        Wage
                                      0.25
                                             6.3           6.8              7.3               7.8              8.3
                                                            Mean log Total Wage of Group in 2010
Table 1:  Characteristics of New Contracts in BTE, Workers in QP, and Merged BTEQP Sample
          Renegotiated Contracts Reported in           Full Time Workers in QP (Private Sector 
            BTE (nonduplicates, in scope)                           Age 1864)                                  Matched BTEQP Sample
                                    Mean Number                                        Percent         Number of
           Number                     Months           Number of        Percent        Covered        Workers with Percent of
          Contracts      Percent      Since Last       Workers in       Covered      by Sectoral         Assigned      All Workers    Number 
 Year       in BTE       Sectoral      Contract            QP           by CBA           CBA           Floors in QP    with Floor     of Floors
              (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)            (8)            (9)

 2008        192           58.9           20            1,966,522         90.0           75.0            634,300           32.3         1,935
 2009        165           53.4           18            1,893,484         89.9           74.2            804,653           42.5         2,211
 2010        140           61.4           20            1,897,345         91.4           75.2            835,011           44.0         2,357
 2011        111           52.3           20            1,868,715         90.9           74.7            817,703           43.8         2,461
 2012        50            38.0           25            1,768,599         89.1           71.6            832,861           47.1         2,566
 2013        54            31.5           22            1,748,831         88.6           70.8            815,606           46.6         2,585
 2014        83            34.9           26            1,778,271         88.4           70.6            825,698           46.4         2,619
 2015        90            47.8           37            1,831,708         88.0           70.3            844,830           46.1         2,603
 2016        103           46.6           29            1,884,758         87.0           69.6            855,602           45.4         2,641
  All        988           50.7           23           16,638,233         89.3           72.5           7,266,264          43.7        21,978
Notes: CBA denotes a collective bargaining agreement.  Columns 13 are based on nonduplicated counts of contracts for workers in mainland 
Portugal excluding agriculture and fisheries.  Workers in QP include fulltime private sector employees age 1864. We also exclude apprentices, 
employees in agriculture and fisheries, employees of accounting firms, and individuals with missing data on monthly wages, education, or date of 
hire.  Workers assigned a wage floor exclude those whose wage floor depends on firm or worker characteristics, workers covered by contracts that 
were never renegotiated, and other groups (see text).
Table 2: Comparisons of Workers by CBA Coverage, and of Covered Workers by Assigned Floor Status

                                                                    By CBA Coverage                    By Floor Assignment (if covered)
                                           All                 Covered         Not Covered            Floor Assigned        No Floor
                                           (1)                   (2)                (3)                     (4)                 (5)
Fraction female                          0.452                  0.448                0.476                 0.420               0.476

Fraction with high school                0.242                  0.240                0.256                 0.233               0.248

Fraction with university                 0.191                  0.169                0.376                 0.156               0.181

Mean years experience                    23.85                  24.32                19.98                 24.50               24.14

Mean tenure current job                   8.34                   8.59                6.31                   8.69                8.48

Mean log monthly base wage                6.696                 6.675                6.858                 6.664                6.686
  (standard deviation)                   (0.509)               (0.495)              (0.590)               (0.491)              (0.499)

Mean log monthly total wage               6.856                 6.837                7.014                 6.837                6.838
  (standard deviation)                   (0.532)               (0.522)              (0.586)               (0.517)              (0.528)

Number personyears                    16,638,233             14,852,805           1,785,428              7,266,264           7,586,541
Source: Quadros de Pessoal. Sample includes wage earners age 1864 with nonmissing base wage, education and date of hire, working under full 
time contract.  Apprentices, workers in Madeira and the Azores, and those in agriculture  and fishing are excluded.
Table 3: Proximate Contributions of Wage Floors, Cushions, and Supplements to Level and Variance of Wages
                                            Decomposition of Means:                                                  Decomposition of Variances:
                        Mean Log        Mean        Relative Wage Mean Wage    Mean                  Var.  Log      Var. Rel.      Var.          Var.      2 × Cov [Rel.
                       Total Wage     Rel to Min.       Floor      Cushion  Supplements             Total Wage      Wage Flr.     Cushion       Suppl.     Flr. & Cush.]
                           (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)        (5)                     (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)           (10)
All Workers                6.84           0.61           0.24            0.19          0.17            0.267         0.086         0.112        0.024            0.042
 (Percent of Total)                                     (40.2)          (31.4)        (28.4)                         (32.3)        (42.1)       (9.1)            (15.6)

By Gender:
Males                      6.91           0.68           0.26            0.23          0.18            0.286         0.091         0.129        0.030            0.039
(58.0% of obs.)                                         (39.1)          (34.0)        (26.8)                         (31.9)        (45.2)       (10.3)           (13.5)
Females                    6.74           0.51           0.22            0.14          0.16            0.226         0.078         0.084        0.017            0.040
(42.0% of obs.)                                         (42.3)          (26.5)        (31.2)                         (34.7)        (37.3)       (7.6)            (17.8)

Gender Gap                 0.16           0.16           0.05            0.09          0.02            0.060         0.013         0.045        0.012            0.010
 (Percent of Gap)                                       (29.7)          (57.9)        (13.3)                         (21.8)        (74.7)       (20.6)           (16.6)

By Education:
<High School               6.65           0.43           0.14            0.12          0.16            0.123         0.031         0.061        0.021            0.010
(61.1% of obs.)                                         (32.7)          (28.8)        (38.5)                         (25.2)        (49.4)       (16.7)           (8.2)

High School                6.93           0.70           0.30            0.21          0.19            0.256         0.091         0.113        0.027            0.023
(23.3% of obs.)                                         (42.7)          (29.7)        (27.6)                         (35.4)        (43.9)       (10.5)           (8.8)

University                 7.41           1.18           0.57            0.43          0.17            0.372         0.141         0.239        0.035            0.023
(15.6% of obs.)                                         (48.7)          (36.6)        (14.7)                         (37.8)        (64.3)       (9.4)            (6.3)

HS/<HS Gap                 0.28           0.27           0.16            0.08          0.03            0.134         0.060         0.052        0.006            0.012
 (Percent of Gap)                                       (58.3)          (31.2)        (10.5)                         (44.8)        (38.9)       (4.8)            (9.3)

University/HS Gap          0.48           0.48           0.28            0.22          0.02            0.115         0.050          0.126       0.008            0.046
 (Percent of Gap)                                       (57.4)          (46.3)         (4.0)                         (43.1)        (109.6)      (7.1)            (39.7)


By Quartile of Firm VA/Worker:
1st Quartile             6.51             0.28           0.11            0.04          0.13            0.076         0.027         0.044        0.011            0.002
(25.0% of obs.)                                         (38.4)          (15.3)        (46.3)                         (35.1)        (57.5)       (13.9)           (2.3)

4th Quartile               7.19           0.96           0.37            0.41          0.18            0.321         0.114         0.183        0.034            0.043
(25.0% of obs.)                                         (38.7)          (42.2)        (19.1)                         (35.6)        (57.2)       (10.5)           (13.4)

4th1st Quartile            0.69           0.68           0.27            0.36          0.05            0.245         0.088         0.140        0.023            0.045
 (Percent of Gap)                                       (38.9)          (53.1)         (8.0)                         (35.7)        (57.1)       (9.4)            (18.3)
Notes: see note to Table 2. Information on value added per worker is only available for nonfinancial firms, and is based on previous calendar year.  See text.
Table 4:  Estimated Models for Wage Floor, Cushion and Base Wage within CBA's
                                                                                                                         *
                          Log Floor               Wage Cushion              Log Base Wage              Cushion Share
CBA Fixed Effects       No          Yes           No           Yes           No           Yes            No       Yes
                        (1)         (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)       (8)
Female               0.054        0.053         0.086       0.094          0.140       0.147           0.615     0.641
                     (0.003)      (0.001)       (0.003)     (0.002)        (0.003)     (0.003)
Education (yrs.)      0.031        0.024         0.027       0.030          0.058       0.054          0.457     0.560
                     (0.001)      (0.000)       (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)
Age                   0.014        0.013         0.024       0.023          0.037       0.036          0.627     0.635
                     (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)        (0.000)     (0.000)
Age2 / 100           0.010        0.010         0.019       0.018          0.029       0.028           0.650     0.631
                     (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)

Indicators for Decile of Mean Log Value Added per Worker at Firm:
Decile 2              0.001       0.004          0.016       0.014          0.017       0.010          0.934     1.434
                     (0.004)      (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.005)     (0.004)
Decile 3              0.031       0.001          0.021       0.044          0.052       0.043          0.399     1.016
                     (0.008)      (0.002)       (0.006)     (0.003)        (0.005)     (0.004)
Decile 4              0.047        0.000         0.034       0.073          0.081       0.074          0.416     0.994
                     (0.012)      (0.004)       (0.012)     (0.005)        (0.011)     (0.008)
Decile 5              0.030        0.009         0.077       0.097          0.107       0.106          0.718     0.913
                     (0.008)      (0.003)       (0.006)     (0.004)        (0.005)     (0.005)
Decile 6              0.037        0.006         0.115       0.137          0.152       0.143          0.754     0.955
                     (0.007)      (0.003)       (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.007)     (0.005)
Decile 7              0.042        0.016         0.155       0.174          0.197       0.191          0.787     0.915
                     (0.004)      (0.002)       (0.005)     (0.005)        (0.006)     (0.006)
Decile 8              0.079        0.028         0.188       0.223          0.268       0.251          0.704     0.887
                     (0.007)      (0.003)       (0.009)     (0.008)        (0.009)     (0.009)
Decile 9              0.114        0.039         0.246       0.290          0.360       0.329          0.684     0.882
                     (0.009)      (0.007)       (0.010)     (0.010)        (0.012)     (0.014)
Decile 10             0.234        0.052         0.336       0.414          0.570       0.466          0.589     0.888
                     (0.023)      (0.004)       (0.016)     (0.011)        (0.019)     (0.012)
Rsquared              0.387        0.656         0.294       0.353          0.499       0.536                      
Notes: Models are estimated on 6,518,290 personyear observations for workers covered by collective bargaining 
agreements (CBA's) at firms with nonmissing valueadded data.  All models also include year effects. Standard errors, 
clustered by firm, in parentheses.
*
Share of the effect of covariate in row heading on base wage that is attributable to effect on wage cushion.
Table 5:  Alternative Models for Renegotiated Wage Floors

                                                                                        Adjusted
                                                                                        Rsquared

Explanatory variables (degrees of freedom)
1. Year effects (7)                                                                       0.787

2. Year effects (7) and modal industry effects (15)                                       0.834

3. Year effects (7), modal industry effects (15), and worker characteristics (3)          0.838

4. Year effects (7), modal industry effects (15), worker characteristics (3), and         0.853
  dummies for elaspsed time since last renegotiation (6)

5. Year × modal industry effects (71), worker characteristics (3), and dummies            0.898
  for elaspsed time since last renegotiation (6)

6. CBA effects (454)                                                                      0.981

7. Contract effects (454) and worker characteristics (3)                                  0.982
Notes: dependent variable is change in real wage floor for a specific floor group within a collective 
bargaining agreement (CBA). Estimates are weighted by the number of workers covered by the floor.  
Sample includes 5,358 renegotiated floors that were set strictly above the minimum wage at the current 
and most recent previous renegotiation.
Table 6:  Models for Change in Average Wage Floor in Renegotiated Collective Bargaining Agreements

                                                              Measure of Distribution of Real Value Added per Worker Used:
                                                     Mean         10th Pctile     25th Pctile      50th Pctile     75th Pctile     90th Pctile
                                                      (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)


Change in Real Value Added/Worker                    0.068           0.007           0.037            0.067           0.034           0.032
                                                    (0.014)         (0.005)         (0.011)          (0.015)         (0.011)         (0.007)



Other Controls:
Cumulative Inflation since last                      0.202           0.032           0.034            0.142           0.115           0.040
  renegotiation                                     (0.086)         (0.089)         (0.074)          (0.068)         (0.071)         (0.071)

Share of Females Covered by CBA                      0.015           0.017           0.015            0.014           0.016           0.015
                                                    (0.003)         (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)

Share of Univ. Grads Covered by CBA                  0.002           0.008           0.008            0.007           0.006           0.005
                                                    (0.006)         (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.005)         (0.006)         (0.006)

Mean Age of Workers Covered by CBA                   0.000           0.000           0.000            0.000           0.000           0.000
                                                    (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)

Year effects and dummies for time                     yes             yes              yes             yes             yes             yes
  since last renegotiation

Rsquared                                             0.946           0.931           0.933            0.943           0.934           0.934
Notes: dependent variable is change in real average wage floor in a renegotiated collective bargaining agreement (CBA). Estimates are weighted 
by the number of workers covered by the CBA.  Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by CBA.  Models in different columns use different 
summary statistics  as indicated in the column heading  for the distribution of changes in real value added per worker among firms covered by 
the CBA.
Table 7:  Models for 201016 Change in Average Wage Floor  Renegotiated Collective Bargaining Agreements

                                                          Measure of Distribution of Real Value Added per Worker Used:
                                                 Mean         10th Pctile      25th Pctile     50th Pctile      75th Pctile     90th Pctile
                                                  (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)

No other control variables:

Change in Real Value Added/Worker                0.134           0.105            0.115           0.131            0.078           0.055
   (20092015)                                   (0.025)         (0.027)          (0.037)         (0.025)          (0.023)         (0.026)

Rsquared                                         0.475           0.383            0.421           0.510            0.284           0.178




With Controls for Industry:
Change in Real Value Added/Worker                0.093           0.068            0.074           0.094            0.040           0.033
   (20092015)                                   (0.040)         (0.029)          (0.042)         (0.036)          (0.027)         (0.025)

Rsquared                                         0.570           0.551            0.557           0.574            0.472           0.475

Notes: dependent variable is change in real average wage floor from 2010 to 2016 in collective bargaining agreements (CBA's) that were 
renegotiated at least once. Estimates are weighted by the number of workers in the agreement.  Robust standard errors in parentheses.  
Models in different columns use different summary statistics  as indicated in the column heading  for the distribution of changes in real 
value added per worker among firms covered by the CBA over the 20092015 interval.
Table 8: Models for Effect of Changes in Wage Floors on Changes in Real Wages of Stayers


                                   Models for Change in Log Base Wage of Stayers        Models for Change in Log Total Wage of Stayers

                                                               Firmwide average                                     Firmwide average 
                                   Individuallevel wages            wages               Individuallevel wages            wages
                                                       **                                                    **
                                      OLS         IV            OLS          OLS           OLS          IV           OLS          OLS

                                      (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)

Mean of Simulated Change in          0.458        0.530         0.550       0.546         0.446        0.536         0.555        0.521
                    * 
 Base or Total Wage                 (0.016)      (0.020)       (0.021)     (0.031)       (0.034)      (0.044)       (0.045)      (0.049)


Change in Real Valueadded            0.021        0.021         0.021       0.021         0.017        0.017         0.017        0.017
 per Worker at Firm (Coeff ×10)     (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)      (0.008)

Share of Workers with Reneg                                                 0.000                                                 0.000
 otiated Floor (Coeff×10)                                                  (0.005)                                               (0.012)

Share with Renegotiated Floor                                               0.008                                                 0.068
  × Mean Simulated Change                                                  (0.031)                                               (0.050)

Demograhic Controls and               yes          yes           yes         yes           yes          yes           yes         yes
  Year Effects

First stage coefficient                           1.029                                                1.027                       
 (instrument=mean simulated                      (0.004)                                              (0.004)
  change for all workers 
   present in previous year)
Rsquared                             0.092       0.092         0.229        0.229         0.030        0.030         0.078       0.078
Notes: standard errors (clustered by firm) in parentheses. Dependent variable is change in individual base wages (columns 12), 
individual total wages (columns 56), firmwide average change in base wages (columns 34), or firmwide average change in total wages 
(columns 78) for workers who remain at the firm from previous to current year.   Models are estimated on workerlevel data for 
2,785,220 workers who remain at the same firm from previous to current year, but in columns 34 and 78 dependent variable and all 
covariates are firmwide averages (so estimates are identical to estimates based on firmwide average wage changes, weighing by the 
number of stayers).  Demographic controls are shares of females and university educated workers and mean age of workers at the firm 
as of the previous year.

* In columns 12 this variable is the simulated change in the individual's base wage, based on the actual change in the real wage floor for
the individual and assuming that (absolute) gap between the wage floor and the base wage remains constant. In columns 56 this
variable is the simulated change in the individual's total wage, based on the actual change in the real wage floor for the individual and
assuming that (absolute) gap between the wage floor and the total wage remains constant. In columns 34 (78) this variable is the
mean simulated change in base wages (total wages) for all workers who were present in the previous year.


** Model estimated by instrumental variables, treating the simulated change in the individual's base wage (column 2) or total wage 
(column 6) as endogenous and using as an instrument the mean simulated change in base wages (column 2) or total wages (column 6) 
for all workers who were present in the previous year.  
Table 9: Estimated Passthrough Rates for Floor Increases, by Subgroup

                                         Mean                                  Estimated Passthough Rate of 
                         Fraction of    Relative     Mean                           Wage Floor Changes
                         Stayers in      Wage        Wage     Mean Wage 
                           Group         Floor      Cushion   Supplements      Base Wage        Total Wage
                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)              (5)              (6)
Males
<High School, Age 1824      0.011        0.074       0.078        0.183           0.50              0.68
                                                                                 (0.06)            (0.11)
<High School, Age 2544      0.206        0.162       0.203        0.182           0.47              0.54
                                                                                 (0.03)            (0.09)
<High School, Age 4564      0.188        0.190       0.271        0.173           0.45              0.46
                                                                                 (0.03)            (0.06)
High School, Age 1824       0.007        0.108       0.095        0.201           0.39              0.48
                                                                                 (0.09)            (0.16)
High School, Age 2544       0.086        0.297       0.302        0.186           0.43              0.42
                                                                                 (0.05)            (0.12)
High School, Age 4564       0.031        0.429       0.536        0.163           0.31              0.23
                                                                                 (0.04)            (0.12)
University, Age 2544        0.061        0.545       0.613        0.125           0.33              0.29
                                                                                 (0.06)            (0.09)
University, Age 4564        0.016        0.720       0.988        0.112           0.20              0.24
                                                                                 (0.06)            (0.13)
Females
<High School, Age 1824      0.005        0.028       0.028        0.153           0.59              0.56
                                                                                 (0.04)            (0.12)
<High School, Age 2544      0.121        0.093       0.075        0.157           0.71              0.63
                                                                                 (0.02)            (0.07)
<High School, Age 4564      0.099        0.120       0.121        0.152           0.77              0.76
                                                                                 (0.03)            (0.05)
High School, Age 1824       0.005        0.067       0.062        0.189           0.37              0.36
                                                                                 (0.13)            (0.15)
High School, Age 2544       0.074        0.223       0.205        0.172           0.44              0.53
                                                                                 (0.04)            (0.09)
High School, Age 4564       0.023        0.322       0.387        0.144           0.50              0.47
                                                                                 (0.04)            (0.07)
University, Age 2544        0.057        0.442       0.477        0.129           0.31              0.37
                                                                                 (0.05)            (0.08)
University, Age 4564        0.009        0.618       0.771        0.106             0.36               0.31
                                                                                   (0.07)             (0.10)
Notes: passthrough rates are estimated from OLS models relating firmwide average of change in mean log base 
wage or mean log total wage of firm stayers to average simulated change in base wages or total wages of all 
workers that were present in previous year.  See note to Table 8.
Table 10: Models for Effect of Changes in Wage Floors on Change in Firmwide Employment

                                                                Dependent Variable = Change in Log Employment 
                                                              All Firms                           Firms Covered by Sectoral CBA's
                                                 (1)             (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)             (6)

Mean of Simulated Change in                     0.432           0.165           0.373            0.412           0.104           0.317
 Total Wage of Employees (using actual         (0.168)         (0.177)         (0.186)          (0.179)         (0.190)         (0.198)
  Floor Changes)

Change in Real Valueadded                       0.027           0.026           0.026            0.029           0.028           0.028
 per Worker at Firm                            (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)

Share of Workers with Reneg                                                     0.030                                            0.027
 otiated Floors (Coeff×10)                                                     (0.037)                                          (0.040)

Share with Renegotiated Floor                                                  0.303                                            0.316
  × Mean Simulated Change                                                      (0.305)                                          (0.316)

Demograhic Controls                              no              yes             yes               no             yes             yes

Year Effects                                     yes             yes             yes              yes             yes             yes

Rsquared                                        0.014           0.027          0.027             0.015           0.029           0.029
Notes: standard errors (clustered by firm) in parentheses. Dependent variable is change in log of employment at the firm, including all 
workers counted in our main QP data set.  Models are weighted OLS estimates, weighted by the number of employees. Mean of simulated 
change in total wage (covariate in first row) is calculated by incrementing real wage floors of employees in previous year but assuming no 
change in other wage components.  Demographic controls are shares of females and university educated workers and mean age of workers 
at the firm as of the previous year.  In columns 46, sample is restricted to firms where the modal collective bargaining agreement (CBA) 
covering workers at the firm is a sectoral contract.
Table 11: Summary of Counterfactual Scenarios

A. All workers in 2010, with actual 2010 floors, cushions, supplements

B. Start with A, increment each floor by actual change 201016
    B minus A captures floor adjustments, holding constant cushions and supplements

C. Start with B, reweight skill groups to 2016 shares
    C minus B captures demographic changes

D. All workers in 2016, with 2016 floors, but 2010 cushions and supplements
    D minus C captures the reallocation of workers across floor groups, holding
    constant floors, cushions, and supplements

E. Start with D but update to actual 2016 cushions
    E minus D captures adjustment of cushions within wage floor groups

F.  Start with E but update to actual 2016 supplements
    (= All workers in 2016 with 2016 floors, cushions and supplements)
      F minus E captures adjustment of supplements within floorgroups
Table 12: Components of Adjustment of Real Wages, 20102016
                                                                                              Simulated Components of Real Wage Change
                   Mean Log                                           Change in                   Reweighing  Reallocation to  Change in     Change in 
                   Wage in      Components of Real Wage in 2010       Real Wage      Change in    across Skill  New Floor  Cushion within  Supplt's within 
                    2010        Rel. Floor Cushion    Supplt's        20102016        Floors        Groups       Groups        Floor Group  Floor Group
                     (1)           (2)        (3)        (4)             (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)            (9)           (10)
All                  6.863        0.272        0.195       0.166        0.017         0.022         0.074         0.048          0.025          0.005

Males                6.931        0.293        0.234       0.174        0.022         0.028         0.077         0.050          0.026          0.006
Females              6.767        0.242        0.140       0.154        0.001         0.015         0.079         0.045          0.024          0.004
Educ<HS              6.677        0.164        0.122       0.160        0.022         0.014         0.009         0.012          0.007          0.002
Educ=HS              6.994        0.350        0.228       0.187        0.126         0.033         0.025         0.092          0.034          0.007
Educ=Univ.           7.491        0.633        0.468       0.160        0.161         0.044         0.019         0.084          0.062          0.010

Age 1624             6.582        0.137        0.040       0.176        0.009         0.004         0.040         0.038          0.016          0.009
Age 2544             6.870        0.282        0.192       0.167        0.025         0.024         0.071         0.046          0.029          0.004
Age 4564             6.907        0.281        0.234       0.163        0.024         0.023         0.065         0.051          0.020          0.006
Males by Education and Age
<HS, Age 1624        6.552        0.100        0.045       0.177        0.024         0.000         0.000         0.018          0.010          0.005
<HS, Age 2544        6.723        0.176        0.145       0.172        0.032         0.022         0.000         0.004          0.007          0.002
<HS, Age 4564        6.820        0.218        0.206       0.167        0.060         0.027         0.000         0.023          0.013          0.002
HS, Age 1624         6.643        0.176        0.043       0.193        0.056         0.012         0.000         0.040          0.017          0.013
HS, Age 2544         7.065        0.390        0.250       0.195        0.177         0.037         0.000         0.112          0.035          0.006
HS, Age 4564         7.476        0.579        0.463       0.204        0.209         0.042         0.000         0.132          0.050          0.015
Univ, Age 1624       7.043        0.512        0.154       0.146        0.147         0.039         0.000         0.094          0.041          0.027
Univ, Age 2544       7.541        0.646        0.507       0.158        0.181         0.042         0.000         0.075          0.073          0.009
Univ, Age 4564       8.058        0.862        0.794       0.171        0.185         0.043         0.000         0.113          0.047          0.017

Females by Education and Age
<HS, Age 1624        6.465         0.067       0.011       0.158       0.014          0.012        0.000         0.021         0.005        0.001
<HS, Age 2544        6.533         0.115       0.043       0.144        0.007         0.001        0.000          0.004        0.001        0.002
<HS, Age 4564        6.601         0.150       0.081       0.140       0.026         0.003         0.000         0.020         0.006        0.003
HS, Age 1624         6.565         0.123       0.021       0.191       0.048         0.005         0.000         0.035         0.012        0.004
HS, Age 2544         6.840         0.277       0.159       0.174       0.118         0.031         0.000         0.061         0.029        0.003
HS, Age 4564         7.152         0.413       0.337       0.171       0.185         0.039         0.000         0.112         0.041        0.007
Univ, Age 1624       6.956         0.463       0.115       0.148       0.156         0.048         0.000         0.083         0.046        0.021
Univ, Age 2544       7.317         0.560       0.367       0.160       0.175         0.045         0.000         0.073         0.063        0.007
Univ, Age 4564       7.765         0.786       0.583       0.167       0.203         0.046         0.000         0.131         0.040        0.015
Notes: Wages refer to real monthly wages, including regular supplementary payments.  See text for description of simulations for decomposition.
Appendix Table A1: Collective Bargaining Agreements BTE,
Constraints on Analysis of Wage Floors, 20082016.
                                                          Number of   Percent of
                                                         Agreements  Agreements
                                                             (1)         (2)

Population BTE*                                             1,467             100
Of which:
     duplicate agreement                                      406              28
     nonduplicate agreement                                 1,061              72

Outside scope of analysis: 
  industry agriculture, fisheries                              50               3
  location Azores or Madeira                                   23               2

Outside analysis set:
  contract not reported in QP                                22                1
  wage table not enforced Oct. 2008  2016                     2                 0
 wage floor depends on info. not reported in QP              267               18

Analysis set of agreements from BTE                           697              48
Source: Portugal, MTSS, Labor Bulletin, 20082016. 
*
 Collective agreements published 20082016 that set salary scales (new or updated). A 
duplicate agreement replicates another one signed by the same employers but a 
different trade union. Some agreements define sets of subfloors along dimension(s) 
not observed in QP (e.g., worker attributes such as academic grades, subjective 
evaluations of CV or performance;  firm attributes such as category of establishment in 
accommodation, food and leisure services, or the average corporate income tax paid in 
the recent past).
Appendix Table A2: Workers in QP, Analysis Set, 20082016.

                                                                 Number of 
                                                               WorkerYear Obs.        Percent
                                                                     (1)                (2)

Population fulltime wageearners QP*:                              16,638,233             100

Not covered by collective bargaining agreement (CBA):              1,785,428             11

Covered by CBA but no wage floor:
  residual/unspecified CBA category                                1,179,189             7
  CBA never updated 20082016                                       1,678,799             10
  CBA updated but floors in 20082016 unaffected                      150,586             1

Covered by CBA but could not assign wage floor:
 wage floor depends on information not reported in QP              3,845,184             23
  could not find floor category in BTE                               538,512             3
  backdated, no information on earlier floor                         194,271             1

Successfully assigned CBA and wage floor                           7,266,264             44
Source: Portugal, MTSS, Labor Bulletin, 20082016 and Portugal, MTSS, QP, 20082016.    
*
 Wageearners aged 18 to 64, with nonmissing base wage, education and seniority within the firm,
reported on fulltime contract; excludes agriculture and fisheries, Madeira and the Azores, and
apprentices. Some agreements define sets of subfloors along dimension(s) not observed in QP (e.g.,
worker attributes such as academic grades, subjective evaluations of CV or performance;  firm
attributes such as category of establishment in accommodation, food and leisure services, or the
average corporate income tax paid in the recent past. ``Could not find match to category in BTE"
refers to specific categories that could not be matched to a salary group in BTE, even though the
agreement was matched. Wage floors represent floors known to the employer at the QP reference
date and do not represent retroactively imposed floors.
Appendix Table A3: New Contracts in BTE  Total and Adjusting for Duplicates and Scope

                     New Contracts Reported in BTE                New Contracts Reported in BTE  (nonduplicates, in scope)
                                                               Number of 
              Number          Number of CBA's by Type:           Non          Ratio:           Number of CBA's by Type:
             Contracts                                         duplicated  column 5 to 
   Year        in BTE     Sectoral   MultiFirm Single  Firm    Contracts column 1 (%)      Sectoral   MultiFirm Single  Firm
                 (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)
  2008         293          172          25           96           192          65.5         113          16           63
  2009         246          141          21           82           165          67.1         88           16           59
  2010         216          140          24           50           140          64.8         86           16           36
  2011         167           93          22           51           111          66.5         58           14           38
  2012         70            30          7            32           50           71.4         19            4           26
  2013         78            25          16           37           54           69.2         17           10           27
  2014         126           43          20           63           83           65.9         29           10           44
  2015         131           66          15           49           90           68.7         43            9           37
  2016         140           67          20           53           103          73.6         48           14           41

    All        1,467          777          170          513           988           67.3           501     109         371
Notes: CBA denotes a collective bargaining agreement.  Columns 14 are based on reported CBA's in BTE; columns 59 are non
duplicated counts of contracts for workers in mainland Portugal excluding agriculture and fisheries. 
Appendix Table B1: Dynamics of Collective Bargaining Coverage

                                           All Years Combined                                              By Year, Pooling Males and Females
                                   All           Males          Females        2009        2010        2011        2012        2013         2014       2015        2016
Employment counts
E(t)                          14,671,711       8,010,391        6,661,320    1,893,484   1,897,345   1,868,715   1,768,599   1,748,831   1,778,271   1,831,708   1,884,758
E(t1)                         14,753,475       8,110,959        6,642,516    1,966,522   1,893,484   1,897,345   1,868,715   1,768,599   1,748,831   1,778,271   1,831,708
E(t)/E(t1)                      0.994            0.988           1.003        0.963       1.002       0.985        0.946       0.989       1.017      1.030       1.029


Transition Rates to Covered Jobs (conditional on employment)
nc (uncoveredcovered)           0.103            0.114           0.091        0.126       0.273       0.074        0.064       0.077       0.069      0.083       0.086
 cc
  (coveredcovered)              0.986            0.986           0.987        0.983       0.987       0.993        0.979       0.988       0.991      0.990       0.981
 nc
  (out of workcovered)          0.881            0.883           0.878        0.883       0.896       0.900        0.884       0.882       0.880      0.866       0.856

Attrition Rates (probabilities of transitioning to outofQP)
n (loss from uncovered)         0.222            0.211           0.235        0.294       0.322       0.193        0.197       0.186       0.194      0.188       0.201
 c
  (loss from covered)           0.217            0.211           0.223        0.233       0.255       0.218        0.231       0.204       0.193      0.197       0.197

Share of Employment in t that was outofQP in t1
                               0.213         0.201               0.227        0.209       0.263       0.204        0.184       0.193       0.206      0.220       0.220
Adjustment Factors to account for outofQP
w1(t)                           0.782            0.799           0.763        0.734       0.677       0.819        0.848       0.823       0.793      0.788       0.777
w2(t)                           0.788            0.799           0.774        0.797       0.744       0.794        0.812       0.805       0.794      0.779       0.781

Three components of equation (1)
nc(t)(1C(t1))w1(t)              0.008            0.009           0.008        0.009       0.019       0.005        0.005       0.007       0.006      0.008       0.008
 cc
 (t)C(t1)w2(t)                  0.696            0.709           0.680        0.705       0.660       0.720        0.723       0.709       0.696      0.682       0.674
 oc
 (t)(t)                         0.188            0.178           0.199        0.185       0.236       0.184        0.163       0.170       0.182      0.190       0.188

Sum (=coverage rate)            0.892            0.896           0.887        0.899       0.914       0.909        0.891       0.886       0.884      0.880       0.870

Note: Sample is the same as in Table 1, column 7. See notes to that table.
Appendix Table C1: Comparisons of Workers Covered by CBA's with an Assigned Floor to All Covered Workers

                                 2008     2009       2010       2011        2012       2013       2014     2015    2016

Share with floor                 0.32     0.42        0.44       0.44       0.47       0.47       0.46     0.46    0.45

Frac. female with floor          0.40     0.40       0.41       0.42        0.42       0.43       0.43     0.43    0.43
Frac. female (all)               0.43     0.44       0.44       0.45        0.46       0.46       0.46     0.46    0.46
Gap in fraction female           0.04     0.03       0.03       0.03        0.03       0.03       0.03     0.03    0.03

Mean education with floor        7.98     8.85       9.17       9.40        9.55        9.70       9.84    10.03   10.21
Mean education (all)             9.10     9.34       9.61       9.82       10.03       10.19      10.33    10.52   10.72
Gap in mean education            1.12     0.49       0.44       0.42       0.48        0.49       0.49     0.50    0.50

Mean age with floor              38.68    38.95      39.23      39.51      39.89       40.30      40.67    40.90   41.11
Mean age (all)                   38.63    38.96      39.20      39.48      39.82       40.19      40.52    40.70   40.85
Gap in mean age                   0.06    0.01        0.03       0.03       0.07        0.11       0.15     0.20    0.26

Mean tenure with floor           7.31     7.87        8.20       8.50       9.06       9.31       9.33     9.23    9.08
Mean tenure (all)                7.50     7.79        8.05       8.28       8.66       8.84       8.84     8.70    8.54
Gap in mean tenure               0.19     0.09        0.16       0.22       0.39       0.47       0.48     0.53    0.53

Mean log base wage with floor    6.58     6.68       6.70       6.68        6.66       6.66       6.67     6.67    6.68
Mean log base wage (all)         6.68     6.71       6.73       6.70        6.68       6.68       6.69     6.69    6.70
Gap in mean log base wage        0.10     0.04       0.03       0.03        0.02       0.02       0.02     0.02    0.02

Mean log total wage with floor   6.73     6.84       6.87       6.85        6.84       6.84       6.85     6.84    6.85
Mean log total wage (all)        6.83     6.86       6.89       6.87        6.85       6.85       6.85     6.85    6.86
Gap in mean log total wage       0.09     0.03       0.02       0.01        0.01       0.01       0.01     0.01    0.01
Notes: See notes to Table 2.
Appendix Table D1:  Models for 201016 Change in Average Wage Floor  Renegotiated CBA's

                                                                    Extra Measure of Distribution of Real Value Added per Worker Used:
                                                                        None         10th Pctile     25th Pctile     75th Pctile      90th Pctile
                                                                         (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)

Without industry controls:
Change in Median Real Value Added/Worker                                0.131           0.101           0.101           0.121            0.120
   (20092015)                                                          (0.025)         (0.028)         (0.041)         (0.034)          (0.027)
Change in other Quantile of Real Value Added/Worker                                     0.038           0.035           0.012            0.019
   (20092015)                                                                          (0.021)         (0.050)         (0.022)          (0.025)

Rsquared                                                               0.510            0.534           0.523           0.513            0.526

With Controls for Industry:
Change in Real Value Added/Worker                                       0.094           0.066           0.064           0.099            0.087
   (20092015)                                                          (0.036)         (0.037)         (0.044)         (0.046)          (0.037)

Change in other Quantile of Real Value Added/Worker                                     0.036           0.034           0.008            0.015
   (20092015)                                                                          (0.024)         (0.053)         (0.030)          (0.022)

Rsquared                                                               0.574            0.595           0.586           0.575            0.582

Notes: dependent variable is change in real average wage floor from 2010 to 2016 in collective bargaining agreements (CBA's) that were renegotiated 
at least once. Estimates are weighted by the number of workers in the agreement.  Robust standard errors in parentheses.  Models in different 
columns include different other quantiles of the change in real value added per worker among firms covered by the CBA  as indicated in the column 
heading. 
Appendix Table E1: Estimated Wage and Employment Models by Group
                                    Estimated Effect of Mean Change in Wage Floor on:
                                        Change in Wages         Change in Empl. 
                                              (1)                      (2)
Males
<HS, Age 1824                                 0.68                      1.07
                                             (0.11)                    (0.76)
<HS, Age 2544                                 0.54                      0.67
                                             (0.09)                    (0.28)
<HS, Age 4564                                 0.46                      0.88
                                             (0.06)                    (0.21)
HS, Age 1824                                  0.48                      0.16
                                             (0.16)                    (0.80)
HS, Age 2544                                  0.42                      0.47
                                             (0.12)                    (0.39)
HS, Age 4564                                  0.23                      0.23
                                             (0.12)                    (0.39)
Univ. Age 2544                                0.29                      0.48
                                             (0.09)                    (0.51)
Univ. Age 4564                                0.24                      0.43
                                             (0.13)                    (2.46)
Females
<HS, Age 1824                                 0.56                      2.46
                                             (0.12)                    (1.22)
<HS, Age 2544                                 0.63                      0.28
                                             (0.07)                    (0.35)
<HS, Age 4564                                 0.76                      0.86
                                             (0.05)                    (0.29)
HS, Age 1824                                  0.36                      0.21
                                             (0.15)                    (1.01)
HS, Age 2544                                  0.53                      0.44
                                             (0.09)                    (0.29)
HS, Age 4564                                  0.47                      0.03
                                             (0.07)                    (0.35)
Univ. Age 2544                                0.37                      0.46
                                             (0.08)                    (0.31)
Univ. Age 4564                                 0.31                      0.24
                                              (0.10)                    (0.51)
Notes: see notes to Table 8.  Results in column 1 are taken from column 6 of Table 9.  
Results in column 2 are based on estimated model for employment changes including 
all wageearners in the QP data set.  Both sets of models include year effects and 
controls for the change in log value added per worker at the firm and for the average 
age of workers in the group. 
Appendix Figure E1: Not in Employment, Education, or Training (NEET)
 a) Female Youths
                     25
                                                                              Italy

                     20                                                       U.S.
 Fraction NEET (%)




                                                                              Spain
                     15
                                                                              France

                     10                                                       Portugal

                                                                              U.K.
                      5
                                                                              Germany

                      0                                                       Unwtd Avg
                      2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018




 b) Male Youths
                     25
                                                                              Italy

                     20                                                       Spain
 Fraction NEET (%)




                                                                              U.S.
                     15
                                                                              France

                     10                                                       Portugal

                                                                              U.K.
                      5
                                                                              Germany

                                                                              Unwtd Avg
                      0
                      2004   2006   2008   2010   2012   2014   2016   2018

Source: ILO.
