                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                     ENERGY, GROUNDWATER, AND CROP CHOICE

                                         Fiona Burlig
                                        Louis Preonas
                                        Matt Woerman

                                      Working Paper 28706
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28706


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021


We thank Nick Hagerty for graciously sharing data with us. For helpful comments and
suggestions, we thank Amy Ando, Andrew Ayers, Maximilian Auffhammer, Kathy Baylis, Ellen
Bruno, Karen Clay, Michael Greenstone, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Koichiro Ito, Katrina Jessoe,
Ryan Kellogg, Ashley Langer, Erik Lichtenberg, Dave McLaughlin, Kyle Meng, Mar Reguant,
Paul Scott, Joe Shapiro, Andrew Stevens, Catherine Wolfram, and seminar participants at UC
Energy Camp, Mississippi State, Stanford, UC Davis, University of Illinois, University of
Gothenburg, ITAM, HKUST, SUNY Binghamton, TWEEDS, University of Pennsylvania
Wharton, University of Massachusetts Amherst, University of Chicago, University of Oklahoma,
USC, the ASSA Annual Meetings, the AERE Summer Conference, the WEAI annual meetings,
the 2020 NBER Summer Institute, and UC Berkeley's POWER Conference. Lauren Beatty,
Chinmay Lohani, Ucindami Mafeni, Shubhalakshmi Nag, Anna Schmidt, Chen Sui, Yixin Sun,
and Xinyi Wang provided excellent research assistance. Karen Notsund provided invaluable
support in obtaining data. We received generous funding in support of this project from the
Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics, the Sloan Foundation (via the E2e Project), and
the Becker Friedman Institute for Economics at the University of Chicago, and the USDA
Economic Research Service, under Cooperative Agreement 58-6000-0-0052. All remaining errors
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Fiona Burlig, Louis Preonas, and Matt Woerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Energy, Groundwater, and Crop Choice
Fiona Burlig, Louis Preonas, and Matt Woerman
NBER Working Paper No. 28706
April 2021
JEL No. Q15,Q25,Q41

                                           ABSTRACT

Groundwater is a key resource for agricultural production globally. Increasingly rapid aquifer
drawdowns--as well as the policies intended to increase their sustainability--increase costs to
agricultural producers, with unknown consequences. This paper provides the first large-scale
empirical estimates of how farmers respond to changes in groundwater costs in one of the world's
most valuable agricultural areas: California. Using rich administrative data and exogenous
variation in the price of electricity, a key input into groundwater extraction, we find that farmers
are very price responsive: we estimate large price elasticities of demand for electricity (-1.17) and
groundwater (-1.12). We demonstrate that crop switching and fallowing are the main channel
through which farmers respond to increases in groundwater costs. Using a static discrete choice
model, we estimate that a counterfactual $10 per-acre-foot groundwater tax--a level consistent
with California's sustainability targets--would lead farmers to reallocate 3.9 percent of cropland,
with increases in fallowing and high-value fruit and nut perennials, and decreases in annual crops
and low-value perennials.

Fiona Burlig                                      Matt Woerman
Harris School of Public Policy                    Resource Economics
University of Chicago                             University of Massachusetts Amherst
1307 East 60th Street                             Stockbridge Hall
Chicago, IL 60637                                 80 Campus Center Way
and NBER                                          Amherst, MA 01003
burlig@uchicago.edu                               mwoerman@umass.edu

Louis Preonas
Department of Agricultural
and Resource Economics
University of Maryland
2200 Symons Hall
7998 Regents Drive
College Park, MD 20742
lpreonas@umd.edu
1      Introduction
Groundwater is an essential input into agricultural production, responsible for supplying
water to 38 percent of irrigated acres worldwide (Siebert et al. (2010)). Recent scientific
evidence documents rapid drawdowns of global aquifers, with key agricultural areas seeing
their water tables fall by over 4 cm per year.1 Given that global climate change is projected
to increase the frequency and severity of droughts (Famiglietti (2014)), governments will
face a greater urgency to enact policies to manage common-pool groundwater resources. For
agricultural producers who rely on groundwater for irrigation, both groundwater scarcity
itself and groundwater management policies increase the costs of growing crops.
      In this paper, we generate novel empirical estimates of farmers' response to changes
in groundwater pumping costs in California, one of the world's most valuable agricultural
regions. California produces 18 percent of total U.S. crop value, and its farmers rely heavily
on groundwater for irrigation. Despite rapidly declining aquifer levels and a series of severe
droughts, most California farmers face no meaningful restrictions on groundwater extrac-
tion. The state is currently implementing the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act
(SGMA), California's first legislation governing groundwater use at scale. The effectiveness
and economic consequences of any such groundwater regulation depend on both the extent
to which farmers will respond to new pumping regulations and their means of adapting to
higher irrigation costs.
      We begin by estimating the price elasticity of demand for agricultural groundwater.
Estimating this elasticity has historically proven difficult, in large part because groundwater
is typically neither priced nor measured. We overcome these challenges by leveraging the fact
that electricity is the main variable input in groundwater extraction. Using data on electricity
prices and quantities, along with farm-specific mappings from energy inputs to groundwater
extraction volumes, we are able to construct measures of groundwater prices and quantities.
We assemble a novel dataset that combines (i) confidential electricity consumption data for
all agricultural customers served by Pacific Gas & Electric (PGE), California's largest electric
utility; (ii) technical pump efficiency audits for nearly 12,000 groundwater extraction points;
    1. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/06/climate/world-water-stress.html



                                               1
and (iii) publicly available groundwater measurements across space and time, for all major
California aquifers.
     Using exogenous variation in PGE's electricity tariff schedules, we causally identify de-
mand elasticities for both electricity and groundwater. We estimate farmers' price elasticity
of demand for electricity to be -1.17, which is much more elastic than prior estimates of
electricity demand in the residential and commercial/industrial sectors. For groundwater,
we estimate a demand elasticity of -1.12. This is much more elastic that previous esti-
mates from the literature on agricultural groundwater demand. Both elasticity estimates are
robust to a variety of sensitivities, and together imply that California's forthcoming ground-
water management efforts have the potential to yield the substantial reductions in extraction
necessary to meet the state's sustainability goals.
     Given these large elasticities, a natural question is: how are farmers reducing their water
use in response to increases in groundwater costs? We consider four potential mechanisms
that farmers may be engaging in: (i) applying less water to existing crops; (ii) changing
irrigation efficiency; (iii) switching water sources; and (iv) switching crops or fallowing. We
present empirical evidence against (i): farmers do not appear to adjust water consumption
in response to large short-run fluctuations in price. We can also rule out (ii): we estimate
quantitatively similar groundwater elasticities in the short windows around pump tests,
where major changes in pumping capital are highly unlikely. We then develop a stylized
model of farm crop choice and irrigation costs to provide theoretical guidance on (iii) and (iv).
This model reveals that (iii) is only likely at extremely high groundwater pumping costs--
which we rarely observe in our data--at which point farmers may substitute groundwater
for water purchased on the open market (Hagerty (2019)).
     This leaves crop switching as the leading candidate mechanism driving farmers' ground-
water large demand response. We conduct several empirical tests to provide evidence in
support of this crop switching mechanism. We estimate annual elasticities that are similar
to our monthly elasticities, suggesting that farmers are not arbitraging water sources within
a growing season. We find that these annual elasticities can be decomposed into substantial
intensive- and extensive-margin responses to increasing groundwater costs, consistent with
farmers switching to less-water-intensive crops and fallowing land.


                                               2
     Building on these results, we estimate a static discrete choice model of farmers' cropping
decisions to directly quantify the causal effect of groundwater costs on land use. Using a
multinomial probit model, identified using exogenous variation in PGE's electricity tariffs,
we find that increases in groundwater costs reallocate cropland across four broad crop types.
A 10 percent increase in the cost of groundwater causes farmers to increase the proportion
of land in fruit and nut perennials by 1.0 percentage point, increase fallowed land by 0.4
percentage points (almost identical to our extensive-margin semi-elasticity), decrease land
in annuals by 0.9 percentage points and reduce land in other perennials by 0.5 percentage
points.2
     Finally, we compute how farmers would respond to a counterfactual groundwater tax--
a regulation that could internalize open-access externalities and achieve sustainable levels
of groundwater extraction.3 Under SGMA, California will require high-use basins to reduce
extraction by between 20 and 50 percent (Bruno (2019)). Extrapolating our preferred elas-
ticity estimate to consider the effects of a $10 per acre-foot tax on groundwater, roughly a
25 percent increase in pumping costs, implies that farmers would reduce their groundwater
extraction by 27 percent, near the low end of this targeted curtailment range. Compared to
previous estimates of inelastic groundwater demand, our relatively elastic demand estimates
imply that a given groundwater tax would yield both greater groundwater conservation and
less loss of farmer surplus. This also suggests that the tax needed to achieve sustainability
targets is less stringent than previously thought.
     The land-use mechanism driving this demand response highlights the broader welfare
implications of groundwater management policies. Our discrete choice estimates imply that
this $10 per acre-foot tax would lead farmers to reallocate 3.9 percent of cropland--either
to a different crop type, or out of crop production. While the level of the efficient Pigouvian
   2. In ongoing work, we are adapting the dynamic discrete choice framework developed in Scott (2013) to
our context.
   3. The water economics literature typically cites two main externalities associated with groundwater
extraction (Provencher and Burt (1993)). The first is the "stock externality", which arises from the finite
nature of non-renewable groundwater stocks, driving farmers to collectively extract faster than the social
planner's optimal extraction path. The second is the "pumping cost" externality: when a farmer extracts an
acre-foot of groundwater from an aquifer, the water level falls, increasing pumping costs for other (nearby)
users. Recently, other potential externalities such as air quality issues associated with soil drying and land
subsidence have been raised as well.




                                                      3
groundwater tax remains unknown, if the true externality is around $10 per acre-foot, our
results imply that 3.9 percent of total cropland in California is currently misallocated from its
socially optimal use. Additionally, this reallocation of cropland could meaningfully impact
food prices domestically and internationally, because California farmers account for a large
share of production--both in the U.S. and worldwide--for many specialty crops.
     This paper makes three main academic contributions. First, we provide the first large-
scale empirical estimates of the impact of groundwater pricing on crop choice in one of
the most valuable agricultural regions of the world: California. We demonstrate that, as
groundwater extraction costs rise, farmers respond by increasing fallowing, shifting into
fruit/nut perennials (among the highest-revenue crops per acre-foot of water), and shifting
out of low-value perennials and annual crops. These results have important implications
for agricultural markets, as California is a monopoly producer of many crops that may
become less prevalent under groundwater regulation. They also contribute estimates from
an understudied sector to the broader literature on the impacts of environmental regulation.
     Second, to quantify the impacts of groundwater cost increases on land use, we begin
by contributing novel estimates of the price elasticity of electricity demand in agriculture--a
major, but heretofore overlooked, electricity end-use sector. While many studies estimate the
relationship between electricity prices and consumption in the residential sector (Alberini and
Filippini (2011); Fell, Li, and Paul (2014); Ito (2014); Deryugina, MacKay, and Reif (2020)),
far fewer have focused on commercial/industrial electricity consumption (Paul, Myers, and
Palmer (2009); Jessoe and Rapson (2015); Blonz (2020)). To the best of our knowledge,
there exists no comparable study estimating the price elasticity of electricity demand in
the agricultural sector. By leveraging microdata for thousands of agricultural consumers
across PGE's service territory, along with plausibly exogenous changes in farmers' marginal
electricity prices, we identify California farmers as unusually elastic electricity consumers (a
central elasticity estimate of -1.17), with potential implications for agricultural electricity
pricing.
     Third, we leverage the central role of electricity use in groundwater extraction to esti-
mate the elasticity of groundwater demand for California farmers--a policy-relevant elasticity
that has proven elusive due to both data and identification challenges (Mieno and Brozovic


                                               4
(2017)). Our empirical strategy overcomes many of these challenges by combining compre-
hensive electricity consumption data with technical audits of groundwater pumps, and by
leveraging exogenous variation in electricity prices (a major component of pumping costs) to
credibly identify changes in farmers' effective price of groundwater. Many previous studies
have estimated water demand outside the agricultural sector (Hewitt and Hanemann (1995);
Renwick and Green (2000); Olmstead, Hanemann, and Stavins (2007)), while others have
focused specifically on groundwater demand in agriculture (Hendricks and Peterson (2012);
Pfeiffer and Lin (2014); Badiani and Jessoe (2019); Bruno and Jessoe (accepted)). We pro-
vide well-identified groundwater demand estimates from over ten thousand pumps in one of
the most important agricultural regions in the world: California's Central Valley. We find
that farmers are surprisingly elastic, with a central estimate of -1.12. We rule out several
hypotheses about what might be driving this large elasticity, and demonstrate that crop
reallocation is the major mechanism behind farmers' responses to increases in water costs.
     Beyond our contributions to the academic literature, our findings have direct and im-
mediate policy relevance for California agriculture. Our elasticity estimates suggest that
meeting the 50 percent groundwater curtailment targets in severely overdrawn basins will
require a tax of at least $15 per acre-foot--over 37 percent of the average cost per acre-foot
we observe in our sample. While this tax may seem large, it is substantially smaller than
what would be required if farmers were less price elastic, as the prior literature suggests.
Extrapolating across California, our results suggest that a $15 tax would lead farmers to
reallocate approximately 450,000 acres of land, or 5.7 of all cropped area. Our estimates
therefore provide both an optimistic and a pessimistic policy outlook: achieving desired
groundwater sustainability may be easier than previously thought, but doing so will likely
have substantial impacts on agricultural production.
     This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides background on groundwater pump-
ing, California agriculture, and energy use in farming. Sections 3 and 4 describe our data
and empirical strategy. Section 5 presents our demand elasticity estimates. In Section 6, we
explore mechanisms, and demonstrate the impacts of groundwater costs on crop switching.
Section 7 concludes.



                                              5
2      Background

2.1      Agriculture in California

California is a major player in global agricultural production, and its nearly $33 billion in
crop value in 2018 represented 18 percent of the U.S. total (USDA (2020)). California's
77,000 farms produce over 400 commodities, including more than half of all fruits, nuts,
and vegetables grown in the United States. In fact, California is the sole domestic producer
of many high-value crops, including almonds, artichokes, olives, and walnuts (California
Department of Food and Agriculture (2011)).
       Water is an essential input for California's agricultural production. Nearly 80 percent of
the state's annual water consumption occurs in the agricultural sector, where crop irrigation
is the primary end use. California has nearly 8.3 million harvested acres of cropland, 7.9
million of which are irrigated (Johnson and Cody (2015)). Many of California's crops require
large amounts of water. For example, hay, almonds, grapes, and rice--four of California's top
crops by acreage--all require at least 3 acre-feet per acre per year, with rice using 5 acre-feet
per acre per year (Bruno (2019)).4 At the same time, droughts of increasing severity have
raised serious concerns about the (over)use of water for agriculture in California.
       A simple time-series analysis provides suggestive evidence that drought is associated
with substantial cropping changes: Figure 1 shows that after the 2011­2016 drought, farmers
had substantially reduced land in water-intensive but relatively low-value crops such as
alfalfa and winter wheat, substituting similarly water-intensive but high-value crops, such
as almonds and grapes. In order to water these thirsty crops, farmers rely on groundwater
and/or surface water--two water sources with significantly different governance structures
(Sawyers (2007)).


Surface water Approximately 40 percent of California's surface water is used in agricul-
ture. 61 percent of irrigation water comes from surface sources, with groundwater making
up the remaining 39 percent (California Department of Water Resources (2015)). Surface
water rights in California follow strict rules. Most farms with access to surface water obtain
    4. The average California household uses 0.52 acre-feet per year (Hanack et al. (2011)).


                                                      6
it via irrigation districts.5 In addition to obtaining surface water from individual rights or
irrigation districts, farmers have a limited ability to purchase water on the open market.
However, these trades constitute only a very small share of total water deliveries, and the
prices are extremely high (Hagerty (2019)).


Groundwater In normal weather conditions, groundwater supplies 30 to 40 percent of
all water end uses in California. However, this rises to close to 60 percent in drought
years, when surface water is unusually scarce (California Department of Water Resources
(2014)). In contrast to the strictly defined surface water rights, agricultural groundwater
rights in California tend to be far more vague. The typical groundwater right is "overlying,"
meaning that landowners whose property sits above an aquifer have the right to extract the
underlying groundwater.6 The vast majority of groundwater use is unmetered, and users
face no variable costs of extraction beyond the energy costs of pumping (Bruno and Jessoe
(accepted)).7 Hence, a farmer may extract as much groundwater as he chooses, conditional
on owning the overlying property rights.
     Many of California's groundwater basins are "overdrafted," meaning that withdrawals
exceed the pace of replenishment. As of 2017, some agricultural regions faced overdraft of 2
million acre-feet annually. This has led to a substantial decline in groundwater levels in the
Central Valley, most notably in the Tulare and San Joaquin groundwater basins--which have
lost a combined 135 million acre-feet of groundwater since 1925.8 The state faced a severe
drought in 2014, with groundwater levels reaching historic lows in many portions of the state.
21 of the state's 515 groundwater basins are now considered "critically overdrafted."
   5. Irrigation districts were established between 1860 and 1950, and their boundaries have remained essen-
tially fixed over time. Though some individual farms do have their own water entitlements, the vast majority
of these allocations belong to districts. These agricultural cooperatives divert water from large rivers and
canals, and distribute this water to farmers. Individual farmers receiving water proportional to their acreage
within the district (Schlenker, Hanemann, and Fisher (2007)). Hagerty (2020) provides a detailed description
of surface water rights in California.
   6. There are also "appropriative" groundwater rights, for users who do not own land above the aquifer.
These rights are lower-priority than the overlying rights, and users may only exercise appropriative rights in
the case of a surplus.
   7. There are limited exceptions to this rule: a few irrigation districts impose a per-unit price on ground-
water, but this remains rare (Bruno and Jessoe (accepted)).
   8. See: https://www.ppic.org/publication/groundwater-in-california/




                                                      7
      In September 2014, California lawmakers responded to drought conditions by passing
the Sustainable Groundwater Management Act (SGMA). This sweeping groundwater leg-
islation is the first statewide regulatory effort to mitigate over-extraction of groundwater.
SGMA comprises three separate bills. AB 1739 empowers California's Department of Wa-
ter Resources (DWR) or local groundwater sustainability agencies (GSAs) to charge fees
for groundwater extraction, and requires GSAs to prepare groundwater sustainability plans
(GSPs). SB 1319 authorizes GSAs to implement these GSPs. SB 1168 mandates that
groundwater end uses be both reasonable and beneficial, and enables GSAs and the DWR
to require groundwater monitoring.
      This legislation represents the future of groundwater management in California, with
the goal of achieving long-run sustainability by 2042. In order to meet these sustainability
targets, some basins will have to reduce groundwater use by between 20 and 50 percent.
Farmers are expected to meet these targets with a combination of reducing irrigation intensity
and/or technology adoption, water trade with urban areas, and land fallowing or shifts
towards less water-intensive crops (Bruno (2019)). However, SGMA's GSPs may not begin
to bind for many years, leaving groundwater pumping effectively unregulated in the interim.


2.2    Electricity for pumping

Electricity is an essential input to groundwater pumping. The California Energy Commis-
sion reports that water use accounts for 19 percent of California's electricity consumption,
and close to 8 percent of the state's energy is used on farms (California Energy Commission
(2005)). The state's investor-owned utilities invest nearly $50 million annually in agricul-
tural energy efficiency. This makes water use--in particular, agricultural water use--a key
component of California's energy policy goals.
      To estimate groundwater demand, we exploit the fact that electricity is a major de-
terminant of pumping costs. Several previous papers have used variation in energy costs to
estimate the price elasticity of groundwater demand (Hendricks and Peterson (2012); Pfeif-
fer and Lin (2014); Badiani and Jessoe (2019); and Mieno and Brozovic (2017)). Mieno
and Brozovic (2017) point out that these estimates may exhibit bias due to (non-classical)



                                              8
measurement error and/or poor identification. Furthermore, data limitations have restricted
previous studies to relatively narrow geographies.
      We build on this existing literature with a sample that covers thousands of farms
throughout California's Central Valley, one of the most productive agricultural regions in the
world. We are able to overcome the standard measurement issues in groundwater demand
estimation via detailed technical audits that precisely characterize pump-specific electricity-
to-groundwater conversion factors. Using exogenous variation from Pacific Gas & Electric's
(PGE) agricultural electricity tariffs, we are also able to overcome the standard identification
challenges in this literature.



3     Data

3.1     Electricity data

We begin by estimating how farmers' electricity consumption responds to changes in elec-
tricity price. We use confidential customer-level electricity datasets, which PGE's data man-
agement team prepared for us under a non-disclosure agreement. These data comprise the
universe of agricultural electricity consumers in PGE's service territory, and we observe each
customer's monthly bills at the service account level for the years 2008­2017. We aggregate
service accounts up to 108,172 unique service points (i.e. the physical location of an elec-
tricity meter) and construct a "monthified" panel of electricity consumption (in kWh) at the
service point (SP) level.9 We also observe several key covariates for each service point: its
latitude and longitude; an indicator for accounts with solar panels on net-energy metering,
which we drop from our estimation sample; and an identifier to link service point locations
to physical electricity meters. Figure 2 maps all agricultural service points in our dataset.
      PGE offers 23 distinct agricultural tariffs, and our billing data report the particular
tariff associated with each monthly bill. Prices on each tariff are updated multiple times per
    9. PGE's monthly bill cycles are customer-specific, and most billing periods do not line up with calendar
months. We "monthify" billed kWh for each SP by splitting/weight-averaging multiple bills in a single
calendar month, in order to create a SP by month panel. This is standard practice in the economics
literature on electricity demand (e.g. Ito (2014)). Most service points have a single service account at each
point in time, but service accounts often turn over within a given service point.



                                                     9
year, and historic prices are publicly available, along with information on tariff-specific rules
and eligibility criteria. We use these data to construct a 10-year panel of hourly volumetric
(marginal) electricity prices, which we collapse to the monthly level by taking an unweighted
average across hours. Importantly, unlike PGE's residential electricity prices, its agricultural
tariffs are not tiered: a farm's marginal price does not depend its consumption.
      Variation in average volumetric price arises from several features of PGE's tariff struc-
ture. All 23 tariffs have higher marginal prices during summer months (May­October).
Time-varying tariffs have higher marginal prices on weekdays, during peak hours (12­6pm),
and on critical peak event days.10 Fixed charges (per kW) also play an important role in
offsetting marginal prices (per kWh): rates with higher marginal prices tend to have lower
fixed charges, and vice versa. On top of these cross-sectional differences in tariffs pricing
schemes, PGE adjusts tariffs' marginal prices differentially over time.
      PGE's 23 agricultural tariffs are divided into five mutually-exclusive categories. These
five categories have strict eligibility criteria, defined both by physical pumping capital (small
pumps, large pumps, or auxiliary internal combustion engines) and by type of electric meter
(conventional meter, or smart meter).11 Each of these five categories has a "default" tariff;
other tariffs within each category are highly correlated with these default tariffs. Figure 3
plots the five time series of default monthly average marginal prices. Our identification
strategy relies on the fact that average marginal prices do not move in parallel across these
five default tariffs. It also leverages the strict eligibility rules which place customers into
categories. Appendix A presents more details on the full set of PGE agricultural tariffs.


3.2     Pump data

To complement our electricity data, we have rich data on agricultural groundwater pumps
collected by PGE's Advanced Pumping Efficiency Program (APEP). These data include the
  10. Critical peak pricing is a form of electricity price in which farms are offered a slightly lower electricity
price throughout the year. In exchange, PGE can raise the price substantially on 15 days throughout the
summer, with one or two days' notice. These event days typically occur on the hottest days of the summer.
See Blonz (2020) for more details on critical peak pricing. Appendix Table A1 summarizes the pricing
structure for each tariff.
  11. Conventional meters record electricity consumption using an analog dial, whereas smart meters can
digitally store the full time profile of consumption. During our sample period, PGE gradually phased out
conventional meters, replacing them with smart meters capable of supporting time-varying electricity pricing.


                                                       10
universe of APEP-subsidized pump tests from 2011­2017, and we observe detailed measure-
ments and technical specifications for 21,851 unique tests at 17,107 unique pump locations.
Importantly, we also observe identifiers for the electricity meter associated with each pump
test, which we use to match pump tests to electricity service points--thereby isolating a
sample of 11,849 service points for which agricultural groundwater pumping is confirmed to
be a major end-use. We restrict our empirical analysis to this 11 percent subset of agricul-
tural service points, in order to best isolate groundwater pumpers and avoid incorporating
other agricultural electricity end uses.12
     Table 1 reports summary statistics for this subset of agricultural service points (in the
right column). Compared to the full set of PGE's agricultural customers, APEP-matched ser-
vice points tend to consume nearly twice as much electricity and tend to pay lower marginal
prices. Figure 2 reveals that APEP-matched service points are heavily concentrated in Cal-
ifornia's Central Valley and appear to be a geographically representative subset of PGE's
agricultural customers.
     After identifying a subset of agricultural consumers who pump groundwater, we use
APEP data to characterize pump-specific groundwater production functions. The amount
of groundwater extracted is a linear function of the electricity consumed by the pump; pump
characteristics and groundwater depth determine how much water (measured in acre-feet
(AF)) is produced by each kWh of electricity consumed. This kWh per AF relationship is
governed by physics:

       kWh         AF        [Lift (feet)] × [Flow (gallon/minute)]    AF
           = kW ÷      =                                             ÷                               (1)
        AF        hour   [Operating pump efficiency (%)] × [Constant] hour

The power (kW) required to pump 1 acre-foot is directly proportional to both the vertical
distance the water must travel to the surface (i.e. lift) and the speed at which the water travels
(i.e. flow). It is inversely proportional to the rate at which the pump converts electric energy
  12. Pumping is likely the only end use at matched service points, as PGE typically installs a dedicated
meter for each groundwater pump. We are currently working on using satellite images to predict whether
service points outside the APEP-matched sample are also groundwater pumps. We hope to incorporate
these farms into future analysis, as there are likely many groundwater pumps that never received an APEP-
subsidized pump test. Note that not every customer on an agricultural tariff is pumping groundwater. We
restrict our sample to the APEP-matched customers in order to avoid avoid including service points with
other agricultural end uses, such as operating machinery or heating greenhouses.


                                                   11
into the movement of water (i.e. operating pump efficiency). We can simplify Equation (1)
by converting from gallons to acre-feet:

                                 kWh     [Lift (feet)] × [Constant]
                                     =                                                                    (2)
                                  AF   Operating pump efficiency (%)

For each APEP pump test, we observe measurements of kWh/AF, operating pump efficiency,
flow, and lift. We also observe the standing water level, or the baseline groundwater depth
in the absence of pumping. Because pumping lowers the water level at a given location,
standing water levels help us more accurately calibrate how changes in aquifer depth impact
lift for each pump.13


3.3     Water data

While a given farm's pumping technology is relatively constant in the short run, its kWh/AF
conversion factor is sensitive to short-run changes in groundwater levels. In order to cap-
ture these short-run shocks in pumping costs, we use publicly available groundwater data
from California's Department of Water Resources collected under the California Statewide
Groundwater Elevation Monitoring (CASGEM) Program.14 These data report depth below
the surface at 16,490 unique monitoring stations during our 2008­2017 sample period, with
an average of 27 measurements at each location at different points in time. We rasterize all
measurements within each month (and quarter), using inverse distance weighting to interpo-
late a gridded two-dimensional surface of average depth at each point in space. This allows
us to construct a monthly (and quarterly) panel of estimated groundwater depths at each
electricity service point.
  13. Lift is (approximately) the sum of the standing water level, drawdown (i.e., how much pump i impacts
its own depth), and other pump-specific factors (e.g., discharge pressure, gauge corrections, height of the
pump above the surface). Drawdown depends on rate of extraction (i.e. flow) and the physical properties of
the substrata. Greater flow increases drawdown, as water levels fall with faster extraction. More transmissive
(or porous) rock formations have lower drawdown, because water levels are able to horizontally reequilibrate
more quickly.
  14. These data are available from: https://water.ca.gov/Programs/Groundwater-Management/
Groundwater-Elevation-Monitoring--CASGEM




                                                     12
      We assign each service point to a groundwater basin, using publicly available shapefiles
maintained by the California Department of Water Resources.15 Groundwater basins are
broadly defined by stratigraphic barriers through which water does not travel horizontally.
We control for annual changes in water levels that impact all farms within the same water
basin. We also obtained shapefiles of irrigation districts in California from the California
Department of Water Resources, the California Atlas, and the California Environmental
Health Tracking Program, following Hagerty (2020). We spatially match PGE service points
to these shapefiles to determine to which irrigation district (if any) each service point be-
longs.16 Irrigation districts (a.k.a. water districts) are administrative entities that govern
farmers' annual allocations of surface water. Because groundwater and surface water are
obvious substitutes, we non-parametrically control for annual shocks to farms' surface water
allocations at the water district level. This helps to isolate variation in pumping behavior
driven by variation in pumping costs, rather than variation in the availability of groundwater
substitutes.


3.4     Groundwater prices and quantities

We merge the above data sources to create a panel of groundwater prices and quantities at the
service point by month level. To convert from electricity (kWh or $/kWh) to groundwater
(AF or $/AF), we simply need to populate a kWh/AF conversion factor for every panel
observation. We construct estimates of kWh/AF by parameterizing Equation (2) using (i)
monthly (or quarterly) rasters of groundwater depths at each service point; (ii) pump-specific
conversions between standing water level and lift, as calculated from APEP pump tests; and
(iii) APEP-measured operating pump efficiencies. We take unweighted averages of APEP
variables across multiple pumps within a single service point; we also extrapolate each service
point's first pump test backwards, extrapolate its last pump test forwards, and interpolate
between multiple pump tests using a triangular kernel in time.
  15. Water     basin     shapefiles    are    available     from      https://water.ca.gov/Programs/
Groundwater-Management/Bulletin-118.
  16. In ongoing work, we are working to incorporate data on each irrigation district's water allocations for
a heterogeneity analysis.




                                                     13
      Table 2 reports summary statistics for this merged panel dataset. We observe 1.67
unique pump tests for the average APEP-matched service point, and APEP data reveal
substantial cross-sectional variation in operating pump efficiencies and kWh/AF conversion
factors. Our constructed kWh/AF estimates tend to moderate extreme values, which com-
presses the right tail of measured kWh/AF (while also slightly shifting this distribution left).
Interestingly, implied marginal groundwater prices exhibit far less seasonal variation than
marginal electricity prices. This is because groundwater levels tend to be higher in sum-
mer months (compared to winter months), which tends to reduce (constructed) kWh/AF in
months when electricity prices are highest.


3.5     Agricultural data

Common Land Units In order to match electricity meters to cropland, we use the USDA
Farm Service Agency's Common Land Unit (CLU) data. We obtained the universe of USDA
CLUs in California.17 A CLU is the smallest contiguous unit of agricultural land under
common land cover, land management, and ownership. We link PGE service points to CLUs
via a spatial match. We also use shapefiles of tax parcels from California county assessors
to aggregate CLUs ( fields) into groups with a common owner ( farms).18


Cropland Data Layer We obtain data on cropped acreage from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's (USDA) Cropland Data Layer (CDL). This product provides annual informa-
tion on what crop is being grown at every 30-by-30 meter pixel in the United States from
1997 to 2019. California was added to the CDL starting in 2007. The CDL is generated using
satellite imagery in conjunction with a machine learning algorithm and is ground-truthed
against the USDA's Farm Service Agency's farm surveys. In California during our sample
period, the CDL reports 83 distinct landcover classifications. We classify these landcover cat-
egories into four broad groups: annual crops, fruit and nut perennial crops, other perennial
crops, and fallowed land. The major annual crops in our sample are winter wheat, cotton,
 17. In the 2008 Farm Bill, the CLU data were made restricted-access. We therefore use the 2008
CLUs for our full sample. The USDA provides more detail on CLUs here: https://www.fsa.usda.gov/
programs-and-services/aerial-photography/imagery-products/common-land-unit-clu/index.
 18. We collected tax parcel shapefiles from each county assessor's office in California. Aggregating CLUs
within the same tax parcel lets us test for sensitivity to within-farm spillovers.


                                                   14
tomatoes, corn, rice, and strawberries. The major fruit and nut perennial crops are almonds,
grapes, walnuts, pistachios, and oranges. The other perennials category is primarily cropped
in alfalfa. The fallow category consists of land that is fallowed according to the CDL, as well
as grass and pastureland.
      We construct an annual panel of landcover at the CLU level based the modal CDL pixel
within the CLU. If this modal crop type does not cover over 50 percent of pixels in the CLU,
we label the CLU as having missing data. Using our CLU to service point concordance, we
are able to assign individual service points a landcover type for each growing season.


3.6    Weather data

Weather is a key input into agricultural production, which directly impacts groundwater
consumption. We obtained daily temperature and precipitation rasters from the PRISM
climate group, a standard source in the agriculture economics literature (see, e.g., Schlenker
and Roberts (2009) and Burke and Emerick (2016)).19 Using gridded data with a 4km-
by-4km resolution, we extract daily maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and
precipitation at each SP location.



4     Empirical strategy
This section outlines our empirical strategy for estimating farmers' demand for groundwater
pumping. First, we estimate price elasticities of demand for electricity, for the full sample
of agricultural consumers where we can match an electricity meter to a groundwater pump.
Next, we estimate price elasticities of demand for groundwater by translating prices and
quantities of electricity into prices and quantities of water using data on (i) technical pumping
production functions and (ii) groundwater depths across space and time.
 19. These data are available at https://prism.oregonstate.edu/.




                                               15
4.1     Electricity demand

We estimate monthly electricity demand using the following specification:


                             sinh-1 (Qelec           elec
                                      it ) =  log (Pit ) + i + t + it                                    (3)


The dependent variable is kWh of electricity consumed at service point i in month t, trans-
formed using the inverse hyperbolic sine function, which closely approximates the natural
log transformation but includes zero in its support (Bellemare and Wichman (2020)).20 Pit
                                                                                        elec


is unit i's marginal electricity price (in $/kWh), averaged across all hours in month t. We
include unit-by-month-of-year fixed effects (i ) to non-parametrically control for seasonality
­ including the average agricultural cycle ­ at every groundwater pump. We also include
month-of-sample fixed effects (t ) to control for average market-wide time effects in both
electricity prices (which rise over time) and pumping behavior, as well as changes in of
the market environment (e.g., crop prices). Alternative specifications include groundwater-
basin-by-year fixed effects (to control for time-varying trends in groundwater depth across
basins), water-district-by-year fixed effects (to control for annual shocks to surface water
allocations), and service-point-specific linear time trends. We two-way cluster standard er-
rors by service point and month-of-sample, which accommodates both arbitrary within-unit
serial correlation and arbitrary spatial correlation across units within a month.
      To econometrically identify the demand elasticity in Equation (3), we leverage both
cross-sectional and time-series variation in electricity prices. Our primary source of exoge-
nous variation comes from the fact that PGE's agricultural tariff schedules are the outcome
of statewide regulatory proceedings. This means that individual farmers cannot plausibly
influence how PGE sets prices. Moreover, tariff decisions are made 1­3 years in advance of
their implementation, reducing concerns that prices are set in response to real-time events
such as droughts.
 20. Since 14 percent of observations in this panel are zeros, we apply the inverse hyperbolic sine transfor-
mation to avoid dropping months when a farm consumes zero kWh for groundwater pumping. Appendix
Table D8 presents alternative functional forms, including log-log and (log +1)-log.




                                                     16
      While the tariff schedules are themselves exogenous, many farmers are able to select
a menu of tariffs--effectively choosing which marginal electricity price they face.21 It is
therefore important that we purge the resulting endogenous variation in unit i's marginal
electricity price. To do this, we take advantage of eligibility restrictions that prevent farmers
from choosing across the full menu of 23 tariffs.As we discuss above, PGE classifies all
agricultural consumers into 5 disjoint categories:

    · small pumps (< 35 hp) with conventional meters

    · large pumps ( 35 hp) with conventional meters

    · small pumps (< 35 hp) with smart meters

    · large pumps ( 35 hp) with smart meters

    · pumps with auxiliary internal combustion engines

While farmers may choose among tariffs within a category, they may not choose tariffs from
other categories. To ensure that this within-category selection is not biasing our estimates,
we instrument for unit i's marginal price with the marginal price of the "default" tariff within
unit i's category.22 This eliminates selection bias from a high-volume pumper choosing a tariff
with advantageously low volumetric prices.
      For farmers to move across tariff categories, they must either adjust their physical
pumping capital or have their electricity meter replaced by PGE. Pumping capital-induced
category changes have the potential to introduce simultaneity bias: for example, upgrading
from a < 35 hp pump to a  35 hp pump would lead to both a decrease in default marginal
price and a mechanical increase in electricity consumption. Figure 4 demonstrates that there
  21. As described in Section 3 above, marginal prices are constant in the amount of electricity consumed.
Constant marginal prices simplify our estimation of agricultural electricity demand, because farm i's marginal
price is determined solely by its tariff schedule. This is in contrast to PGE's residential electricity tariffs,
which have increasing block pricing, wherein a household's marginal price is endogenous to its own consump-
tion (Ito (2014)).
  22. Three categories (conventional meters and internal combustion engines) comprise a single tariff; for
these categories, assigning a "default" tariff is trivial. The two smart meter categories comprise 8 and 12
separate time-varying tariffs, respectively; for these categories, we choose as "defaults" the tariffs with the
least time-varying marginal prices that most closely resemble their non-time-varying counterparts (AG-4A,
AG-4B). Appendix Table A1 summarizes all 23 tariffs by category, with default tariffs in bold, and Appendix
Figure A1 shows the time series of each tariff. We find similar results if we instrument using the modal tariff
in each category (see Appendix Table D1).


                                                      17
is no "bunching" in installed capital around this 35 hp threshold, suggesting that farmers
are not endogenously choosing their pumping capital to manipulate their tariff category.23
Nevertheless, we control for potential endogenous changes in price by interacting unit fixed
effects with dummies for each type of physical capital: small pumps, large pumps, and
auxiliary internal combustion engines.
      Moreover, Table 1 shows that 90 percent of changes in a unit's tariff category come from
PGE replacing unit i's conventional meter with a smart meter. It is highly unlikely that
such meter upgrades coincided with any other changes in a farmer's pumping behavior.24
Hence, meter-induced category changes are unlikely to lead to endogenous changes in unit i's
marginal electricity price. As a robustness check, we instrument with lagged default prices
to purge potential endogeneity in the timing of unit i's smart meter installation.
      Figure 3 plots both raw and residualized time series of monthly average marginal prices
for the five default tariff categories during our sample period.25 The right panel partials
out both tariff × month-of-year fixed effects and common month-of-sample fixed effects,
thereby illustrating the the main source of exogenous variation we use identify the demand
elasticity in Equation 3: that the residualized time series do not move in parallel. We also
leverage variation from meter-induced shifts across tariff categories: farmers who received
smart meters during our sample saw a systematic decrease in their average monthly marginal
prices (i.e., from AG-1A to AG-4A, or from AG-1B to AG-4B).


4.2     Groundwater demand

To estimate the causal effect of groundwater price on groundwater consumption, we construct
an electricity-to-water conversion ratio, kWh
                                           AF it , for each observation in our dataset. While
we do not directly observe groundwater prices or quantities, we can use these conversion
  23. As a robustness check, we estimate Equation (3) interacting month-of-sample fixed effects with deciles
of pump horsepower. Our results are nearly identical to those in our main specification, assuaging concerns
of differential trends between small vs. large pumpers (see Appendix Table D2).
  24. During our 2008­2017 sample period, PGE gradually installed smart meters for the vast majority of
its customers. The timing of PGE's smart meter rollout was determined by institutional and geographic
factors, which were outside of customers' control. Previous research has established that PGE did not design
their smart meter rollouts to target customers with particular usage patterns (Blonz (2020)).
  25. Appendix Figure A1 presents an extended version of this same figure, with all 23 PGE tariffs.




                                                    18
factors to transform the electricity variables we do observe into their water equivalents:


                   Qwater = Qelec kWh                            water     elec
                                                                                × kWh
                    it       it ÷ AF it                        Pit     = Pit       AF it                   (4)


Appendix B explores this conversion in detail, and describes how we can decompose the
implied values of Qwater
                   it
                               water
                         and Pit     to separately identify farmer responses to changes in
electricity price versus changes in pumping costs.
      Here, we present a more parsimonious specification for estimating groundwater demand:


                            sinh-1 (Qwater
                                     it
                                                       water
                                           ) =  log (Pit     ) + i + t + it                                (5)


This model uses the same fixed effects as in Equation (3) above, and we instrument for
       water
log (Pit     ) using the same instrument: logged average marginal electricity price of unit
i's within-category default tariff. This isolates changes in the effective price of groundwater
driven only by plausibly exogenous changes in the marginal electricity price. The instrument
also eliminates the within-pump feedback effect of Qwater
                                                    it
                                                               water
                                                          on Pit     , whereby extraction lowers
a pump's own water level and mechanically increases is effective marginal groundwater price.
Finally, instrumenting with default electricity price removes right-hand-side measurement
error in kWh
          AF it , which has the potential to bias our elasticity estimates.
                                                                            26




5     Results

5.1     Electricity demand

Table 3 reports results from estimating Equation (3). Column (1) presents the OLS results
without instrumenting for marginal electricity price, resulting in a potentially biased ^ esti-

mate. Column (2) instruments using unit i's within-category default marginal price, which
eliminates bias from farmers choosing their own electricity tariffs. The direction of this bias
is not obvious ex ante, because farmers are choosing between tariffs with both volumetric

 26. In Equation (5), measurement error from kWh/AFit enters directly on the right-hand side and inversely
on the left-hand side. Instrumenting with default electricity prices negates the correlation between left-hand-
vs. right-hand-side measurement error. See Appendix B for further details.


                                                      19
($/kWh) and fixed ($/kW) price components.27 Comparing Columns (1) vs. (2), we see that
on average, farmers with higher electricity consumption tend to choose tariffs with relatively
low fixed charges per kW and relatively high prices per kWh.
      Column (3) eliminates the other potential source of price endogeneity--farmers switch-
ing across rate categories--by interacting unit fixed effects with indicators for (i) small pumps
(< 35 hp), (ii) large pumps ( 35 hp), and (iii) auxiliary internal combustion engines. While
only 5 percent of units shift across tariff categories due to changes in their physical capital,
the resulting simultaneous changes in Qelec
                                       it
                                                  elec
                                            and Pit    induce substantial bias in Column (2)
point estimate. Column (3) reports our preferred estimate of -1.17, after having purged
both sources of price endogeneity.28
      Columns (4)­(6) report three additional elasticity estimates, each intended to assuage
any remaining concerns over price endogeneity. Column (4) includes separate year fixed
effects for each water basin and each water district, to control for potential time-varying
confounders related to groundwater depth or surface water availability. The resulting point
estimate of -0.95 is similar, albeit slightly attenuated. Column (5) instruments with the 6-
and 12-month lags of the default price (rather than the contemporaneous default price), to
account for potential endogeneity in the timing of PGE's smart meter rollout.29 This yields
a nearly identical point estimate, implying that farmers' electricity consumption did not
meaningfully change in anticipation of a smart meter installation. Finally, Column (6) adds
11,173 unit-specific linear time trends, to confirm that we are not identifying ^ solely off of

monotonic trends in price and quantity. The resulting point estimate of -0.76 is attenuated,
as linear trends remove much of the (exogenous) variation in electricity prices over time, but
still indicates that farmers respond strongly to changes in electricity prices.
  27. PGE tariffs with relatively high volumetric (i.e. marginal) prices tend to have relatively low fixed prices,
and vice versa. Two farmers with the same average electricity consumption may optimally choose different
tariffs. Suppose farmer A operates a 300 hp pump for 50 hours per month, while farmer B operates 50 hp
pump for 300 hours per month. Farmer A should prefer a low fixed price and a high volumetric price, while
farmer B should prefer a high fixed price and a low marginal price.
  28. Appendix Table D2 presents results from specifications where we interact month-of-sample fixed effects
with bins of horsepower, kW, or operating pump efficiency. We recover extremely similar point estimates,
(-1.15 with a standard error of 0.16 for horsepower), indicating that differential trends in pump size are not
biasing our results.
  29. Recall that farmers may shift across tariff categories (inducing changes to their within-category default
price) due to either changes in their physical capital or the installation of a smart meter.



                                                       20
     In Appendix D, we present a series of sensitivity checks on this main result: instru-
menting with modal within-category tariffs, rather than default tariffs (Appendix Table D1);
interacting month-of-sample fixed effects with bins of pump horsepower, measured load, and
efficiency (Appendix Table D2); interacting month-of-sample fixed effects with geographic
fixed effects (Appendix Table D4); and adding weather controls (Appendix Table D6). Across
all specifications, we find large, statistically significant elasticities that are quantitatively sim-
ilar to our preferred specification in Column (3) of Table 3. Appendix Table D8 reveals that
while our estimates are not sensitive to our choice of functional form, they are sensitive to the
inclusion of observations with zero electricity consumption. If we exclude unit-months with
zero electricity consumption, our elasticity estimate attenuates to -0.31. This is consistent
with farmers responding to high electricity prices by changing their cropping patterns--a
mechanism that we explore in greater detail in Section 6 below.
     Across specifications, we find large, precisely-estimated elasticities. The magnitude of
these estimates is surprisingly large, considering that electricity demand tends to be quite
inelastic in other contexts. The literature on electricity demand has focused heavily on
the residential sector, and recent estimates have found elasticities of -0.08 to -0.48 in the
short run (Reiss and White (2005); Alberini and Filippini (2011); Fell, Li, and Paul (2014))
and -0.09 to -0.73 in the medium-to-long run (Alberini and Filippini (2011); Ito (2014);
Deryugina, MacKay, and Reif (2020)).30 Fewer estimates exist for commercial or indus-
trial electricity demand. Paul, Myers, and Palmer (2009) estimate commercial/industrial
elasticities of -0.11 to -0.16 in the short run, and -0.29 to -0.40 in the long run. Jes-
soe and Rapson (2015) find no demand response to dynamic pricing in these sectors, while
Blonz (2020) estimates elasticities of -0.08 to -0.22 using hourly price variation for PGE's
small commercial/industrial customers. To our knowledge, we provide the first large-scale
estimates of electricity demand elasticities in the agricultural sector.
  30. These estimates use monthly or annual variation in electricity prices, which aligns with our empirical
strategy. Studies that leverage hourly variation in electricity prices have estimated electricity demand elas-
ticities ranging from -0.03 to -0.25 (Wolak (2011); Jessoe and Rapson (2014); Fowlie et al. (2020); Ito, Ida,
and Tanaka (2018)).




                                                     21
5.2     Groundwater demand

Table 4 presents our estimates of the price elasticity of farmer's groundwater demand. In each
column, we estimate Equation (5), including unit-by-himonth-of-year fixed effects, month-
of-sample fixed effects, and interactions between unit fixed effects and physical capital. In
Column (1), we present OLS results. As with the electricity results in Table 3, we find a
smaller elasticity with the OLS (-0.88) than with our instrumental variables approach in the
following columns. In Column (2), our preferred specification, we instrument for the price
of groundwater using using unit i's within-category default marginal price, eliminating bias
from farmers choosing their electricity tariff. We estimate a price elasticity of groundwater
demand of -1.12.
      Columns (3)­(6) present a series of sensitivity checks around this central estimate.
Column (3) restricts the sample to the three largest groundwater basins, each of which has
over 1,000 units in our estimation sample.31 The resulting ^ estimate is quite similar, which

should assuage concerns that the instrument is invalid due to a few large farms located in very
small groundwater basins. In Column (4), we convert from electricity to groundwater by re-
calculating kWh
             AF it using groundwater data rasterized at the quarterly (rather than monthly)
level; this addresses the inherent tradeoff between spatial density vs. temporal frequency
of groundwater measurements, and has little effect on our results. Column (5) includes
water-basin-by-year and water-district-by-year fixed effects, yielding a slightly attenuated
point estimate (-0.90). In Column (6), we instrument with 6- and 12-month lags of the
default within-category electricity price (rather than contemporaneous prices); we again find
a quantitatively similar estimate of -1.14.
      The point estimates in Table 4 are quite similar to our electricity demand estimates.32
Appendix B presents the results from an alternative approach where we separately estimate
the price elasticity of demand for groundwater with respect to electricity prices vs. kWh-
to-AF conversion factors. In our preferred specification, we estimate larger elasticities than
  31. These basins are the San Joaquin Valley, the Sacramento Valley, and the Salinas Valley. The number
of agricultural groundwater pumpers in each basin is likely much larger, as our estimation sample comprises
only the subset of PGE customers that we can match to an APEP-subsidized pump test.
  32. It is not surprising that Equations (3) and (5) yield similar point estimates, since Qwater and P water
are multiplicative transformations of Qelec and P elec , and both specifications use the same two-stage least
squares model.


                                                     22
in Table 4: -1.27 for groundwater price changes induced by electricity price changes, and
-1.51 for groundwater price changes induced by kWh-to-AF changes. These estimates are
not statistically different from each other, which signals that farmers respond similarly to
both types of pumping cost changes--as Neoclassical theory would predict, if farmers are
indeed rationally optimizing over groundwater as an agricultural input.
     Appendix D presents additional robustness checks: sensitivities to how we construct
the kWh
     AF it conversion factor (Appendix Table D3); interacting month-of-sample fixed effects
with geographic fixed effects (Appendix Table D5); including weather controls (Appendix
Table D6); and sensitivities by assignment to CLUs (Appendix Table D7). We find large,
statistically significant elasticities that are quantitatively similar to our preferred point es-
timate from Column (2) of Table 4 across specifications. As with the electricity regressions
described in Section 5.1, we find that our groundwater results are sensitive to the inclusion
of observations with zero groundwater pumping: excluding unit-months with zero ground-
water extraction attenuates our elasticity to -0.30 (Appendix Table D9). This suggests
that an important method of adjustment to high groundwater prices is halting pumping,
which is again consistent with fallowing or crop switching as a mechanism. We examine this
possibility in Section 6 below.33
     As with our elasticity estimates for electricity, our groundwater elasticity estimates are
quite large relative to the existing literature. Recent studies have also exploited variation
in energy prices but have yielded far smaller magnitudes: Hendricks and Peterson (2012)
find an elasticity of -0.10, and Pfeiffer and Lin (2014) find an elasticity of -0.27 (both
for agricultural groundwater in Kansas). Bruno and Jessoe (accepted) estimate demand
elasticities of -0.17 to -0.22 within the Coachella Valley of California, which is a unique
setting where groundwater extraction is directly priced.34
  33. Below, Table 6 further corroborates this intensive-vs.-extensive margin result at the annual level.
  34. Prior work on urban water demand, a setting in which researchers also observe prices and quantities for
water, has found similar elasticities, ranging from -0.10 to -0.76 (Nataraj (2011); Ito (2013); Baerenklau,
Schwabe, and Dinar (2014); Wichman (2014); Buck et al. (2016); Wichman, Taylor, and Haefen (2016);
Hagerty (2019)). Previous studies have also estimated farmers' elasticity of demand for surface water, most
notably Hagerty (2019), who finds an elasticity of -0.23 for surface water in California agriculture. While
estimates of surface water demand are often as large as -0.80 in specific locations (Schoengold, Sunding,
and Moreno (2014); Hagerty (2019)), we find agricultural groundwater demand to be even more elastic on
average.




                                                     23
6     Economics of groundwater demand response
We now explore possible mechanisms underlying the large elasticities we find in Section 5.
When we observe a farmer consume less electricity at a pump with a dedicated electricity
meter, four broad mechanisms could explain this decrease:

    1. The farmer applies less irrigation water, without changing crop types.

    2. The pump's kWh-to-AF groundwater production function changes.

    3. The farmer switches to an alternate water source.

    4. The farmer switches crops or fallows the land.


Applying less water, without changing crops We should expect this first mechanism
to manifest in the short run, as a response to high-frequency cost shocks. To test for this, we
exploit additional richness in our PGE electricity data. Beyond monthly billing data, we also
observe 336 million observations of hourly electricity consumption for 10,930 service points
in our estimation sample. All of these farmers are on time-varying electricity tariffs: during
summer months, their average marginal electricity price nearly doubles during 12­6pm peak
periods. Figure 5 plots these average marginal prices against the density of their hourly
electricity consumption during summer months. We observe no pronounced decrease in
consumption in response to these large swings in marginal price. This suggests that short-
run adjustments to irrigating existing crops are not the primary mechanism driving our
elasticity estimates.35 This is also consistent with our informal conversations with California
growers, who tend to adhere to crop-specific irrigation targets.36


Changing the groundwater production function By contrast, changes in the kWh-
to-AF function should manifest over longer time scales, as a result of pump depreciation,
maintenance, and upgrades. To test whether pumping technology changes are driving our
  35. In ongoing work, we are extending our econometric analysis to formally estimate short-run demand
elasticities at the daily and hourly levels.
  36. Accelerated orchard management would be another manifestation of this mechanism, which we hope to
explore further in future work. Farmers may respond to pumping cost shocks by shifting forward the timing
of when they replace old trees with young saplings, which require less water as they mature.


                                                   24
elasticity estimates, or whether measurement error in kWh
                                                       AF it from infrequent pump tests are
biasing our results, we re-estimate Equation (5) using only observations that are close in
time to a pump test that we observe. Table 5 presents the results, which are quite stable
even when we restrict- the sample to the 30 percent of observations within 12 months of a
pump test. This implies that unobserved changes in kWh-to-AF are unlikely to be impacting
our results.37


6.1     A stylized model of farmer decision-making

This leaves two candidate mechanisms: switching water sources and switching crops. Here,
we develop a stylized model to characterize the economics underlying both switching margins.
Let i index farms, or atomistic pieces of cropland with area Ai . Farm i makes a discrete
choice to plant crop k from a set of potential crops K, with an outside option of fallowing
(k = 0). The choice of crop determines ex ante expected yields Yi (k ), water required for
irrigation Wi (k ), and non-irrigation costs Fi (k ). Yields, water, and other costs vary cross-
sectionally within crops, due to heterogeneous climate, soil quality, irrigation capital, etc.38
All farms are price-takers in the output market, facing common crop prices pk . Farm i
chooses the crop k that maximizes its profits:


                           max i (k ) = pk Yi (k ) - Ci (Wi (k )) - Fi (k )                               (6)
                            kK



      Irrigation costs Ci (W ) are farm-specific and weakly convex in W , since farmers may
irrigate using surface water allocated by their water district, pumped groundwater, and/or
water purchased on the open market. Water districts typically have the lowest cost per
acre-foot, but limited allocations may not be sufficient to meet irrigation needs, especially
in drought years. This may force farmers to pump their own groundwater, with costs per
  37. Another possibility is that unobserved changes in other irrigation capital impact the share of pumped
water than ultimately reaches crops. While we lack data on irrigation capital "downstream" from pumps, it
is reassuring that we find similar elasticities using a significantly shortened time period for estimation.
  38. For simplicity, we abstract away input re-optimization within crops. This focuses our model solely on
the planting margin, while also aligning it with standard crop budgeting calculations farmers typically use to
make such ex ante planting decisions. This stylized static model also ignores the obvious state-dependence
inherent in choosing perennial (or annual) crops.



                                                     25
acre-foot that are (typically) higher and may increase convexly in the quantity extracted.
Open market water prices tend to be much higher than both district-allocated surface water
and pumped groundwater, due to high costs of physically moving water. However, district
allocations and pumping costs are sufficiently heterogeneous that some California farmers
rely on water markets for irrigation (Hagerty (2019)).
     The upper left panel of Figure 6 depicts a hypothetical irrigation price schedule for a
farm that irrigates with both surface water (allocated by its irrigation district) and pumped
groundwater. This representative farm i has chosen crop k 0 , and the shaded region under
the price function depicts its total cost of irrigating, Ci (Wi (k 0 )). If the farm experiences
a pumping cost shock due to either an electricity price increase or a groundwater depth
increase, the groundwater piece of its price schedule will shift up. The upper right panel of
Figure 6 illustrates how such a pumping cost shock would increase farm i's cost of irrigating
crop k 0 by the shaded area Ci (Wi (k 0 )).
     Our econometric results show that such a pumping cost shock (holding the rest of the
price schedule constant) causes average groundwater consumption to decrease. The bottom
panels of Figure 6 illustrate how this consumption decrease could come through either crop
switching or water source substitution. In the lower left panel, farm i switches to a less water-
intensive crop k 1 , thereby reducing both its groundwater consumption and its total water
consumption. In the lower right panel, a larger pumping cost shock causes farm i to switch to
the open market backstop; while it continues to consume Wi (k 0 ) acre-feet of water, new water
purchases now crowd out its groundwater consumption. As long as district-allocated surface
water is inframarginal for groundwater users (Hagerty (2020)), water source substitution is
only likely to occur at extremely high prices. Hagerty (2019) reports the distribution of prices
for 671 California water transactions, with a mean price of $221 per acre-foot. Since the
PGE data almost never imply pumping costs above $200 per acre-foot, and since California
water markets are relatively thin, crop switching (and fallowing) appears more likely as a
mechanism for groundwater demand response.




                                               26
6.2     Empirical tests of crop switching

6.2.1    Linear estimates

We take the model in Section 6.1 to data using several empirical tests. First, we collapse our
monthly panel dataset to the service-point-by-year level, and estimate annual elasticities.
While monthly data enable us to include more granular fixed effects to non-parametrically
control for potential time-varying confounders, annual data more closely align with the
timescale of a farmer's cropping choice. We estimate annual elasticities using modified
versions of Equations (3) and (5):


                             sinh-1 (Qelec           elec
                                      iy ) =  log (Piy ) + i + y + iy                                      (7)


and
                            sinh-1 (Qwater
                                     iy
                                                       water
                                           ) =  log (Piy     ) + i + y + iy                                (8)

where the unit of observation is now the service point-(i)-by-year-(y ). As in Sections 4.1­
4.2, we instrument for the price of electricity (groundwater) with the default within-category
price of electricity. Columns (1)­(2) of Table 6 present the main results, where we estimate
an annual demand elasticity of -0.99 for electricity and -0.93 for groundwater. Since these
annual results are similar to our monthly estimates, they suggest that farmers are not simply
arbitraging within-year fluctuations in groundwater prices by switching to surface water.39
      To further investigate crop switching as a mechanism, we estimate pumping changes on
the intensive (reducing the amount of non-zero pumping) vs. extensive (stopping pumping
entirely) margins. First, we estimate Equation (7) for the subset of service points with non-
zero groundwater use in each sample year. Next, we estimate a semi-elasticity, by replacing
the dependent variable in Equation (7) with 1[Qwater
                                               iy    ], a binary indicator for whether a
unit consumes groundwater in a given year. Table 6 reports these results. In Column (3),
                                                 water
  39. Decomposing the variance in monthly Pit          into between-unit, within-unit-within-year, and within-
unit-across-year components, we find that 68 percent of the price variation is between units. Of the remaining
within-unit variation, 84 percent is within-year, and only 16 percent is across-year. Nevertheless, our monthly
and annual elasticity estimates are quite similar, suggesting that the former are mostly driven by within-
unit-across-year variation in groundwater price. This provides further evidence against (i) farmers applying
less water to existing crops and (ii) short-run substitutions between surface water and groundwater.



                                                      27
we find that the intensive margin elasticity (-0.22) is substantially lower than the average
elasticity.40
     By contrast, Column (4) reports a semi-elasticity of -0.04 for the extensive margin:
a 10-percent increase in effective groundwater price increases the probability that a farmer
stops pumping entirely by 0.4 percentage points--perhaps via fallowing. Comparing across
Columns (2)­(4), we see further evidence that our elasticities are driven by units moving in
and out of pumping, which is consistent with the crop-switching mechanism.


6.2.2    Static discrete choice estimates

Building on this evidence, we estimate a static discrete crop choice model to directly measure
the causal effect of groundwater costs on cropping decisions.41 We begin by re-writing the
farm's crop choice optimization problem, from Equation (6), as:


                               max iy (k ) = k pwater
                                                iy    + cyk + iyk                                         (9)
                               kK



where farm i in county c in year y chooses among four possible crop types k : annuals, fruit
and nut perennials, other perennials, and fallow. Within these groups, crops exhibit roughly
similar cost structures. We decompose profits for farm i into two components: the cost of
groundwater and all other costs and revenues. The total cost of groundwater is a linear
function of the price of groundwater, k pwater
                                         iy    , which we allow to vary by crop type. We
represent all remaining costs and revenue with the set of parameters cyk , which gives the
average annual profits--excluding groundwater costs--from growing crop type k in county
c in year y . We estimate the choice of crop type using a multinomial probit model. As in
our previous regressions, the groundwater price is potentially endogenous, so we instrument
with the unit's within-category default electricity price to isolate exogenous variation in the
price of groundwater.
     In this discrete choice model, we continue to use data aggregated to the annual level.
In order to assign crops to units, we match each service point to a USDA CLU based on its
  40. This is consistent with Appendix Table D8, where we compare the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) and
log transformations at the monthly level. We find substantially larger elasticities with the IHS (which admits
zeros) than with the log (which does not).
  41. Appendix C provides a step-by-step derivation of the following model.

                                                     28
latitude and longitude, and use CLU as the cross-sectional unit of analysis. As described
in Section 3, we use the Cropland Data Layer to assign a crop type to each 30-by-30 meter
pixel in each CLU. We aggregate these pixels to the CLU level by assigning each CLU a crop
type based on the modal type across pixels within the CLU, for CLUs where the modal crop
type covers more than 50 percent of the CLU.42
     Table 7 shows the marginal effects of groundwater price on crop choice and the semi-
elasticities of crop choice with respect to groundwater price that are implied by our static
discrete choice estimates, averaged over all units and reported in percentage points. On
average, when the price of groundwater increases by 10 percent, a farmer increases the
proportion of land in fruit and nut perennials by 1.0 percentage points and increases fallowed
land by 0.4 percentage points, and reduces land in annuals by 0.9 percentage points and other
perennials by 0.5 percentage points. This semi-elasticity for fallowing is quite close to the
semi-elasticity on the extensive margin of pumping in Table 6 (-0.04).
     Because we estimate a static discrete choice model in a setting where dynamics are
inherently important, these semi-elasticity estimates may differ from the true land-use re-
sponse. The sign of this difference is ambiguous ex ante. For example, farmers may respond
to a permanent change in groundwater prices with stronger crop switching behavior, which
would increase their groundwater usage response. On the other hand, farmers could also
adapt to long-run cost shocks by investing in more water-efficient capital, which would at-
tenuate both the static crop-switching and groundwater-usage effects. In ongoing work, we
are adapting the model developed by Scott (2013) to our setting, in order to produce dynamic
discrete choice estimates.


6.2.3   Counterfactual groundwater taxes

We use our static discrete choice estimates to simulate the effects of a uniform Pigouvian
groundwater tax on cropping decisions. Because the precise size of the groundwater extrac-
tion externality is unknown, we consider a range of possible taxes from $5 per acre-foot
to $15 per acre-foot, which roughly corresponds to a 12­37 percent increase in the average
 42. We drop CLUs where the modal crop type covers less than 50 percent of the CLU.




                                                 29
price of groundwater.43 For each tax level, we add the tax to the observed groundwater price
faced by each farmer and use the estimated model parameters to calculate the counterfactual
choice probability for each crop type.
     Table 8 reports the estimated total acreage for each crop type within our sample when
farmers face different counterfactual groundwater taxes.44 In line with the semi-elasticity
estimates, as the groundwater tax increases, farmers shift acreage into fruit and nut peren-
nials and into fallowing, and they decrease acreage in annuals and other perennials. We find
that a relatively large share of total acreage is reallocated to different crop types in response
to relatively moderate groundwater taxes. For a $10 per acre-foot tax, more than 12,000
acres--3.9 percent of total cropland in our sample--are reallocated to a different crop type.
Figure 7 plots how each CLU in our sample would respond to a $10 groundwater tax.
     If we conducted this counterfactual exercise using a Pigouvian tax equal to true (un-
known) marginal external costs at the socially efficient level of groundwater extraction, we
could interpret the amount of land reallocated due to the tax as the amount of land that is
currently misallocated due to unpriced pumping externalities. If the true externality were
$10 per acre-foot, our results would imply that 3.9 percent of cropland in our 314,884-acre
sample is currently misallocated. Under the assumption that our sample is representative
of all 7.9 million acres of irrigated cropland in California, this implies that over 300,000
acres are growing a socially suboptimal crop type due to groundwater being underpriced.
However, to our knowledge there is scant existing evidence on the true external costs from
groundwater extraction in California; we encourage future research on this topic.
     Alternatively, we use California policy to benchmark a counterfactual groundwater tax.
Under SGMA, California has opted for broad quantity-based groundwater sustainability
targets. When the regulation goes into effect, major groundwater basins in California are
expected to require groundwater pumping restrictions of 20­50 percent (Bruno (2019)). We
simulate effects under several non-marginal pricing scenarios. As shown in the bottom row
of Table 8, our groundwater demand elasticity estimate of -1.12 implies that a $10 per
acre-foot tax would yield a 27-percent reduction in groundwater extraction. By contrast, if
 43. The average annual groundwater price for CLUs in our sample is $41.00 per acre-foot.
 44. There are 314,884 acres that we can confidently match to APEP units, which we use for estimation.



                                                  30
we assume the most elastic estimate from the previous literature--a groundwater demand
elasticity of -0.27, from Pfeiffer and Lin (2014)--achieving the same 27-percent reduction
would require a tax of at least $40 per acre-foot. Thus, our elasticity estimates suggest
that the tax needed to achieve sustainability targets would be less stringent than previously
thought. Additionally, this 27-percent reduction is at the lower end of the range of expected
curtailment, lending credence to our use of a $10 tax as our central counterfactual scenario.



7    Conclusion
In this paper, we estimate how a key sector--agriculture--is likely to respond to environ-
mental regulation which will increase the costs of an essential input--groundwater--in the
setting of California, one of the most productive farming regions in the world. While Cal-
ifornia accounts for 18 percent of total U.S. crop value, its farmers are heavily dependent
on groundwater-based irrigation. As a result of overuse, water levels in California's un-
derground aquifers have fallen substantially, with 21 of the state's groundwater basins now
deemed "critically overdrafted."
     In an effort to prevent aquifer collapse, California policymakers have recently passed
the state's first comprehensive groundwater legislation, the Sustainable Groundwater Man-
agement Act (SGMA), which will require large reductions in groundwater use. Regardless
of the exact implementation approach, these regulations will raise the costs of groundwater
for California's farmers.
     In order to understand how farmers will respond to increases in water costs, we must
overcome measurement and identification challenges: groundwater is typically neither priced
nor measured, and groundwater costs are typically not randomly assigned. We leverage the
insight that electricity is the key marginal input into the groundwater production function.
We use a novel restricted-access dataset on farmers' electricity consumption and ground-
water pump efficiencies, combined with government measurements of groundwater depths
and satellite-derived land use designations for the universe of farmers in the Pacific Gas and
Electric utility service territory, which covers the majority of the farmland in the state. We
leverage exogenous variation in electricity tariffs over time to estimate farmers' price elasticity


                                                31
of demand for electricity, and find a surprising large elasticity estimate of -1.17. We then
use the physics of groundwater pumping to compute groundwater costs and groundwater
quantities for each pump in our sample, and we estimate the price elasticity of groundwater
demand to be -1.12. These elasticities are much larger than previous estimates in the elec-
tricity and groundwater literatures, making a groundwater tax a much more effective policy
tool for reducing extraction than previously thought.
     We then explore the mechanisms underlying farmers' groundwater demand response.
We find evidence consistent with crop switching as the primary mechanism driving our
estimated demand elasticities. First, farmers do not appear to respond to large within-
day switches in price, meaning that changing water use on existing crops is unlikely to
explain our results. Second, we find similar elasticities when we restrict our sample to
months around pump tests, making it unlikely that pumping capital upgrades are driving our
estimates. Third, because surface water tends to be substantially cheaper than groundwater,
and because we estimate similar elasticities at the monthly and annual level, within-year
surface water substitution is not likely to be the primary mechanism. Finally, we find a
large semi-elasticity on the extensive margin of groundwater use, showing that a key means
of adjustment is to cease pumping altogether--consistent with crop switching or fallowing.
     We build on this evidence by using a discrete choice model to estimate the impact of
increasing groundwater costs on crop choice. We find that higher groundwater costs cause
farmers to increase acreage in fruit and nut perennials and increase fallowing, and to decrease
acreage in annuals and other perennials. We simulate a counterfactual groundwater tax to
estimate the impacts of potential groundwater pricing policies on land use in California. We
find that a moderate $10 per acre-foot tax--approximately the price increase our elasticity
estimates imply would be required to meet California's lower-bound target of 20 percent
curtailment--would lead farmers to reallocate nearly 3.9 percent of land to a different crop
type. If the planned curtailments under SGMA reflect the true externality from groundwater
extraction, extrapolating our estimates from our sample to the rest of the state suggests
that more than 300,000 acres of California cropland may be misallocated due to unpriced
groundwater.



                                              32
References
Alberini, Anna, and Massimo Filippini. 2011. "Response of residential electricity demand to
    price: The effect of measurement error." Energy Economics 33:889­895.
Badiani, Reena, and Katrina Jessoe. 2019. "Electricity prices, groundwater, and agricul-
    ture: The environmental and agricultural impacts of electricity subsidies in India." In
    Agricultural productivity and producer behavior, edited by Wolfram Schlenker, 157­181.
    Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Baerenklau, Kenneth A., Kurt A. Schwabe, and Ariel Dinar. 2014. "The residential water
    demand effect of increasing block rate water budgets." Land Economics 90 (4): 683­699.
Bellemare, Marc F., and Casey J. Wichman. 2020. "Elasticities and the inverse hyperbolic
     sine transformation." Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 82 (1): 50­61.
Blonz, Joshua A. 2020. "Making the best of the second-best: Welfare consequences of time-
    varying electricity prices." Energy Institute at Haas Working Paper 275.
Bruno, Ellen. 2019. Groundwater Policy and California Agriculture. Technical report. Uni-
    versity of California Cooperative Extension.
Bruno, Ellen, and Katrina Jessoe. accepted. "Missing markets: Evidence on agricultural
    groundwater demand from volumetric pricing." Journal of Public Economics.
Buck, Steven, Maximilian Auffhammer, Stephen Hamilton, and David Sunding. 2016. "Mea-
    suring welfare losses from urban water supply disruptions." Journal of the Association
    of Environmental and Resource Economists 3 (3): 743­778.
Burke, Marshall, and Kyle Emerick. 2016. "Adaptation to climate change: Evidence from
    U.S. agriculture." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3): 106­140.
California Department of Food and Agriculture. 2011. "California agricultural resource di-
     rectory 2010­2011."
California Department of Water Resources. 2014. "Public Update for Drought Response
     Groundwater Basins with Potential Water Shortages and Gaps in Groundwater Moni-
     toring." Technical Report.
      . 2015. "California's Groundwater Update 2013." Technical Report April 2015.
California Energy Commission. 2005. "California's water-energy relationship." CEC Report
     700-2005-011-SF.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Alexander MacKay, and Julian Reif. 2020. "The long-run dynamics of
    electricity demand: Evidence from municipal aggregation." American Economic Journal:
    Applied Economics 12 (1): 86­114.
Famiglietti, J. S. 2014. "The global groundwater crisis." Nature Climate Change 4 (11): 945.




                                            33
Fell, Harrison, Shanjun Li, and Anthony Paul. 2014. "A new look at residential electricity
     demand using household expenditure data." International Journal of Industrial Orga-
     nization 33:37­47.
Fowlie, Meredith, Catherine Wolfram, C. Anna Spurlock, Annika Todd, Patrick Baylis, and
    Peter Cappers. 2020. "Default effects and follow-on behavior: Evidence from an electric-
    ity pricing program." NBER working paper 23553.
Hagerty, Nick. 2019. "Liquid constrained in California: Estimating the potential gains from
    water markets." Working paper.
      . 2020. "Adaptation to water scarcity in irrigated agriculture." Working paper.
Hanack, Ellen, Jay Lund, Ariel Dinar, Brian Gray, Richard Howitt, Jeffrey Mount, Peter
   Moyle, and Barton Thompson. 2011. Managing California's water: From conflict to
   resolution. San Francisco, California: Public Policy Institute of California.
Hendricks, Nathan P., and Jeffrey M. Peterson. 2012. "Fixed effects estimation of the inten-
   sive and extensive margins of irrigation water." Journal of Agricultural and Resource
   Economics 37 (1): 1­19.
Hewitt, J.A., and W.M. Hanemann. 1995. "A discrete/continuous choice approach to resi-
   dential water demand under block rate pricing." Land Economics 71 (2): 173­192.
Ito, Koichiro. 2013. "How do consumers respond to nonlinear pricing? Evidence from house-
     hold water demand." Working paper.
       . 2014. "Do consumers respond to marginal or average price? Evidence from nonlinear
    electricity pricing." American Economic Review 104 (2): 537­563.
Ito, Koichiro, Takanori Ida, and Makoto Tanaka. 2018. "Moral suasion and economic in-
     centives: Field experimental evidence from electricity demand." American Economic
     Journal: Economic Policy 10 (1): 240­267.
Jessoe, Katrina, and David Rapson. 2014. "Knowledge is (less) power: Experimental evidence
    from residential electricity use." American Economic Review 104 (4): 1417­1438.
       . 2015. "Commercial and industrial demand response under mandatory time-of-use
    electricity pricing." Journal of Industrial Economics 63 (3): 397­421.
Johnson, Renee, and Betsy A. Cody. 2015. "California agricultural production and irrigated
    water use." Congressional Research Service report.
Mieno, Taro, and Nicholas Brozovic. 2017. "Price Elasticity of Groundwater Demand: At-
    tenuation and Amplification Bias Due to Incomplete Information." American Journal
    of Agricultural Economics 99 (2): 401­426.
Nataraj, Shanthi. 2011. "Does marginal price matter? A regression discontinuity approach
    to estimating water demand." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
    61:198­212.



                                            34
Olmstead, S.M., Michael W. Hanemann, and R.N. Stavins. 2007. "Water demand under
   alternative price structures." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 54
   (2): 181­198.
Paul, Anthony, Erica Myers, and Karen Palmer. 2009. "A partial adjustment model of U.S.
    electricity demand by region, season, and sector." Resources for the Future Working
    Paper DP 08-50.
Pfeiffer, Lisa, and C.-Y. Cynthia Lin. 2014. "The effects of energy prices on agricultural
      groundwater extraction from the High Plains aquifer." American Journal of Agricultural
      Economics 96 (5): 1349­1362.
Provencher, Bill, and Oscar Burt. 1993. "The Externalities Associated with the Common
    Property Exploitation of Groundwater." Journal of Environmental Economics and Man-
    agement 24:139­158.
Reiss, Peter C., and Matthew W. White. 2005. "Household electricity demand, revisited."
    Review of Economic Studies 72:853­883.
Renwick, E.M., and R.D. Green. 2000. "Do residential water demand side management poli-
   cies measure up? An analysis of eight California water agencies." Journal of Environ-
   mental Economics and Management 40 (1): 37­55.
Sawyers, Gary. 2007. "A primer on California water rights." UC Davis Cooperative Extension
   working paper.
Schlenker, Wolfram, Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C. Fisher. 2007. "Water availability,
    degree days, and the potential impact of climate change on irrigated agriculture in
    California." Climatic Change 81 (1): 19­38.
Schlenker, Wolfram, and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. "Nonlinear temperature effects indicate
    severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change." Proceedings of the National
    Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 (37): 15594­15598.
Schoengold, Katrina, David L. Sunding, and Georgina Moreno. 2014. "Price elasticity recon-
    sidered: Panel estimation of an agricultural water demand function." Water Resources
    Research 42.
Scott, Paul T. 2013. "Dynamic discrete choice estimation of agricultural land use." Working
    paper.
Siebert, S., J. Burke, J. M. Faures, K. Frenken, J. Hoogeveen, P. Döll, and F. T. Portmann.
    2010. "Groundwater use for irrigation ­ a global inventory." Hydrology and Earth System
    Sciences 14:1863­1880.
USDA. 2020. "Crop values: 2019 summary." United States Department of Agriculture report.
Wichman, Casey J. 2014. "Perceived price in residential water demand: Evidence from a
    natural experiment." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 107:308­323.




                                            35
Wichman, Casey J., Laura O. Taylor, and Roger H. von Haefen. 2016. "Conservation policies:
    Who responds to price and who responds to prescription?" Journal of Environmental
    Economics and Management 79:114­134.
Wolak, Frank A. 2011. "Do residential customers respond to hourly prices? Evidence from a
    dynamic pricing experiment." American Economic Review 101 (3): 83­87.




                                           36
Figures and Tables




                                    Figure 1: Change in cropped area in selected crops, 2010­2017

                                     1500
                                             Alfalfa
                                                    Almonds
           Thousand acres planted




                                     1000

                                                         Winter                  Grapes
                                                         Wheat
                                                                  Rice
                                                                                           Pistachios
                                      500
                                                                         Cotton Corn             Walnuts




                                         0
                                                         2010                   2017
                                                         Low-value crops        High-value crops


    Notes: This figure plots the change in cropped area for nine water-intensive California crops from 2010 (light
    shaded) to 2017 (dark shaded): before and after the historic droughts of the mid-2010s. Crops in dark blue
    are relatively lower value per acre, while crops in light blue are relatively high value per acre. Acres planted
    measured using the USDA's Cropland Data Layer.




                                                                    37
                           Figure 2: PGE agricultural customers




Notes: This figure maps the locations of all agricultural service points served by PGE. Dark blue dots
indicate the 11,851 service point that we can match directly to an APEP pump test. Light blue dots
indicate unmatched agricultural service points. The light grey outline is the geographic boundary of PGE's
service territory.




                                                   38
                                                 Figure 3: Average marginal electricity prices
                                          Raw marginal prices                                                                     Residualized marginal prices




                                                                               Avg marginal price ($/kWh), residuals
                              .30                                                                                       .03
 Avg marginal price ($/kWh)




                              .25                                                                                       .02

                              .20                                                                                       .01

                              .15                                                                                        0

                              .10                                                                                      -.01

                              .05                                                                                      -.02

                               0                                                                                       -.03
                                2008      2011        2014         2017                                                    2008      2011          2014          2017


                                       AG-1A       AG-1B        AG-ICE                                                            AG-1A         AG-1B        AG-ICE
                                       AG-4A       AG-4B                                                                          AG-4A         AG-4B


Notes: This figure plots times series of monthly average marginal electricity prices ($/kWh) for PGE's five default agricultural
tariffs. The left panel plots raw average marginal prices for each month in our estimation sample, taking unweighted averages
across all hours. The right panel plots residuals of these same five time series, after partialing out tariff × month-of-year fixed
effects and month-of-sample fixed effects (aligning with the fixed effects we use in estimation). AG-1A and AG-1B are non-time-
varying rates (i.e. constant marginal price for all hours within a month), whereas AG-4A and AG-4B are time-varying rates (i.e.
higher marginal prices during peak hours and weekdays). AG-1A and AG-4A are for small pumps (< 35 hp), whereas AG-1B
and AG-4B are for large pumps ( 35 hp). AG-ICE is a time-varying rate for customers with auxiliary internal combustion
engines. Marginal prices are systematically higher during summer months (May­October). Our identifying variation comes
(a) strict restrictions that segment customers into categories; (b) the fact that the residualized default prices do not move in
parallel; and (c) PGE's smart meter rollout, which exogenously shifted many customers from the AG-1A/1B default tariffs to
the AG-4A/4B default tariffs with lower marginal prices.




                                                   Figure 4: Histogram of pump horsepower




Notes: This is a histogram of measured horsepower for all 21,851 tests in our APEP pump test dataset. We observe no bunching
on either side of the 35 hp cutoff that determines whether PGE classifies pumps as small or large. Bunching would be a sign
that farmers optimize against PGE's tariff schedules when making pump investment decisions.




                                                                          39
                             Figure 5: Hourly electricity prices and consumption

                   .05                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                    Avg marg price ($\kWh)
                   .04
                                                                                                              .15
     kWh density




                   .03
                                                                                                              .1
                   .02

                                                                                                              .05
                   .01


                    0                                                                                         0
                         0   2    4      6       8     10 12          14     16     18      20     22
                                                         Hour

Notes: This figure plots a histogram of electricity consumption at each hour of the day against average marginal price at each
hour of the day for summer months. While average marginal prices rise substantially during the afternoon, consumption does
not fall in response.




                                                             40
           Figure 6: Modeling farm i's water costs and groundwater demand response




Notes: This figure presents a stylized water price schedule for a representative farm i. The price schedule is nonlinear and
comprises water from up to three sources: (i) a low-cost allocation of surface water from farm i's irrigation district; (ii) medium-
cost groundwater pumping, with costs that rise gradually in own extraction; and (iii) a high-cost backstop of open market water
transactions, for which we assume farm i is a price taker. For crop k0 requiring Wi (k0 ) acre/feet of water, farm i's irrigation
costs Ci (Wi (k0 )) are represented by the shaded region in the top-left panel. If farm i experiences a pumping cost shock (due
to either an electricity price increase or a groundwater depth increase), its groundwater costs shift up and its total irrigation
costs increase by the shaded region Ci (Wi (k0 )) in the top-right panel. The bottom panels illustrate two ways that this
pumping cost shock increase translate to a reduction in farm i's groundwater consumption. First, the farmer may respond to
this pumping cost shock by switching from crop k0 to a less water intensive crop k1 , as in the bottom-left panel. Second, for a
large enough cost shock, the farmer may continue to grow crop k0 , but substitute away from groundwater using open market
water purchases.




                                                                41
               Figure 7: Crop choice changes in response to a $10 groundwater tax




Notes: This figure plots the estimated counterfactual changes in crop choice resulting from a $10 groundwater tax, relative to
no tax. Each dot is the centroid of a CLU in our sample. To generate these estimates, we first compute the average probability
each CLU farms each crop type across all sample years in the no-tax baseline. We then compute similar probabilities with the
groundwater price increased by $10 per acre-foot. Finally, we subtract the no-tax baseline from the $10 tax counterfactual to
compute the change in probability of having each land type. The top left panel shows the change in fallowing. The top right
panel shows the change in annual crops. The bottom left panel shows the change in fruit and nut perennials, and the bottom
right shows changes in other perennials.




                                                             42
                               Table 1: Summary statistics ­ Electricity data

                                                                                        All Ag                Matched
                                                                                       Customers             to Pumps
      Service point-month observations                                                  9,991,458            1,168,511
      Unique service points (SPs)                                                        108,172              11,849
      SPs that switch tariff categories                                                   44,414               2,844
      SPs that switch categories (pumping capital)                                         3,454                561
      SPs that switch categories (smart meters)                                           43,045               2,553
      Share of SP-months on time-varying tariffs                                          0.702                0.886
      Share of SP-months on peak-day tariffs                                               0.295               0.152

      Monthly electricity consumption (kWh)                                              6080.9               12055.6
                                                                                        (39783.1)            (25075.3)
      Monthly electricity consumption (kWh), summer                                      8249.6               17589.0
                                                                                        (45660.8)            (29818.9)
      Monthly electricity consumption (kWh), winter                                      3849.7               6362.8
                                                                                        (32498.8)            (17232.7)

      Average marginal electricity price ($/kWh)                                           0.148                0.113
                                                                                          (0.050)              (0.042)
      Average marginal electricity price ($/kWh), summer                                   0.171                0.130
                                                                                          (0.051)              (0.044)
      Average marginal electricity price ($/kWh), winter                                   0.126                0.096
                                                                                          (0.037)              (0.032)

      Average monthly bill ($, non-zero bills)                                            936.66              1814.15
                                                                                        (4662.71)            (3285.26)
      Average monthly bill ($, non-zero bills), summer                                   1398.90              2821.16
                                                                                        (5847.34)            (4020.99)
      Average monthly bill ($, non-zero bills), winter                                    456.17               764.99
                                                                                        (2888.86)            (1742.21)
Notes: The left column reports summary statistics for the universe of agricultural electricity customers in PGE service territory,
from 2008­2017. The right column includes the subset of agricultural customers that we successfully match to a groundwater
pump in the APEP pump test dataset--i.e., our main estimation sample. "Pumping capital" denotes tariff category switches
driven by shifts between small pumps (< 35 hp) and large pumps ( 35 hp), or adding/removing an auxiliary internal combustion
engine. Most tariff category switches were driven by PGE's smart meter rollout. Time-varying tariffs (i.e. all except 1A and 1B)
have higher marginal prices during peak demand hours. Peak-day tariffs (i.e. 4A, 4D, 4C, 4F, 5C, 5F) have very high marginal
prices during peak hours on the 14 highest-demand summer days. Monthly bills include both volumetric ($/kWh) and fixed
charges ($/kW, $/hp, and $/day). Summer months are May­October. Standard deviations of sample means in parentheses.




                                                               43
       Table 2: Summary statistics ­ Pump tests and groundwater consumption

                                                                                     Matched to Pumps

     Service point-month observations                                                       1,168,511
     Unique service points (SPs)                                                             11,849

     Matched APEP points per SP                                                                1.67
                                                                                              (1.73)
     Operating pump efficiency (%)                                                            54.46
                                                                                             (11.52)
     kWh per AF conversion factor (APEP measured)                                            430.35
                                                                                            (254.23)
     kWh per AF conversion factor (constructed)                                              321.12
                                                                                            (185.81)

     Monthly groundwater consumption (AF)                                                     46.8
                                                                                             (133.1)
     Monthly groundwater consumption (AF), summer                                             69.7
                                                                                             (155.8)
     Monthly groundwater consumption (AF), winter                                              23.2
                                                                                              (99.4)

     Average marginal groundwater price ($/AF)                                                40.35
                                                                                             (30.08)
     Average marginal groundwater price ($/AF), summer                                        43.27
                                                                                             (32.38)
     Average marginal groundwater price ($/AF), winter                                        37.34
                                                                                             (27.19)

Notes: These summary stats are from the merged panel of groundwater prices and quantities, which combines electricity
data, pump test data, and groundwater data. We observe 3.45 unique APEP pump tests for the average matched service
point, although 37 percent of service points match to only a single APEP test. Our constructed kWh per AF conversion
factor (i.e. kWh/AFit ) uses monthly groundwater rasters to capture changes in (measured) kWh per AF over time, and
estimation error compresses the right tail of distribution of measured kWh per AF. Monthly groundwater consumption
divides electricity consumption (kWh) by kWh/AFit . Grounwater prices multiply marignal electricity prices ($/kWh)
by kWh/AFit . Summer months are May­October. Standard deviations of sample means in parentheses.




                                                        44
                           Table 3: Estimated demand elasticities ­ Electricity

                                                 (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                 OLS             IV             IV            IV             IV             IV
       elec )
log (Pit                                      -1.31          -1.58          -1.17          -0.95          -1.18          -0.76
                                               (0.11)         (0.17)         (0.16)         (0.14)         (0.21)         (0.17)

Instrument(s):
                 elec )
  Default log (Pit                                              Yes            Yes            Yes                           Yes
                 elec ), lagged
  Default log (Pit                                                                                           Yes

Fixed effects:
 Unit × month-of-year                            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 Month-of-sample                                 Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 Unit × physical capital                                                       Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes
 Water basin × year                                                                           Yes
 Water district × year                                                                        Yes
 Unit-specific linear time trends                                                                                           Yes

Service point units                            11,173         11,173         11,173         11,167         10,922         11,173
Months                                          117             117            117            117           105             117
Observations                                   1.05M          1.05M          1.05M          1.05M          0.91M          1.05M
First stage F -statistic                                       4136           7382           7542           757            4776
Notes: Each regression estimates Equation (3) at the service point by month level, where the dependent variable is the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation of electricity consumed by service point i in month t. We estimate IV specifications via two-stage
least squares, instrumenting with either unit i's within-category default logged electricity price in month t or the 6- and 12-
month lags of this variable. "Physical capital" is a categorical variable for (i) small pumps, (ii) large pumps, and (iii) internal
combustion engines, and unit × physical capital fixed effects control for shifts in tariff category triggered by the installation of
new pumping equipment. Water basin × year fixed effects control for broad geographic trends in groundwater depth. Water
district × year fixed effects control for annual variation in surface water allocations; we include a common "no-water-district"
dummy for units not assigned to a water district, to avoid dropping them from the regression. All regressions drop solar NEM
customers, customers with bad geocodes, and months with irregular electricity bills (e.g. first/last bills, bills longer/shorter
than 1 month, overlapping bills for a single account). Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service point
and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                                45
                          Table 4: Estimated demand elasticities ­ Groundwater

                                               (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)
                                               OLS             IV              IV             IV             IV             IV
        water )
 log (Pit                                   -0.88          -1.12           -1.16          -1.12          -0.90          -1.14
                                             (0.07)         (0.15)          (0.17)         (0.15)         (0.14)         (0.21)

 Instrument(s):
                  elec )
   Default log (Pit                                            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes
                  elec ), lagged
   Default log (Pit                                                                                                         Yes

 Fixed effects:
  Unit × month-of-year                          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Month-of-sample                               Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Unit × physical capital                       Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
  Water basin × year                                                                                         Yes
  Water district × year                                                                                      Yes

 Groundwater time step                        Month          Month          Month         Quarter         Month           Month
 Only basins with > 1000 SPs                                                 Yes

 Service point units                          10,155         10,155         9,337          10,155          10,149         9,922
 Months                                        117             117            117            117            117            105
 Observations                                 0.93M          0.93M          0.85M          0.93M           0.93M          0.82M
 First stage F -statistic                                     3021           2791           3198            4562           477
Notes: Each regression estimates Equation (5) at the service point by month level, where the dependent variable is the inverse
hyperbolic sine transformation of groudnwater consumed by service point i in month t. We estimate IV specifications via two-
stage least squares, and Columns (2)­(5) instrument for Pit  water with unit i's within-category default logged electricity price.

Column (6) instruments with the 6- and 12- month lags of this variable. "Physical capital" is a categorical variable for (i) small
pumps, (ii) large pumps, and (iii) internal combustion engines, and unit × physical capital fixed effects control for shifts in tariff
category triggered by the installation of new pumping equipment. Water basin × year fixed effects control for broad geographic
trends in groundwater depth. Water district × year fixed effects control for annual variation in surface water allocations;
we include a common "no-water-district" dummy for units not assigned to a water district, to avoid dropping them from the
regression. Column (3) restricts the sample to only the three most common water basins (San Joaquin Valley, Sacramento
Valley, and Salinas Valley), each of which contains over 1000 unique SPs in our estimation sample. Column (4) uses a quarterly
panel of groundwater depths to construct both Qwater
                                                  it
                                                             water , rather than a monthly panel. All regressions drop solar NEM
                                                       and Pit
customers, customers with bad geocodes, months with irregular electricity bills (e.g. first/last bills, bills longer/shorter than 1
month, overlapping bills for a single account), and pumps with implausible test measurements. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                                 46
                         Table 5: Sensitivity to recent pump tests ­ Groundwater

                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
                                                       IV            IV             IV             IV             IV
               water )
        log (Pit                                   -1.10          -1.00         -0.92          -1.01          -0.90
                                                    (0.16)         (0.17)        (0.18)         (0.20)         (0.23)

        Months away from pump test:                    60             48             36            24             12
                           elec )
        IV: Default log (Pit                          Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

        Fixed effects:
         Unit × month-of-year                         Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
         Month-of-sample                              Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
         Unit × physical capital                      Yes            Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

        Groundwater time step                       Month           Month         Month         Month          Month

        Service point units                         10,144          10,129        10,110         10,054        9,826
        Months                                        117            117            117            105           93
        Observations                                0.82M           0.74M         0.63M          0.48M         0.28M
        First stage F -statistic                     2803            2557          2098           1517          902
Notes: Each regression replicates our preferred specification in Column (2) from Table 4, while restricting the sample to units
with pump tests within m months of sample month t. For example, a March 2013 observation for unit i is only included in
Column (3) if we observe a pump test for unit i between March 2010 and March 2016. These regressions reveal that unobserved
changes in pump specifications are unlikely to be systematically biasing our groundwater elasticity estimates. Stated differently,
the mechanism underlying our estimates is unlikely to be unobserved changes to farmers' irrigation capital. See notes under
Table 4 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample.
Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                               47
                Table 6: Annual demand elasticities ­ Intensive vs. extensive margin

                                                       Electricity                    Groundwater
                                                         Overall         Overall        Intensive       Extensive
                                                        elasticity      elasticity       margin          margin
                                                           (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)
                        elec )
                 log (Piy                               -0.99
                                                         (0.25)
                        water )
                 log (Piy                                               -0.93            -0.22          -0.04
                                                                         (0.24)           (0.09)         (0.01)

                 Outcome:
                  sinh-1 (Qiy )                            Yes              Yes             Yes
                  1[Qiy > 0]                                                                                Yes

                 Sample restriction:
                   Qiy > 0 in all years                                                     Yes

                 Instrument:
                                  elec )
                   Default log (Piy                        Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes

                 Fixed effects:
                  Unit × physical capital                  Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
                  Water basin × year                       Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes
                  Water district × year                    Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes

                 Service point units                     10,113           9,058           4,270           9,058
                 County × years                            270             268              236            268
                 Observations                            58.2K            51.8K           25.0K           51.8K
                 First stage F -statistic                 2165             2425            1092            2425
Notes: Each regression estimates Equation (7) or Equation (8) at the service point by year level. Column (1) reports results for
electricity consumption, and Columns (2)­(4) report results for groundwater consumption. Columns (1) and (2) report annual
demand elasticities for electricity and water, respectively. These results are analogous to the monthly demand elasticities
reported in Column (4) of Table 3 and in Column (5) of Table 4, respectively. Column (3) reports an analogous demand
elasticity for the subset of service points that consume water in every year of our sample. Column (4) reports the semi-elasticity
for the extensive margin by replacing the outcome variable with a binary indicator for groundwater consumption. We estimate
these regressions using two-stage least squares, instrumenting with unit i's within-category default logged electricity price in
year y . "Physical capital" is a categorical variable for (i) small pumps, (ii) large pumps, and (iii) internal combustion engines,
and unit × physical capital fixed effects control for shifts in tariff category triggered by the installation of new pumping
equipment. Water basin × year fixed effects control for broad geographic trends in groundwater depth. Water district × year
fixed effects control for annual variation in surface water allocations. All regressions drop solar NEM customers, customers with
bad geocodes, years with irregular electricity bills (e.g. first/last bills, bills longer/shorter than 1 month, overlapping bills for a
single account), and incomplete years. Groundwater regressions use a monthly time interval to assign rasterized groundwater
levels. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service point and by county-year. Significance: *** p < 0.01,
** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                                 48
                           Table 7: Discrete choice estimates of crop switching

                                                                Marginal effect        Semi-elasticity

                      Annuals                                      -0.252                 -0.088
                                                                    (0.042)                (0.013)
                      Fruit and nut perennials                      0.307                  0.104
                                                                    (0.055)                (0.020)
                      Other perennials                             -0.162                 -0.053
                                                                    (0.034)                (0.010)
                      Fallow                                        0.107                  0.038
                                                                    (0.033)                (0.013)

                      Instrument:
                                  elec
                        Default Piy                                               Yes
                      Fixed effects:
                        County × year × crop type                                 Yes

                      Common land units                                          7,380
                      Observations                                               36,799
                      First stage 2 -statistic                                    1134
Notes: We estimate the discrete choice model of Equation (9) using IV probit, instrumenting for groundwater price with
the default within-category electricity price. We include county-by-year-by-crop-type fixed effects to flexibly estimate profit
excluding the cost of groundwater pumping. The left column presents the average marginal effects of groundwater price on
crop type choice probabilities. The right column reports the average semi-elasticities for each crop type choice probability with
respect to the groundwater price. Each value is calculated for every observation in our analysis, and then we take the mean over
all observations to yield these average values. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the common land unit (CLU).
Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                              49
     Table 8: Crop choice and groundwater use under counterfactual groundwater taxes

                                                                        No tax       $5 tax       $10 tax      $15 tax

       Simulated acreage (thousands of acres)
        Annuals                                                         61.74        57.85        54.09         50.45
        Fruit and nut perennials                                        147.30       151.69       155.93        160.03
        Other perennials                                                34.24        31.94        29.71         27.57
        Fallow                                                          71.60        73.40        75.15         76.83
         Total reallocation                                                           6.19         12.18        17.96
         Total reallocation (percent)                                                 2.0%         3.9%         5.7%
       Change in groundwater consumption (percent)                                  -13.7%       -27.3%        -41.0%
Notes: This table reports the results of adding counterfactual taxes on groundwater to the observed electricity prices in our
sample. To simulate the impacts of a groundwater tax, we first calculate the choice probability of each crop type (annuals,
fruit/nut perennials, other perennials, and no crop) for each CLU in our sample over our time series. This baseline allocation is
represented in the first column, labeled "No tax." The sample average marginal price is $41.00 per acre-foot. In the subsequent
columns, we take each CLU's average annual marginal price and add the reported tax level to it. We then calculate choice
probabilities for this counterfactual groundwater price. The first four rows correspond to the four crop types in our analysis,
and the table displays the total acreage in our sample that we predict would be cropped in each crop type under each of the tax
levels. The fifth row reports the total acreage of cropland that is reallocated to a different crop type due to the groundwater
tax, as compared to no tax. The sixth row displays the total percent change in land use for each tax level, as compared to no
tax. These reallocations estimates are based on the 314,884 acres of agricultural land matched to our sample. The final row
reports the estimated change in groundwater consumption, using our groundwater elasticity estimate of -1.12, for each tax
level.




                                                              50
Appendix A                                              PGE electricity prices
As described in Section 3 of the main text, PGE offers 23 distinct agricultural tariffs, which
fall into 5 categories, depending on a farmer's meter type (conventional vs. smart) and
pumping capital (small, large, or previously powered by an internal combustion engine).
Here, we present additional details on these rates. Table A1 describes each rate in detail,
including a description of the eligibility category, the broad pricing schedule on each rate,
and the share of customers on each rate within our sample. Figure A1 shows a time series
of each rate over our sample. This is analogous to Figure 3 in the main text, but shows all
rates in addition to the "default" within-category rate. All rates that are the same color in
Figure A1 belong to the same category; the default rate for each category is bolded. The
left panel shows the raw rate time series. The right panel shows residualized rates, after
partialling out tariff × month-of-year fixed effects and month-of-sample fixed effects.



                                                 Figure A1: Average marginal electricity prices (all rates)
                                                Raw marginal prices                                                                             Residualized marginal prices
                                                                                         Avg marginal price ($/kWh), residuals




                               .30                                                                                                .03
  Avg marginal price ($/kWh)




                               .25                                                                                                .02

                               .20                                                                                                .01

                               .15                                                                                                 0

                               .10                                                                                               -.01

                               .05                                                                                               -.02

                                0                                                                                                -.03
                                 2008           2011        2014           2017                                                      2008           2011         2014           2017


                                        AG-1A   AG-1B   AG-4A      AG-4B   AG-ICE                                                           AG-1A   AG-1B   AG-4A       AG-4B   AG-ICE


Notes: This figure plots times series of monthly average marginal electricity prices ($/kWh) for all of PGE agricultural tariffs.
These 23 tariffs are divided into 5 mutually-exclusive categories, based on the type of electricity meter on a farm (smart vs.
conventional) and a farm's pumping capital (small, large, or previously internal combustion engine). All rates belonging to
the same category are the same color. The five "default" rates, which we also show in main text Figure 3 are bolded. The
left panel plots raw average marginal prices for each month in our estimation sample, taking unweighted averages across all
hours. The right panel plots residuals of these same five time series, after partialling out tariff × month-of-year fixed effects and
month-of-sample fixed effects (aligning with the fixed effects we use in estimation). AG-1A and AG-1B are non-time-varying
rates (i.e. constant marginal price for all hours within a month), whereas AG-4A and AG-4B are time-varying rates (i.e. higher
marginal prices during peak hours and weekdays). AG-1A and AG-4A are for small pumps (< 35 hp), whereas AG-1B and
AG-4B are for large pumps ( 35 hp). AG-ICE is a time-varying rate for customers with auxiliary internal combustion engines.
Marginal prices are systematically higher during summer months (May­October). Our identifying variation comes (a) strict
restrictions that segment customers into categories; (b) the fact that the residualized default prices do not move in parallel; and
(c) PGE's smart meter rollout, which exogenously shifted many customers from the AG-1A/1B default tariffs to the AG-4A/4B
default tariffs with lower marginal prices.




                                                                                    50
                                             Table A1: PGE agricultural tariffs
                Category                             Tariff                            Description                             Percent
 Small pumps, conventional meters
                                                                       High price per kWh (not time-varying),
         single motor < 35 hp, or                      1A                                                                         3.0
                                                                           fixed charge per hp connected
  multiple motors summing to < 15 hp
 Large pumps, conventional meters
         single motor  35 hp, or                                       High price per kWh (not time-varying),
                                                       1B                                                                         8.1
  multiple motors summing to  15 hp,                                    fixed charge per max kW consumed
   or single overloaded motor  15 hp
                                                                    High prices per kWh (higher in peak hours),
                                                    4A (4D)                 fixed charges per hp connected,                       7.2
                                                                  very high peak prices on 14 summer Event Days
                                                                       Lower prices per kWh (peak & offpeak),
                                                    5A (5D)                   no Event Day price increases,                       2.7
    Small pumps, smart meters                                                  higher fixed charges per hp
        single motor < 35 hp, or                                               Lower peak prices per kWh,
  multiple motors summing to < 15 hp                                         higher off-peak prices per kWh,
                                                   RA (RD)                                                                        1.2
                                                                              no Event Day price increases,
                                                                      choice between MTW or WTF peak days
                                                                               Lower peak prices per kWh,
                                                                             higher off-peak prices per kWh,
                                                   VA (VD)                                                                        0.9
                                                                              no Event Day price increases,
                                                                        choice of 3 shorter 4-hour peak periods
                                                                    High prices per kWh (higher in peak hours),
                                                    4B (4E)                                                                       20.1
                                                                         fixed charges per max kW consumed
                                                                   Much lower prices per kWh (peak & offpeak),
                                                    5B (5E)                                                                       37.8
                                                                            higher fixed charge per max kW
                                                                  Slightly lower prices per kWh (peak & offpeak),
                                                    4C (4F)          higher fixed charges per kW shifted to peak,                 2.4
                                                                  very high peak prices on 14 summer Event Days
     Large pumps, smart meters
                                                                   Much lower prices per kWh (peak & offpeak),
         single motor  35 hp, or
                                                    5C (5F)          higher fixed charges per kW shifted to peak,                 7.8
  multiple motors summing to  15 hp,
                                                                  very high peak prices on 14 summer Event Days
   or single overloaded motor  15 hp
                                                                      Higher prices per kWh (peak & off-peak),
                                                   RB (RE)            choice between MTW or WTF peak days,                        1.5
                                                                    lower fixed charges per max kW (in summer)
                                                                      Higher prices per kWh (peak & off-peak),
                                                   VB (VE)             choice of 3 shorter 4-hour peak periods,                   0.6
                                                                    lower fixed charges per max kW (in summer)
     Customers transitioning off                                   Very low price per kWh (high in peak hours),
                                                      ICE                                                                         6.8
     internal combustion engines                                          fixed charge per max kW consumed
Notes: This table provides a rough summary of PGE's 23 electricity tariffs for agricultural customers. The first column lists the 5 disjoint
categories of customers, defined (primarily) by physical pumping capital and electricity meters. Effective default tarrifs within each group
are in bold, and farmers may switch tariffs within a category (but not across categories). All tariffs have fixed ($/kW) and volumetric
($/kWh) prices that vary by summer vs. winter. All time-of-use tariffs (i.e. all but 1A and 1B) also vary between peak (12:00pm­6:00pm
on summer weekdays), partial peak (8:30am­9:30pm on weekends), and off-peak periods. DEF tariffs are functionally equivalent to their
ABC analogs, and are holdovers for the earliest customers to adopt time-of-use pricing. Actual tariffs are far more complex, and tariff
documents are available at https://www.pge.com/tariffs/index.page. The right-most column reports the percent of observations in our
main estimation sample on each tariff.




                                                                    51
Appendix B                 Groundwater demand estimation
In Section 4.2 of the main text, we present an approach for estimating the price elasticity of
demand for groundwater. Here, we use a decomposition approach and estimate the elasticity
with respect to electricity prices and water pumping costs separately.
     As in Section 4.2, we aim to estimate causal effect of groundwater price on groundwater
consumption, and this demand elasticity is linearly approximated by the coefficient  :

                                      log (Qwater
                                            it
                                                              water
                                                  ) =  log (Pit     )                                 (B1)

     We construct Qwater
                     it
                                water
                          and Pit     using the estimated conversion factor kWh
                                                                             AF it , which has
measurement error and is also potentially endogenous.
     Hence, the same measurement error and endogeneity is present on both the left-hand
side and the right-hand side of Equation (B1). We can rewrite this expression decomposing
kWh on both sides:
 AF it

                    log (Qelec       kWh              elec      kWh
                          it ) - log  AF it =  log (Pit ) + log AF it                                 (B2)

Rearranging:
                          log (Qelec           elec             kWh
                                it ) =  log (Pit ) + ( + 1) log  AF it                                (B3)

This expression is algebraically equivalent to Equation (B1), but it isolates the endogenous
estimated conversion factor in one right-hand-side variable. We estimate an analogous re-
gression specification:

              sinh-1 (Qelec   e       elec   w         kWh +  +  + 
                       it ) =  log (Pit ) + ( + 1) log  AF it i t   it                                (B4)

This specification is similar to Equation (3), except that we can now interpret  e and  w as
the price elasticity of demand for groundwater. We allow this elasticity to vary depending
on the source of variation in pumping costs--groundwater depths may be more salient to
farmers than electricity prices, or vice versa.1 As in the electricity regressions, as well as
                                                                                       elec
those in the main text, we purge electricity price endogeneity by instrumenting Pit         with
within-category default prices.
      To identify  w , we must overcome three potential sources of bias. First, farmers may
choose to alter their pumping technologies in order to change kWh  AF it , and such changes are
likely correlated with Qelec          kWh
                         it . Second, AF it is a function of unit i's groundwater depth, which
is mechanically linked to Qelec
                              it --when unit i consumes electricity to extract groundwater,

   1. A strict Neoclassical interpretation would assume  e =  w , as the optimizing farmer should respond to
                            water
all short-run changes in Pit      identically.


                                                    52
its localized groundwater level falls, thereby increasing kWh                   kWh
                                                               AF it . Third, AF it incorporates
measurement error both from interpolating rasterized groundwater depths across space and
from interpolating/extrapolating unit i's APEP measurements across time.
       We instrument for log ( kWh
                                AF it ) using logged groundwater depth averaged across unit i's
                          2
full groundwater basin. This purges potential endogeneity driven by changes in pumping
technologies, and eliminates bias induced by measurement error in unit i's pump specifica-
tions in month t. It also breaks the mechanical relationship between kWh                   elec
                                                                                AF it and Qit , as
farm i's extraction should have a negligible contemporaneous effect on average groundwater
levels across the whole basin. Finally, instrumenting with basin-wide average depth miti-
gates measurement error from having spatially interpolated groundwater measurements into
a (potentially overfit) gridded raster.
       Table B1 presents our results for estimating farmers' groundwater demand. Each col-
umn estimates Equation (B4) using our preferred strategy for identifying the elasticity with
                                                               elec
respect to the electricity price: instrumenting for log (Pit        ) with within-category default
prices, and interacting unit fixed effects with indicators for each category of physical pump-
ing capital. Note that we report    ^e and  ^w , where the latter subtracts 1 from the regression
coefficient on log ( kWh
                       AF it ). We interpret each coefficient as the elasticity of demand for
groundwater with respect to one component of the price of groundwater, holding the other
component constant.
                                                                                                elec
       In Column (1), we present a quasi-OLS specification: while we instrument for log (Pit         )
with the within-category default electricity price, we do not instrument for log (kWh/AFit ).
In this specification, we recover a somewhat lower elasticity of demand with respect to
pumping costs (-0.99) than with respect to electricity prices (-1.21).
       Column (2) reports our preferred estimates of       ^e and     ^w , where we instrument for

log ( kWh
       AF it ) with logged groundwater depth in month t averaged across unit i's groundwater
basin. Comparing      ^w in Columns (2) vs. (1), instrumenting with average depth appears to

alleviate bias due to measurement error in log ( kWh AF it ), and our estimate rises to (-1.51).
                                                                                                     3

The exclusion restriction requires that unit i's pumping behavior have no contemporane-
ous impact on basin-wide average groundwater depths. Such feedback effects between the
dependent variable and the instrument would be extremely unlikely for three reasons: (i)
unit i is small relative to the geographic footprint of its groundwater basin; (ii) thousands of
other pumpers are also extracting from the same basin; (iii) basin-wide average groundwater
levels do not instantaneously reequilibrate after extraction at one point in space. Column
   2. We instrument with groundwater depth in logs (rather than levels) because logging both sides of
Equation (2) implies that log (kWh/AFit ) is linear in log (lift), and a percentage change in depth should
yield a similar percentage change in lift.
   3. We discuss three potential sources of bias in  w in Section 4.2: (i) endogenous changes to pumping
technologies, (ii) the mechanical relationship between extraction and depth at a given location, and (iii)
measurement error. Bias from (i) and (ii) appear unlikely, as they should bias our  w away from zero, rather
than towards zero.

                                                    53
(3) restricts the sample to the 3 largest groundwater basins, each of which has over 1,000
units in our estimation sample.4
       The magnitudes of our     ^e estimates are relatively similar (if slightly larger) than the
results in our electricity-only regressions, especially comparing   ^e = -1.21 from Column (1)
of Table B1 with the analogous estimate (      ^ = -1.17) from Column (3) of Table 3. This is
not surprising, since Equation (B4) simply adds one regressor to Equation (3).          ^e is quite
close to our instrumented      ^w estimate (-1.27 vs. -1.51). This implies that a 1 percent
change in the effective price of groundwater has close to the same effect on farmers' pumping
behavior, whether that change comes via their marginal electricity price or via their pump's
kWh/AF conversion factor. It also suggests that farmers are quite attentive to their true
costs of pumping, and that they reoptimize their pumping behavior relatively similarly in
response to either type of price variation--as Neoclassical theory would predict.
       Columns (4)­(6) report three alternate versions of our preferred estimates in Column
(2). First, to account for the inherent tradeoff between spatial density vs. temporal frequency
of groundwater measurements, Column (4) re-estimates Equation (B4) using groundwater
data rasterized at the quarterly (rather than monthly) level. Whereas our preferred monthly
rasters are able to capture groundwater measurements at greater temporal frequency, quar-
terly rasters have greater accuracy in the cross-section by incorporating more distinct mea-
surement sites. The resulting     ^w estimate decreases in magnitude slightly, and comes closer
to the  ^e estimate. Column (5) includes water basin by year and water district by year fixed
effects, yielding only slightly attenuated point estimates despite eliminating much of the vari-
ation in the average depth instrument. In Column (6), we instrument with 6- and 12-month
lags of average depth (rather than contemporaneous depth), as it is possible (albeit unlikely)
that farmers pump less in months with lower groundwater levels for some reason other than
pumping costs. These lagged instruments marginally increase         ^e and substantially increase
 ^w ; however, the small first stage F -statistic indicates a weak instrument, and we interpret
these results with caution.




   4. These basins are the San Joaquin Valley, the Sacramento Valley, and the Salinas Valley. The number
of agricultural groundwater pumpers in each basin is likely much larger, as our estimation sample comprises
only the subset of PGE customers that we can confident match to an APEP-subsidized pump test.


                                                    54
                Table B1: Estimated demand elasticities decomposed ­ Groundwater

                                                  (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)
                                                  IV             IV            IV             IV            IV             IV
       elec ): 
log (Pit       ^e                             -1.21          -1.27         -1.27          -1.23         -1.05          -1.47
                                               (0.17)         (0.17)        (0.18)         (0.17)        (0.16)         (0.19)

log kWh
     AF it : 
             ^w                               -0.99          -1.51         -1.47          -1.25         -1.14          -2.09
                                               (0.10)         (0.32)        (0.38)         (0.33)        (0.28)         (0.56)

Instrument(s):
                 elec )
  Default log (Pit                                Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
  log (Avg depth in basin)                                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
  log (Avg depth in basin), lagged                                                                                        Yes

Fixed effects:
 Unit × month-of-year                             Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
 Month-of-sample                                  Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
 Unit × physical capital                          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
 Water basin × year                                                                                         Yes
 Water district × year                                                                                      Yes

Groundwater time step                           Month         Month          Month        Quarter         Month         Month
Only basins with > 1000 SPs                                                   Yes

Service point units                             10,155        10,141         9,337         10,141         10,140        10,108
Months                                            117          117            117           117            117           105
Observations                                    0.93M         0.87M          0.83M         0.91M          0.87M         0.77M
First stage F -statistic                         6935           87             71            49             55            18
 Notes: Each regression estimates Equation (B4) at the service point by month level, where the dependent variable is the inverse
 hyperbolic sine transformation of electricity consumed by service point i in month t. We report estimates for        ^e and ^w ,
 where the latter subtracts 1 from the estimated coefficient on log (kWh/AFit ). We estimate IV specifications via two-stage
                                                    elec with unit i's within-category default logged electricity price in month
 least squares, and all regressions instrument for Pit
 t (consistent with our preferred specification from Table 3). We instrument for log (kWh/AFit ) with either logged average
 groundwater depth across unit i's basin, or the 6- and 12-month lags of this variable. "Physical capital" is a categorical
 variable for (i) small pumps, (ii) large pumps, and (iii) internal combustion engines, and unit × physical capital fixed effects
 control for shifts in tariff category triggered by the installation of new pumping equipment. Water basin × year fixed effects
 control for broad geographic trends in groundwater depth. Water district × year fixed effects control for annual variation in
 surface water allocations. Column (3) restricts the sample to only the three most common water basins (San Joaquin Valley,
 Sacramento Valley, and Salinas Valley), each of which contains over 1000 unique SPs in our estimation sample. Column (4)
 uses a quarterly panel of groundwater depths to construct log (kWh/AFit ) and the instrument, rather than a monthly panel.
 All regressions drop solar NEM customers, customers with bad geocodes, months with irregular electricity bills (e.g. first/last
 bills, bills longer/shorter than 1 month, overlapping bills for a single account), and pumps with implausible test measurements.
 Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01,
 ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                               55
Appendix C             Discrete choice modeling framework
To arrive at the discrete choice model we present in Section 6.2.2 of the main text, we begin
with a general model of farm profits:

                                  iy (k ) = riyk - ciyk + iyk                             (C1)

where iy (k ) is the profit for farmer i in year y growing crop type k , riyk is farm revenues,
ciyk are farm costs, and iyk is an error term. Rewriting revenues as a function of crop prices
pky (common across farmers) and quantity grown qiyk , and decomposing costs into non-water
costs and water costs, we can re-write this as:

                          iy (k ) = pyk qiyk - cnon-water
                                                iyk       - cwater
                                                             iyk + iyk                    (C2)
                                                                   water
                                 = pyt qiyk - cnon-water
                                               iyk       - pwater
                                                            iy    qiyk   + iyk            (C3)

Assuming yield and per-unit costs are constant within county c, and denoting acreage as
Aiy :

                                                            water
                          iy (k ) = cyk + cyk Aiy - pwater
                                                     iy    qiyk   + iyk                   (C4)
                                 = cyk + cyk Aiy +    cyk Aiy pwater
                                                               iy      + iyk              (C5)

Assuming all costs scale with acres (i.e. cky = 0):

                          iy (k ) = cyk + cyk pwater
                                               iy    + iyk                                (C6)

And, finally, assume that the impact of water prices on profits is time-invariant and location-
invariant (i.e. cyk = k  y, c):

                          iy (k ) = cyy + k pwater
                                             iy    + iyk                                  (C7)

Farmer i maximizes profits by choosing crop k (identical to Equation (9 in the main text):

                     max iy (k ) = cky + k pwater
                                            iy    + iyk                                   (C8)
                     kK


We further assume that the error terms are i.i.d. Normal: iyk  N (0,  ), and estimate this
model using the instrumental variables probit model described in the main text.




                                               56
Appendix D               Sensitivity analysis
In this Appendix, we present a variety of sensitivity analyses and robustness checks which
build upon the results we present in the main text.


D.1     Instrumenting with modal tariffs
                                                       elec              water
In our main estimates, we instrument for log (Pit           ) and log (Pit     ) using the "default"
within-category electricity tariff for each of PGE's 5 rate categories. For the AG-1A, AG-
1B, and AG-ICE tariffs, this designation is trivial ­ each of these rates is a singleton within
its category. However, for the small pumps and smart meters category and the large pumps
and small meters category, there are 8 and 12 separate tariffs, respectively. We define the
default tariff as the rate within each category that has the least complex marginal pricing
structure: AG-4A and AG-4B. In Appendix Table D1, we instead present results where we
                       elec
instrument for log (Pit     ) with the modal tariff in each category: AG-1A, AG-1B, AG-ICE,
AG-4A, and AG-5B. Our preferred specification, shown in Column (2), produces an identical
elasticity (-1.17) to our preferred estimate in Table 3 in the main text.




                                                57
            Table D1: Instrumenting with within-category modal tariffs ­ Electricity

                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
                                                           IV             IV            IV             IV
                        elec )
                 log (Pit                              -1.53          -1.17         -1.00          -1.19
                                                        (0.15)         (0.16)        (0.15)         (0.20)

                 Instrument(s):
                                elec )
                   Modal log (Pit                          Yes           Yes            Yes
                                elec
                   Modal log (Pit ), lagged                                                           Yes

                 Fixed effects:
                  Unit × month-of-year                     Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Month-of-sample                          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Unit × physical capital                                Yes            Yes           Yes
                  Water basin × year                                                    Yes
                  Water district × year                                                 Yes

                 Service point units                     11,173        11,173         11,142        10,922
                 Months                                    117           117            117           105
                 Observations                            1.05M         1.05M          1.04M         0.91M
                 First stage F -statistic                 5796          5006           5202          1043
Notes: This table reestimates Columns (2)­(5) from Table 3, instrumenting with the average marginal price of the modal tariff
within each category. These instruments produce very similar results, demonstrating that our main results are not sensitive to
our choice of default tariff. See notes under Table 3 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered
by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




D.2       Sensitivity to trends in pump characteristics
A potential endogeneity concern in our setting is farmers choosing their pumping capital in
order to attain a more favorable electricity tariff. We find no evidence of farmers "bunching"
pump characteristics around the 35 hp cutoff in Figure 4, and we include a unit × physical
capital fixed effect in our preferred specifications to help control for this. Ultimately, our
identification strategy relies on a parallel-trends type argument, which requires that electric-
ity consumption for farmers in different tariff categories would be trending similarly in the
absence of differential rate increases or decreases over time. To provide evidence in support
of this assumption, in Appendix Table D2, we interact our month-of-sample fixed effects with
bins of three different pump characteristics: horsepower, kW, and operating pump efficiency
(OPE). We use 11 bins in horsepower: 1 below PGE's 35 hp cutoff, and 10 bins for deciles
of the horsepower distribution above 35 hp. We similarly use 11 bins in kW: 1 for measured
kW for pumps below PGE's 35 hp cutoff (equivalent to 26.1 kW), and 10 for each decile of
kW for pumps above this 35 hp cutoff. Finally, we use 10 bins for OPE. In Columns (1)­(3)
of Table D2, we exclude our unit × physical capital fixed effect, and find larger elasticities


                                                              58
                 Table D2: Sensitivity to trends in HP, kW, and OPE ­ Electricity

                                           (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
                                           IV            IV             IV            IV            IV             IV
           elec )
    log (Pit                           -1.56         -1.54          -1.60         -1.15          -1.13         -1.17
                                        (0.16)        (0.16)         (0.17)        (0.16)         (0.16)        (0.16)

    Month-of-sample FEs                   HP            kW            OPE            HP             kW           OPE
       interaction                        bins          bins          bins           bins           bins         bins
                       elec )
    IV: Default log (Pit                  Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

    Fixed effects:
     Unit × month-of-year                 Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
     Month-of-sample                      Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
     Unit × physical capital                                                          Yes           Yes           Yes

    Service point units                  11,173        11,173        11,173         11,173        11,173         11,173
    Months                                117           117            117           117           117             117
    Observations                         1.05M         1.05M         1.05M          1.05M         1.05M          1.05M
    First stage F -statistic              3983          4056          4164           6989          7123           7406
Notes: This table conducts sensitivity analysis on our monthly electricity regressions by interacting month-of-sample fixed
effects with bins of pump horsepower, kW, and operating efficiency. Columns (1)­(3) replicate Column (2) from Table 3, while
Columns (4)­(6) replicate Column (3) from Table 3. Columns (1) and (4) interact month-of-sample fixed effects with 11 bins
of nameplate horsepower: 1 bin below PGE's 35 hp cutoff, and 10 bins for deciles of the distribution of hp above this cutoff.
Columns (2) and (5) interact month-of-sample fixed effects with 11 bins of kW usage, as measured in APEP pump tests: 1 bin
below PGE's 35 hp cutoff (equivalent to 26.1 kW), and 10 bins for deciles of the distribution of measured kW above this cutoff.
Columns (3) and (6) interact month-of-sample fixed effects with 10 bins for deciles of operating pump efficiency recorded in
APEP pump tests. See notes under Table 3 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service
point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




than in our preferred model. In Columns (4)­(6), we include this fixed effect, and recover
estimates that are quantitatively similar to our preferred estimate (-1.17 from Table 3),
providing reassurance that our results are not being driven by differential sorting into tariff
categories over time.


D.3       Sensitivity to kWh/AF construction
Because we do not observe groundwater extraction or costs directly, we must construct Qwater
                                                                                       it
      water
and Pit     by scaling our electricity data by a conversion factor:

                                  kWh      [Lift (feet)] × [Constant]
                                        =
                                   AF it Operating pump efficiency (%) it

While operating pump efficiency is a variable in our data, lift is a function of the pump's
drawdown and the static water level. We use rasterized versions of CASGEM well measure-


                                                               59
ments to construct lift. Appendix Table D3 presents sensitivity analyses for our groundwater
elasticity estimates using a variety of approaches to construct kWhAF it . In Column (1), we
instrument only with the (log of) the average groundwater depth in each unit's basin. The
resulting point estimate, (-1.36), lies between our preferred electricity-instrument-only esti-
mate of (-1.12) presented in Table 4 and our preferred dual-instrument     ^w estimate of -1.51
presented in Appendix Table B1. In Column (2), we use only the average depth instrument,
and assign units kWhAF it directly from an APEP test, rather than attempting to estimate
it. In Columns (3)­(6), we use the electricity instrument only. In Column (3), we remove
units that do not have reliable measures of drawdown in their APEP test data. In Column
(4), we predict drawdown as a function of groundwater depth, rather than retaining a static
drawdown measurement from an APEP test. In Column (5), we again predict drawdown,
this time using the average basin-wide groundwater level. In Column (6), we restrict our
sample to units that have a groundwater depth measurement within 8 miles prior to ras-
terization. Across all specifications, we find estimates that are quantitatively similar to our
central estimate of -1.12.




                                              60
                      Table D3: Sensitivity to kWh/AF construction ­ Groundwater

                                                     (1)            (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                                     IV             IV           IV            IV            IV            IV
       water )
log (Pit                                         -1.36         -1.09         -1.26         -1.12          -1.13         -1.28
                                                  (0.32)        (0.15)        (0.37)        (0.16)         (0.15)        (0.18)

kWh/AFit criteria:
  Measured, not estimated                                         Yes
  Drop tests with bad drawdown                                                   Yes
  Time-varying predicted drawdown                                                              Yes           Yes
  Mean groundwater depth                                                                                     Yes
  Depth measured w/in 8 miles                                                                                              Yes

Instrument:
  log (Avg depth in basin)                          Yes           Yes
                 elec )
  Default log (Pit                                                               Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes

Fixed effects:
 Unit × month-of-year                               Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Month-of-sample                                    Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
 Unit × physical capital                            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

Groundwater time step                             Month         Month          Month         Month         Month         Month

Service point units                               10,141         10,155        1,562         10,155        10,155        9,930
Months                                             117             117          117            117          117            117
Observations                                      0.87M          0.93M         0.12M         0.93M         0.93M         0.45M
First stage F -statistic                           161            5398          645           2824          2420          2382
   Notes: Each regression replicates our preferred specification from Column (2) of Table 4, while altering our preferred method
   of specifying units' kWh/AF conversion factor. Columns (1)­(2) maintain our preferred kWh/AF definition, but instrument
   for groundwater price using basin-wide average groundwater depths. This leverages only variation in P water driven by changes
   in depth. Column (2) directly assigns kWh/AF as measured in an APEP pump test, which yields a P water variable that is
   independent of changes in groundwater depth. Column (3) removes units without a reliable drawdown measurement from an
   APEP pump test. Columns (4)­(5) construct kWh/AF using predicted drawdown as a function of groundwater depth, rather
   than fixed drawdown within pumps over time. Column (5) also applies basin-wide average depth to construct kWh/AF, rather
   than using localized measurements from groundwater rasters. Column (6) uses rasterized groundwater measurements, but
   drop the (roughly half of) observations without a contemporaneous groundwater measurement within 8 miles. See notes under
   Table 4 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample.
   Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




   D.4       Sensitivity to geographic controls
   In our preferred specifications in Tables 3 and 4, we include unit-by-month-of-year fixed
   effects and month-of-sample fixed effects. However, it is possible that confounders that vary
   both by location and time remain. In Appendix Tables D4 and D5, we add additional ge-
   ographic controls by interacting our month-of-sample fixed effects with fixed effects for a

                                                               61
                        Table D4: Sensitivity to geographic controls ­ Electricity

                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)
                                                    IV             IV             IV              IV              IV
                  elec )
           log (Pit                             -1.12          -1.09          -1.08           -1.10            -1.02
                                                 (0.15)         (0.15)         (0.15)          (0.15)           (0.15)

           Month-of-sample FEs                  Climate         County          Basin        Sub-Basin          Water
               interaction                       zone                                                           district
                              elec )
           IV: Default log (Pit                    Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

           Fixed effects:
            Unit × month-of-year                   Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
            Month-of-sample                        Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
            Unit × physical capital                Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

           Service point units                   11,167          11,170         11,159          11,151          11,156
           Months                                  117             117            117             117             117
           Observations                          1.04M           1.05M          1.04M           1.04M           1.04M
           First stage F -statistic               7548            7527           7375            7579            7648
Notes: This table conducts sensitivity analysis on our preferred electricity specification from Column (3) of Table 3, by in-
teracting month-of-sample fixed effects with different geographic variables. California comprises 16 climate zones, and PGE
agriculture customers are distributed across 11 distinct climate zones. Sub-basins are administrative sub-divisions of groundwa-
ter basins; this estimation sample includes agricultural consumers from 46 unique groundwater basins and 95 unique sub-basins.
The sample also includes units assigned to 125 unique water districts; Column (5) includes a separate set of month-of-sample
fixed effects for units not assigned to a water district. See notes under Table 3 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




variety of different geographic scales that may be relevant for agricultural production: cli-
mate zone, county, groundwater basin, groundwater sub-basin, and water district to allay
these concerns. In Appendix Table D4, we present results for electricity. When we interact
our month-of-sample fixed effects with these geographic fixed effects, we find very similar
estimates to those in Table 3. Including month-of-sample-by-water-district fixed effects at-
tenuates the estimates the most, to -1.02, though we cannot reject that this is the same as
the -1.12 in our preferred specification. Appendix Table D5, presents results for groundwa-
ter. When we interact our month-of-sample fixed effects with these geographic fixed effects,
we again find very similar estimates to those in Table 4. Once again, including month-of-
sample-by-water-district fixed effects attenuates the estimates the most, to -0.95, though
this elasticity is still large and highly statistically significant.




                                                                 62
                     Table D5: Sensitivity to geographic controls ­ Groundwater

                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)
                                                 IV             IV            IV              IV             IV
                 water )
          log (Pit                            -1.08         -1.05          -1.05          -1.05           -0.95
                                               (0.15)        (0.15)         (0.15)         (0.15)          (0.14)

          Month-of-sample FEs                 Climate        County          Basin       Sub-Basin         Water
              interaction                      zone                                                        district
                             elec )
          IV: Default log (Pit                   Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes

          Fixed effects:
           Unit × month-of-year                  Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
           Month-of-sample                       Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes
           Unit × physical capital               Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes            Yes

          Service point units                  10,150         10,152        10,142          10,135         10,136
          Months                                 117            117           117             117            117
          Observations                         0.93M          0.93M         0.93M           0.93M          0.93M
          First stage F -statistic              3827           4379          3573            4511           4239
Notes: This table conducts sensitivity analysis on our preferred water specification from Column (2) of Table 4, by interacting
month-of-sample fixed effects with different geographic variables. California comprises 16 climate zones, and PGE agriculture
customers are distributed across 11 distinct climate zones. Sub-basins are administrative sub-divisions of groundwater basins;
this estimation sample includes agricultural consumers from 46 unique groundwater basins and 95 unique sub-basins. The
sample also includes units assigned to 125 unique water districts; Column (5) includes a separate set of month-of-sample fixed
effects for units not assigned to a water district. See notes under Table 4 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




D.5       Sensitivity to weather controls
Weather is a key input in the agricultural production process. While we do not include
weather controls in our main estimates, because we expect weather to be orthogonal to
our within-category electricity tariff instrument, conditional on unit-by-month-of-year and
month-of-sample fixed effects. Nevertheless, we present sensitivities to the inclusion of
weather controls here. We obtained gridded daily temperature and precipitation data from
PRISM, and geographically matched this weather data to our units using CLU centroids.
We average daily maximum and minimum temperatures and sum daily precipitation over
all days in each month to construct monthly weather controls. Appendix Table D6 presents
the results of adding weather controls to our main estimates. In Columns (1) and (4), we
add a monthly precipitation control to our electricity and water regressions, respectively. In
Columns (2) and (5), we also add average daily minimum and maximum temperature. In
Columns (3) and (6), we also add 1-month-lagged temperature and precipitation. Across
all specifications, our electricity and groundwater elasticity estimates remain quantitatively
similar to our preferred estimates in Table 3 and 4: -1.17 and -1.12, respectively.


                                                              63
                                  Table D6: Sensitivity to weather controls

                                                     Electricity                               Groundwater
                                           (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                           IV             IV             IV            IV             IV             IV
           elec )
    log (Pit                            -1.18         -1.17          -1.19          -1.12         -1.12          -1.14
                                         (0.16)        (0.16)         (0.16)         (0.15)        (0.15)         (0.15)

    Weather controls:
     Precipitation                         Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Temperature                                          Yes           Yes                           Yes           Yes
     Lagged precipitation                                               Yes                                         Yes
     Lagged temperature                                                 Yes                                         Yes
                       elec )
    IV: Default log (Pit                   Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

    Fixed effects:
     Unit × month-of-year                  Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Month-of-sample                       Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     Unit × physical capital               Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes

    Service point units                  11,173         11,173        11,172         10,155         10,155        10,154
    Months                                 117            117           116            117            117           116
    Observations                         1.05M          1.05M         1.04M          0.93M          0.93M         0.93M
    First stage F -statistic              7387           7390          7348           3033           3054          2977
Notes: This table adds weather controls to our preferred specifications for electricity (Column (3) of Table 3) and groundwater
(Column (2) of Table 4). We assign daily precipitation, maximum temperature, and minimum temperatures to each unit's
latitude and longitude, using daily rasters from PRISM. We sum daily precipitation over all days in each month, and average
daily maximum and minimum temperatures over all days in each month. Columns (3) and (6) control for 1-month lags in all
three variables. See notes under Tables 3 and Table 4 for further details. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered
by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




D.6        Sensitivity to field assignments
Our PGE data are geographically resolved to the service point (SP) level. In order to
estimate impacts of electricity and groundwater costs on land use, we must match these
SPs to geographic features with agricultural meaning. We use the USDA's Common Land
Unit (CLU) as our main agricultural unit of analysis. A CLU is defined as "is the smallest
unit of land that has a permanent, contiguous boundary, a common land cover and land
management, a common owner and a common producer in agricultural land associated with
USDA farm programs. CLU boundaries are delineated from relatively permanent features
such as fence lines, roads, and/or waterways." 5 We use a 2008 CLU shapefile: in the 2008
   5. https://www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/aerial-photography/imagery-products/common-
land-unit-clu/index



                                                                64
            Table D7: Sensitivity to CLU assignments and groupings ­ Groundwater

                                                    (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                    IV            IV             IV            IV             IV
                water )
         log (Pit                               -1.11          -1.09         -1.35          -0.96         -1.09
                                                 (0.19)         (0.16)        (0.26)         (0.19)        (0.17)

         Sample criteria:
           Inside CLU polygon                       Yes
           Drop CLU inconsistencies                               Yes
           Pumps per CLU group                                                    1            2+
           Cluster by CLU group                                                                              Yes
                            elec )
         IV: Default log (Pit                       Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

         Fixed effects:
          Unit × month-of-year                      Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
          Month-of-sample                           Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
          Unit × physical capital                   Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes

         Groundwater time step                    Month         Month          Month         Month         Month

         Service point units                      5,913         9,702          2,677         7,072          4,708
         Months                                     117           117            117           117            117
         Observations                             0.55M         0.89M          0.25M         0.65M          0.90M
         First stage F -statistic                  2059          2896           1334          2009           2548
Notes: Each regression replicates our preferred specification in Column (2) from Table 4, while conducting sensitivity on unit-
specific assignments to CLU polygons (i.e. fields). Column (1) includes only units with coordinates that are fully inside their
assigned CLU polygon. Column (2) drops units with inconsistent, problematic, or internally conflicting CLU assignments.
Columns (3)­(5) group CLUs that lie within the same tax parcels. Columns (3) includes only units that are the singleton
(confirmed) groundwater pump in their CLU group. Columns (4) includes units in CLU groups with multiple (confirmed)
groundwater pumps. Columns (5) two-way clusters by CLU group and by month-of-sample, with 4708 unique CLU groups.
See notes under Table 4 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses) are two-way clustered by service point and by
month-of-sample, except in Column (5). Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




Farm Bill, CLUs were deemed to be confidential, and future shapefiles were not made publicly
available. In part because PGE's SPs often lie at the edge of property boundaries (i.e., on
roads, and therefore easily accessible), there is the potential for measurement error in the
SP­CLU match. In Appendix Table D7, we present sensitivities on this assignment process.
In Column (1), we keep only units that lie within a CLU polygon. In Column (2), we drop
units with inconsistent CLU assignments. In Column (3), we restrict the sample to SPs
whose CLUs do not contain any other APEP pumps. In Column (4), we restrict the sample
to SPs whose CLUs contain multiple pumps. In Column (5), we two-way cluster our standard
errors by CLU and month-of-sample. We find similar elasticities across all specifications.




                                                             65
D.7     Sensitivity to functional form
In our main specifications in Tables 3 and 4, we use the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) trans-
formation for our dependent variables, sinh-1 (Qelec
                                                  it ) and sinh
                                                               -1
                                                                  (Qwater
                                                                    it    ), since 14 percent of
our monthly observations are zeroes. The IHS behaves much like the log, but admits zeroes
(Bellemare and Wichman (2020)). Here, we present sensitivities using different dependent
variables: the IHS transformation, excluding zero-valued observations, log(Q), log(1 + Q),
and log(1 + 100Q). Appendix Table D8 presents electricity results, and Appendix Table D9
presents groundwater results. Both tables are laid out identically. In Column (1), we repli-
cate our preferred specification from the main text, where we use the IHS transformation
with no sample restrictions. In Column (2), we retain the IHS transformation, but only use
strictly positive-valued observations, to match the sample used by the standard log. We find
that our estimates attenuate strongly, moving from an elasticity of -1.17 to -0.31 (electric-
ity) and -1.12 to -0.30 (water). Reassuringly, we find identical point estimates when we
use log(Q) as the dependent variable in Column (3). In Column (4), we use log(1 + Q), in
order to use the log while retaining the zero-valued observations, and our point estimates
rise (a much larger -0.78 for electricity; a smaller -0.36 for water). Finally, Column (5)
uses log(1 + 100Q), and we again recover less attenuated estimates: -1.12 for electricity
and -0.71 for water. This suggests that our choice of functional form is not driving our
results. However, zeroes are important in this context, because they are likely associated
with farmers fallowing their land or switching crops. Finding that our elasticity estimates
are driven in part by these mechanisms is consistent with our discussion in Section 6 in the
main text, and echoed by our intensive-vs.-extensive margin results in Table 6.




                                              66
                    Table D8: Sensitivity to IHS vs. log transformation ­ Electricity

                                            (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)
                                            IV              IV             IV              IV                 IV
           elec )
    log (Pit                            -1.17           -0.31           -0.31          -0.78              -1.12
                                         (0.16)          (0.08)          (0.08)         (0.11)             (0.15)

    LHS transformation:                sinh-1 (Q)       sinh-1 (Q)       log(Q)       log(1 + Q)       log(1 + 100Q)

    Sample restriction:
      Qit > 0                                               Yes            Yes
                       elec )
    IV: Default log (Pit                    Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes

    Fixed effects:
     Unit × month-of-year                   Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes
     Month-of-sample                        Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes
     Unit × physical capital                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes

    Service point units                   11,173          11,109         11,109          11,173             11,173
    Months                                  117             117            117             117                117
    Observations                          1.05M           0.89M          0.89M           1.05M              1.05M
    First stage F -statistic               7382            6841           6841            7382               7382
Notes: This table conducts sensitivity analysis on the transformation of the dependent variable Qelec . Column (1) reproduces
our preferred specification from Column (3) of Table 3 using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. where the dependent
variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of electricity consumed by service point i in month t. Column (2) uses
the same transformation but removed zeros to align with the natural log transformation in Column (3). Columns (4)­(5) apply
the natural log + 1 transformation. Column (5) also scales the dependent variable by 100, which nearly matches our results
using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. See notes under Table 3 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                             67
                Table D9: Sensitivity to IHS vs. log transformation ­ Groundwater

                                            (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)                (5)
                                            IV              IV             IV              IV                 IV
           water )
    log (Pit                            -1.12           -0.30           -0.30          -0.36              -0.71
                                         (0.15)          (0.08)          (0.08)         (0.05)             (0.10)

    LHS transformation:                sinh-1 (Q)       sinh-1 (Q)       log(Q)       log(1 + Q)       log(1 + 100Q)

    Sample restriction:
      Qit > 0                                               Yes            Yes
                       elec )
    IV: Default log (Pit                    Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes

    Fixed effects:
     Unit × month-of-year                   Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes
     Month-of-sample                        Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes
     Unit × physical capital                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes                Yes

    Service point units                   10,155          10,091         10,091          10,155             10,155
    Months                                  117             117            117             117                117
    Observations                          0.93M           0.79M          0.79M           0.93M              0.93M
    First stage F -statistic               3021            2629           2629            3021               3021
Notes: This table conducts sensitivity analysis on the transformation of the dependent variable Qwater . Column (1) reproduces
our preferred specification from Column (2) of Table 4 using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. where the dependent
variable is the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation of electricity consumed by service point i in month t. Column (2) uses
the same transformation but removed zeros to align with the natural log transformation in Column (3). Columns (4)­(5) apply
the natural log + 1 transformation. Column (5) also scales the dependent variable by 100, which nearly matches our results
using the inverse hyperbolic sine transformation. See notes under Table 4 for further detail. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are two-way clustered by service point and by month-of-sample. Significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.10.




                                                             68
