                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE ECONOMIC RIPPLE EFFECTS OF COVID-19

                                       Francisco J. Buera
                                      Roberto N. Fattal-Jaef
                                       Hugo Hopenhayn
                                      P. Andres Neumeyer
                                         Yongseok Shin

                                       Working Paper 28704
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28704


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Juan Pablo Nicolini, Pedro Teles, and seminar participants at Banco Central de Chile,
Banco de Mexico, Banco de Portugal, Bank of England, Universidad Torcuato di Tella, Virtual
Macro Seminar (VMACS), and the World Bank for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Francisco J. Buera, Roberto N. Fattal-Jaef, Hugo Hopenhayn, P. Andres Neumeyer,
and Yongseok Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Economic Ripple Effects of COVID-19
Francisco J. Buera, Roberto N. Fattal-Jaef, Hugo Hopenhayn, P. Andres Neumeyer, and Yongseok
Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 28704
April 2021
JEL No. E32,E44,L25

                                         ABSTRACT

What are the effects of a temporary lockdown of the economy? Do firms' deteriorating balance
sheets and labor market frictions propagate and prolong the effects? We answer these questions in
a model with financial and labor market frictions. The model makes quantitative predictions about
the effect of lockdowns of varying magnitude and duration on output, employment and firm
dynamics. We find that the effects are not persistent if (i) workers on temporary layoff can be
recalled by their previous employers without having to go through the frictional labor market and
(ii) the government provides employment subsidies to firms during the lockdown. However, the
effects are heterogeneous and young non-essential firms are disproportionately affected. In
addition, if lockdowns lead to more permanent reallocation across industries, the recession
becomes more protracted. Although the paper is motivated by the lockdowns during the Covid-19
pandemic, the framework can be readily applied to large, temporary shocks of different nature.


Francisco J. Buera                             P. Andres Neumeyer
Department of Economics                        Universidad Torcuato Di Tella
Washington University in St. Louis             pan@utdt.edu
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130                            Yongseok Shin
and NBER                                       Department of Economics
fjbuera@wustl.edu                              Washington University in St. Louis
                                               One Brookings Drive
Roberto N. Fattal-Jaef                         St. Louis, MO 63130
Development Research Group                     and NBER
The World Bank                                 yshin@wustl.edu
1818 H St. N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
rfattaljaef@worldbank.org

Hugo Hopenhayn
UCLA
Department of Economics
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
hopen@econ.ucla.edu
       1     Introduction
       The goal of this paper is to quantitatively evaluate the ripple effects of temporarily
       shutting down a large part of the economy, as implemented by many countries in
       response to the Covid-19 pandemic. How long does it take for the economy to go back
       to normal once the shutdown is lifted? What explains the cross-country differences in
       the depth of the recession and the speed of the recovery? Do negative balance sheet
       effects or labor market frictions significantly slow down the recovery? Which firms are
       more affected and which ones recover faster or slower? How do the macroeconomic
       and firm dynamics change if the temporary shutdown shock generated lasting changes
       in some industries, to which firms adapted?
           Our quantitative analysis is motivated by the Covid-19 recession that started with
       the shutdown of nonessential, contact-intensive businesses in the second quarter of
       2020.1 The ideas in the model we propose, however, go beyond the case of a pandemic-
       induced shutdown. They apply to other large temporary shocks, such as natural or
       nuclear disasters, wars or other events that severely disrupt parts of the economy for
       a short duration of time.
           We answer the above questions using a model economy with entrepreneurial pro-
       duction subject to financial and labor market frictions. In our benchmark quantitative
       experiment the shutdown shock causes a short-lived V-shaped recession with small
       persistent effects if (i) workers on temporary layoff can be recalled by their previous
       employers without having to go through the frictional labor market and (ii) laid-off
       workers receive unemployment insurance. An equivalent institutional setup that yields
       a quick recovery is one where non-essential workers remain employed and the govern-
       ment pays the wage bill of shut down firms. A longer lockdown or one that shuts down
       a larger part of the economy has a predictably larger impact for longer periods, but the
       economy still rebounds quickly after the lockdown ends. Rigid labor markets policies
       without balance sheet support result in more protracted recoveries.2
           It is possible that the temporary shutdown shock can lead to lasting changes in peo-
       ple's and firms' preferences and behaviors. The idea is that the pandemic renders some
       goods and services less appealing (e.g., cruises) and others more appealing (e.g., tele-
       conferencing and online shopping, including food and grocery delivery) to consumers
       in a permanent way, and some firms adapt better to new practices. We model this as a
       permanent reallocation shock that reshuffles productivity across firms without affect-
   1
     Nonessential contact-intensive industries represent 25% of final demand and 35% of employment in the
US (Leibovici et al., 2020). GDP in these industries fell by 40% to 54% between the end of 2019 and the
second quarter of 2020. Consumption of transportation services, recreation services, and food services and
accommodations fell by 41, 54, and 40 percent, respectively, between 2019Q4 and 2020Q2.
   2
     This result extends to small open economies with tighter financial frictions.



                                                    1
       ing their average productivity.3 We find that, if the reallocation shock accompanies
       the temporary shutdown shock, the recession becomes significantly protracted. The
       reallocation shock generates not only unemployment but also misallocation of capital
       and labor, because some of those firms that become suddenly more productive are
       too credit-constrained to produce at the larger scale corresponding to their new pro-
       ductivity. The misallocation gets undone slowly over time, as the credit-constrained
       productive entrepreneurs save up and overcome the constraint. The one-time realloca-
       tion shock leaves a persistent negative effect on aggregate TFP and GDP.4
          Both the shutdown shock and the reallocation shock have heterogeneous effects
       across firms. For young non-essential firms, which are more likely to be financially
       constrained, the shutdown shock has an important negative balance sheet effect. Some
       of them exit and, even for those that remain, it takes several years for their employment
       to fully recover. The reallocation shock causes a burst of firm creation and destruction.
          Our model builds on the model with financial and labor market frictions in Buera
       et al. (2015). The most important difference is that we allow for recall (or rest)
       unemployment. Workers who are temporarily laid off due to the shutdown can return
       to their previous employer without having to go through the hiring market subject to
       matching frictions (Alvarez and Shimer, 2011). This assumption is supported by the
       analysis of Hall and Kudlyak (2020), who show that unemployed workers with jobs
       (on furlough or temporary layoff) accounted for 93% of the increase in unemployment
       between the first and the second quarter of 2020. Unemployed workers with jobs
       returned to employment much faster than "jobless" unemployed workers who had no
       job to return to. Bick and Blandin (2020), Cajner et al. (2020) and Lee et al. (2021)
       provide further evidence on the importance of recall unemployment in 2020.
          The second important assumption is the institutional setup in which firms can cost-
       lessly lay off workers during the shutdown, unemployed workers collect unemployment
       insurance benefits with a 100% replacement rate (Ganong et al., 2020), and the unem-
       ployment insurance is financed with long-term debt. This institutional setup captures
       the policy adopted by the US government through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and
       Economic Security (CARES) Act. Other countries, for example the UK, supported
       firms and workers in non-essential sectors during the pandemic through transfers to
       firms to cover wage bills during the shutdown.5 In our model, supporting firms' bal-
       ance sheet by covering their labor costs and providing income insurance to workers are
       equivalent. They only differ in the label of the workers who are not working and whose
   3
     Barrero et al. (2020) report evidence of expected reallocation shocks using data of expected sales and
employment extracted from an online firm survey.
   4
     Without these frictions, a pure reallocation shock would have no aggregate effect.
   5
     The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) in the US CARES Act did the same, but only for small
businesses.



                                                    2
wage is paid for by taxes.
    These assumptions play an important role in the speed of the economic recovery.
Without recall unemployment, all laid off workers must go through the frictional labor
market to find new jobs when the shutdown ends, substantially slowing down the
recovery. Without the balance sheet support, firms suffer stronger deterioration of
their balance sheets during the lockdown and cannot rehire all the labor they laid off
during the shutdown. The workers who are not re-hired by their previous employers
have to go through the labor market matching process as the demand for labor recovers.
As a result, the recovery will be more drawn out.
    This paper is part of a growing literature on the macroeconomic effects of Covid-
19. A strand of the literature traces how household behavior responds and feeds
back to disease dynamics and government policies, using integrated macroeconomic
and epidemiological models (e.g., Eichenbaum et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020; Aum
et al., 2021; Hevia et al., 2021). Guerrieri et al. (2020) shows how complementarities
across sectors and household credit constraints propagate and lead to aggregate demand
shortages. While our paper abstracts from the epidemiological side, it complements
this literature by focusing on the lasting effects of shutdowns after they are gone
and by analyzing how shutdowns and economic policy affect firms in an environment
with credit constraints and labor market frictions. Our analysis is in the tradition of
Bernanke and Gertler (1989) who study the dynamic repercussions of balance sheet
effects. Our focus on the firm side separates us from the large literature on the economic
impact of the pandemic and our use of recall unemployment in a quantitative framework
is another unique contribution.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows the data on the
recession and recovery across countries and also some relevant micro-level data. Section
3 develops the model. Section 4 works out the quantitative exercises using the model
to better understand the role of various model elements, including the nature of shocks
and the policy responses. Section 5 studies the role of the reallocation shock and
Section 6 concludes.



2     Motivating Evidence
The Covid-19 shutdown was one of the largest shocks to GDP on record for most
countries around the globe (Neumeyer et al., 2020). In this section we focus on the
recession and early recovery of OECD countries and then delve deeper into the cases
of the United States and New Zealand.
    Figure 1 shows the data on GDP for the second, third, and fourth quarters of 2020
for OECD countries relative to their respective GDP before the pandemic in the last


                                            3
                                  Fig. 1: GDP in OECD countries
                     105%


                     100%


                     95%
      % of Q4-2019




                     90%


                     85%


                     80%


                     75%
                            75%   80%      85%       90%        95%     100%   105%
                                        Q2-2020 GDP as % of GDP Q4-2019
                                            Q3-2020       Q4-2020

                       Source: OECDstats.

quarter of 2019. The dispersion of observations along the horizontal axis shows the
heterogeneity in the impact of the shutdown in the second quarter, which ranges from
5% to more tan 20%. Along the vertical axis, the speed of the recovery in the third
and the fourth quarter is measured by the distance between each point and the 45
degree line (no recovery) and the 100% (full recovery) line. For example, the United
States and New Zealand had a similar reduction of GDP in the second quarter of
2020, 10% relative to the pre-pandemic quarterly GDP, but the recovery was different.
New Zealand's output was 103% and 101% of the fourth quarter of 2019 GDP in the
third and fourth quarters of 2020, respectively, while the corresponding numbers for
the United States were 97% and 98%. Table 2 in Appendix A has the data underlying
Figure 1.
   In our model, we take the size of the shutdown as an unanticipated shock, which
determines the fall in GDP during the lockdown. We are interested in characterizing
the speed of the recovery.
   We find the cases of the United States and New Zealand of particular interest.
The US is our calibration benchmark and we assess the quantitative implications of
our laboratory economy using the US data. Our interest in New Zealand, in turn,
lies in the starkness of its containment policies. It implemented a very intense, but
brief shutdown in the second quarter of 2020 and, except for some time intervals and
locations, lifted mobility restrictions thereafter. In this sense, New Zealand fits very


                                                      4
       well our benchmark experiment of a one quarter shutdown.6


                                 Fig. 2: New Zealand and United States

                                                              1
            1


                                                            0.95
          0.9



          0.8                                                0.9

                     GDP
                                                                       Priv Employment +
                     Consumption                                       Unemp with Jobs
          0.7                                               0.85
                     Investment                                        Priv Employent

           Q1-19         Q3-19       Q1-20      Q4-20            9        9        9          0         0        1
                                                              n-1      n-1      v-1        r-2       p-2      b-2
                                                            Ja       Ju       No       Ap         Se        Fe




                                                              1
            1


                                                            0.95
          0.9



          0.8                                                0.9



          0.7                                               0.85

           Q1-19         Q3-19       Q1-20      Q4-20        Q1-19            Q3-19          Q1-20           Q4-20

                Source: Aggregate macroeconomic data for the United States is from FRED. New
                Zealand data from https://www.stats.govt.nz/ and data on unemployed with jobs
                from the Current Population Survey as reported in Hall and Kudlyak (2020). The
                dotted black lines in the top right panel are the monthly averages for each 2020
                quarter of the sum of US private employment and unemployed persons with jobs.




          Figure 2 shows the dynamics of macroeconomic aggregates in New Zealand and
       the US. The left panels depict GDP, consumption, and investment. In both countries,
       GDP fell about 10% in the second quarter of 2020 and rebounded quickly, the US
       concluding the year about 2% below the pre-pandemic level, and New Zealand about
       1% above it. Consumption and investment also fell sharply during the second quarter,
       the contraction in investment being more pronounced in New Zealand than in the US.
   6
     Figure 16 in Appendix B shows, using data from Google mobility reports on visits to shopping venues
and workplaces, that New Zealand had a brief intense shutdown and that the US experienced a longer-lasting
one.



                                                        5
          The dynamics of consumption are worth emphasizing, for they are informative
      about the nature of shocks that we introduce into our model. Interpreting the Covid-
      19 shock as a large temporary decline in TFP in a neoclassical growth model, invest-
      ment would experience a sharp contraction mirroring households' desire to smooth
      consumption. In contrast, the data shows a drop in consumption that roughly mimics
      the decline in GDP. Empirically, the fall in consumption is rationalized by the peculiar-
      ities of the Covid-induced recession, which disproportionately affects contact-intensive
      consumption activities. For the model, then, it means we must introduce a comple-
      mentary force that counteracts the consumption smoothing. We do this by means of a
      demand shock that raises the marginal utility of consumption in the period following
      the lockdown. Our calibration section discusses how we discipline this demand shock.
          The right panel of Figure 2 shows the evolution of private employment normalized
      by its value in December 2019 in the United States (monthly data) and in the fourth
      quarter of 2019 in New Zealand (quarterly data). The different institutional setup in
      the two countries explains the difference in employment dynamics. While in the US
      firms can easily furlough employees, who collect unemployment insurance while they
      are temporarily laid off, in New Zealand firms received a subsidy to keep employees
      who are not working due to the shutdown on their payroll. As a result, the fall in
      (measured) employment in the second quarter of 2020 is small in New Zealand. The
      US institutional setup motivates our modeling choice of having rest unemployment
      with full-replacement unemployment insurance benefits. If we add to the number of
      employed workers in the United States the unemployed with jobs, the employment
      dynamics of the two countries become more similar.7 In the last three quarters of
      2020, this measure of employment took the values of 97.4%, 96.5%, and 95.2% relative
      to the US employment in the last quarter of 2019, while New Zealand's employment in
      the second and the third quarters of 2020 was 98.5% and 97% of its value at the end
      of 2019.
          In our benchmark economy with balance sheet support policies that shields shut
      down firms from paying wages during the shutdown, the ripple effects of a shutdown are
      small. These policies could be implemented by furloughing workers, who then receive
      unemployment insurance benefits, or transferring resources to firms so that they pay the
      wages of employees who are "unemployed" within the firm. This sort of policies were
      adopted by New Zealand and the United States, among other countries. For example,
      the Small Business Pulse Survey conducted by the US Census Bureau reports that
      over 70% of small businesses received assistance from the PPP and other programs.
      During the shutdown, their cash-on-hand increased and the arrears in servicing loans
      and other costs decreased.
7
    Hall and Kudlyak (2020) refer to those on temporary layoff as unemployed with jobs.



                                                   6
         The cross-country differences in the speed of recovery could be the result of weaker
      balance sheet support policies, longer lockdowns, or reallocation shocks. In our inter-
      pretation, the slow recovery of employment and output in the United States relative
      to New Zealand is the consequence of a more prolonged lockdown, which could also
      have induced a reallocation shock that would not have materialized under a shorter
      lockdown. Concerning the latter, there is mounting evidence in the US that this is
      indeed the case. Barrero et al. (2020) report evidence on reallocation from an online
      survey of businesses, showing that excess job and sales reallocation across firms rose
      sharply since the pandemic struck. The Business Formation Statistics (BFS) reported
      in Figure 3 and Dinlersoz et al. (2021) also suggest a reallocation shock, manifested
      by a surge in new business applications, following a temporary contraction in the first
      weeks of the pandemic.8 We assess the implications of a reallocation shock in our
      model in Section 5.

                                                                  Fig. 3: Business Formation Statistics


                                                            1800000

                                                            1600000           2006     2007      2008
                                                                              2009     2010      2011
                     Cumulative New Business Applications




                                                            1400000           2012     2013      2014
                                                                              2015     2016      2017
                                                            1200000           2018     2019      2020

                                                            1000000

                                                             800000

                                                             600000

                                                             400000

                                                             200000

                                                                  0
                                                                      1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45 47 49 51
                                                                                                     Weeks




               Source: This figure shows the cumulative new business applications that
               have a high propensity of turning into businesses with payroll, as reported
               in the Business Formation Statistics (BFS), United States Census Bu-
               reau. See https://www.census.gov/econ/bfs/pdf/bfs_current.pdf for
               further details.

  8
   See also Guilford and Scott (2020), who report a version of this figure and also provide real world
examples.




                                                                                                  7
3     Modeling the Great Shutdown
Building on Buera et al. (2015), we model an economy with entrepreneurial production
subject to financial and labor market frictions. There is a continuum of individuals,
who are heterogeneous in their entrepreneurial productivity, employment opportunity,
and wealth. Furthermore, an unanticipated shock can shut down a fraction of them
temporarily, but since it is completely unanticipated, it has no impact on peoples'
behavior ex ante.
    Access to capital is determined by entrepreneurs' wealth through a simple collateral
constraint, motivated by the imperfect enforceability of capital rental contracts. One
entrepreneur can operate only one production unit in a given period. Entrepreneurial
ideas are inalienable, and there is no market for managers or entrepreneurial talent.
    We assume that there is a centralized labor market where hiring entrepreneurs
compete for available workers. The arrival of unemployed workers into this centralized
hiring market is subject to frictions modeled as a simple matching function.
    We model the "Great Shutdown" as the combination of two unanticipated shocks
that hit the economy in the first period, with a period corresponding to a quarter: (i) a
productivity shock (or shutdown shock) affecting a subset of the entrepreneurs, which
we label non-essential, regardless of their productivity or wealth, and (ii) a demand
shock affecting the utility from consumption in the first period. The firms cannot
produce when hit by the shutdown shock, but we assume that the shock disappears in
the following period and that this is common knowledge. Given the transitory nature
of the aggregate shock, we allow for a simple form of rest unemployment in the spirit
of Alvarez and Shimer (2011). Laid-off workers who do not enter the centralized labor
market can be re-hired by their previous employers in the following period without
going through the frictional labor market. Similarly, we assume that the demand shock
disappears in the following period. We extend the model to consider reallocation shocks
(Section 5) and in the robustness section we consider longer and larger shutdowns.


3.1     Model Elements
Demographics and Heterogeneity The population size of the economy is nor-
malized to one with no population growth. People live indefinitely and are heteroge-
neous in their financial wealth a, entrepreneurial productivity z  Z , and employment
opportunity. Their wealth is chosen endogenously by forward-looking saving decisions,
but their entrepreneurial productivity follows an exogenous stochastic process. To be
specific, an individual retains her entrepreneurial productivity from one period to the
next with probability  . With probability 1 -  , she has to draw a new entrepreneurial
productivity from a time-invariant distribution with a cumulative density µ(z ). The


                                           8
new draw is independent of her previous productivity level but  > 0 makes the
process persistent. In each period, an individual with an employment opportunity
chooses whether to work for a wage or to operate an individual-specific technology (en-
trepreneurship). Those without an employment opportunity choose between searching
for a job and entrepreneurship.
   The unanticipated lockdown in period t = 1 temporarily shuts down a fraction
 of the entrepreneurs, labeled as non-essential, and is orthogonal to their wealth or
entrepreneurial productivity.
   Employed workers earn a wage that clears the hiring market in each period. Un-
employed workers receive unemployment benefits and search for a job. Following the
unanticipated shutdown shock, unemployed workers may rest and wait to be recalled
by their previous employers in the following period.

Preferences Individual preferences are described by the following expected utility
over sequences of consumption, ct :


                                                                          -
                                                                       c1
                   U (c) = E           t-1 t u (ct )   ,   u (ct ) =    t
                                                                            ,
                                                                       1-
                                t=1

where  is the discount factor,  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and t
is the sequence describing the unanticipated preference shock, with 1 < 1 and t =
1, for all t > 1. There is no disutility from working or searching for a job. The
expectation is taken over the realizations of the entrepreneurial productivity z but not
over the unanticipated shutdown or preference shocks. These shocks are completely
unanticipated but, upon their arrival, their future paths are completely deterministic.

Technology An entrepreneur with productivity z produces using capital k and labor
l according to a decreasing-return-to-scale production function f :

                                      zf (k, l) = zk  l ,                            (1)

where  and  are the elasticities of output with respect to capital and labor, with
 +  < 1.

Financial Markets Productive capital and government bonds are the only assets
in the economy. There is a perfectly-competitive financial intermediary that receives
deposits, rents out capital to entrepreneurs, and invests in government bonds. Both
assets are safe and the return on deposits and government debt--i.e. the interest rate



                                                9
       in the economy--is denoted by rt . The zero-profit condition of the intermediary implies
       that the rental price of capital is rt +  , where  is the depreciation rate of capital.
           We assume that entrepreneurs' capital rental k is limited by a collateral constraint
       k  a, where a  0 is individual wealth and  measures the degree of credit frictions,
       with  = + corresponding to perfect credit markets and  = 1 to financial autarky
       where all capital has to be self-financed by entrepreneurs. The same  applies to
       everyone.9

       Labor Markets We first describe the workings of the labor market without rest
       unemployment, which becomes relevant only after the unanticipated arrival of the tem-
       porary shutdown shock. Entrepreneurs hire new workers in a competitive centralized
       hiring market. We assume that (i) all employed workers must be paid the wage that
       clears the hiring market in each period and (ii) employers may terminate the employ-
       ment relationship at any time.
           Unemployed workers, whether because they are laid off or they quit entrepreneur-
       ship, must re-enter the hiring market before getting employed, and this is where the
       labor market frictions matter. To be specific, a matching function determines the frac-
       tion of the currently unemployed that enters the centralized hiring market, in which
       everyone gets hired at the market-clearing wage. It is assumed that all unemployed
       workers face the same probability of entering the hiring market.10
           Formally, denoting with Mt the number of unemployed workers that enter the hiring
       market in period t, the matching function is:

                                               Mt =  (Ut + JDt )                                           (2)

       where Ut is the number of unemployed workers at the end of the previous period and
       JDt is the job destruction at the beginning of the current period.11
           The job destruction can be written as:
                                                                                      

            JDt =       max {lt-1 - lt (a, z ) , 0} + I{lt-1 > 0  lt (a, z ) = 0} dGt (a, lt-1 , z )
                                                                                 

                                    layoffs                   exiting entrepreneur

    9
      A microfoundation for this parsimonious constraint is provided in Buera and Shin (2013). Alternatively,
we can assume that entrepreneurs directly own capital, invest in government bonds, and issue bonds subject
to the limit b  (1 - )/k . This decentralization is equivalent provided that the entrepreneurial productivity
for the following period is realized at the end of the current period, before the portfolio choice is made (Moll,
2014).
   10
      Our modeling of the labor market closely follows Alvarez and Veracierto (2001). Our model can also be
interpreted as a simplified version of Veracierto (2016).
   11
      It is critical for the dynamic stability of Ut that a fraction of the laid-off workers and exiting entrepreneurs
enters the hiring market and be employed within the period, as implied by the JDt term appearing in the
right-hand side of equation equation (2).


                                                         10
       where lt is labor demand of an individual (positive for entrepreneurs and zero for
       workers) and Gt is the joint cumulative distribution function of wealth (a), previous
       period employment (lt-1 ), and current entrepreneurial productivity (z ). The second
       term in the integral captures exiting entrepreneurs with indicator functions I, who
       enter the pool of unemployed workers. The employees of exiting entrepreneurs enter
       the first term of the integral.
           The law of motion of the unemployment rate is then:

                                       Ut+1 = Ut + JDt - Mt - U Bt ,                                   (3)

       where the last term U Bt is the measure of new entrepreneurs in period t who were
       unemployed workers at the end of period t - 1. Equations (2) and (3) imply that
       unemployment evolves according to Ut+1 = (1 -  ) (Ut + JDt ) - U Bt .

       Rest Unemployment We enrich the model of the labor market by giving the
       non-essential employers (those hit by the short-lived shutdown shock) the option to
       rehire their laid-off workers as soon as the shock is gone, bypassing the frictional
       labor market represented by the matching function. Following Alvarez and Shimer
       (2011), we refer to this state of the labor market as rest unemployment. Importantly
       for the purpose of this paper, the extent to which employers will be able to recall
       the resting workers is endogenously shaped by the interaction between the financial
       frictions and the lockdown duration. While inactive, firms must still pay for their
       capital rental payments, drawing down their financial assets. As a result, depending on
       the external financing needs of the firms, their ability to rehire and resume operations
       after the lockdown will be shaped by the extent of asset depletion vis-a-vis the collateral
       requirements. The fraction of the resting workers that could not be recalled when the
       lockdown ends will join the regular unemployment pool.12
           The measure of workers laid off in period 1 (when the unanticipated shock hits)
       and recalled by their previous employers in period 2 (when the shutdown ends) is R2 ,
       given by
                         R2 =        max {min {l2 (a, z ), l1- } , 0} dGN
                                                                        2
                                                                          E
                                                                            (a, l1- , z ) ,            (4)

       where l1- is the number of employees in period 1 immediately before the unanticipated
       shock hits, and GN
                        2
                          E is the joint cumulative distribution function in period 2 of those hit

       directly by the shutdown shock, with GN E
                                             2 (, , ) = , the fraction shut down, and
  12
     Although this option is not available in the initial stationary equilibrium, it would not be relevant even if
it were, because our entrepreneurial productivity shock process implies that a firm that is laying off workers
will not increase employment in the following period. If an entrepreneur lays off workers but then is hit by
a higher productivity shock the next period, which implies more hiring, we interpret it as the entrepreneur
starting a new, more productive firm.


                                                        11
       N E standing for non-essential. Only continuing firms have the option to recall their
       former employees who are unemployed, so the probability of keeping the entrepreneurial
       productivity for a period,  , appears. (Again, an entrepreneur who continue to operate
       after hit by the idiosyncratic productivity shock is interpreted as starting a new firm.)
          An inspection of equation (4) shows that the key equilibrium object determining the
       ripple effects from a shutdown shock is given by the joint distribution dGN
                                                                                 2
                                                                                   E (a, l , z ).
                                                                                          1-
       While wages and interest rates also shape the labor demand of an entrepreneur with
       a given productivity and wealth post-lockdown, l2 (a, z ), it is the joint distribution
       of producers across these dimensions that ultimately determines the extent of worker
       recall. The asset depletion that non-essential entrepreneurs suffer during the lockdown
       period shows up in the wealth distribution of continuing entrepreneurs. Because of
       the collateral constraint, an increase in the number of entrepreneurs with a worsened
       financial position undermines the capital and labor demand possibilities of firms post-
       lockdown, thereby weakening the recovery. Lastly, the balance sheet deterioration
       may lead to non-essential entrepreneurs endogenously exiting the market when the
       lockdown ends, as captured by entrepreneurs transitioning to a wealth level for which
       l2 (a, z ) = 0--zero labor demand meaning out of entrepreneurship.
          Given the measure of resting unemployed workers, the measure of workers matched
       to the hiring market in period 1 and the unemployment rate in period 2 are:

                                        M1 =  (U1 + JD1 - R2 )

       and
                                  U2 = U1 + JD1 - M1 - U B1 - R2 .                                (5)

       Unemployment Benefits We assume that unemployed workers receive a transfer
       bt equal to the period wage, which is partially financed with debt to be paid off by
       period T .
          In particular, we assume that for t = 1, · · · , T - 1, the lump-sum tax is constant
       over time t =  B and the debt policy satisfy the budget constraint of the government:

                              B + Bt+1 - Bt = wt Ut+1 + rt Bt , 1  t < T,                         (6)

       with B1 = 0 and Bt = 0 for t  T . That is, the government had no debt prior to the
       unanticipated shutdown shock and chooses the lump sum transfer  B so that it repays
       its debt by period T .13 For t  T , the government reverts to the balanced budget with
  13
     Appendix C considers two alternative debt financing schemes: (i) a full adjustment of the lump sum
transfer to balance the budget every period and, (ii) a laxer repayment option where taxes are held unchanged
for 12 quarters, and increased by a fixed amount thereafter to cancel the debt in 12 years. As shown in the
appendix, our main finding of the swift recovery of output and the unemployment rate remains insensitive


                                                     12
      no debt, i.e., the lump-sum taxes are given by equation

                                          t = wt Ut+1 , t  T,                                    (7)

      where the right-hand side is the product of the wage wt that clears the hiring market
      in each period (because we assume bt = wt ) and the measure of unemployed workers
      at the end of period t, Ut+1 .
          Together with the assumption of no disutility of labor, the bt = wt assumption
      implies that people are indifferent between wage work and unemployment, and if un-
      employed, between going through the matching function and resting. However, the
      unemployment rate is an important variable for the equilibrium dynamics of the ag-
      gregate economy.


      3.2      Individuals' Problem
      In the initial stationary equilibrium, an individual's state is summarized by his financial
      wealth a and entrepreneurial productivity z . To be precise, the state of an individual
      also includes his employment/unemployment status. However, because we assume
      that unemployed benefits are exactly equal to the market wage every period, from an
      individual's point of view, there is no difference between being a wage earner and being
      unemployed.
          With the unanticipated shutdown shock that affects only a fraction of the firms,
      it becomes necessary to distinguish those shut down from those who were not. In a
      completely unanticipated manner, a fraction  of firms are classified as non-essential
      (N E ) to be shut down temporarily, and the remaining 1 -  of firms are classified
      as essential (E ) and continue operation. The classification into the essential and the
      non-essential sector is independent of a firm's productivity or assets, (z, a).
          Assuming that the shock hits the economy in period 1 and disappears the very
      next period, the following is the recursive formulation of an individuals' problem in all
      periods, except for the non-essential entrepreneurs' problem in period 1.


                                        c1-
                    vt (z, a) = max t       +  Et vt+1 (z , a )                                  (8)
                               c,a 0    1-
                           s.t. c + a = max {wt , t (z, a; rt , wt )} + (1 + rt ) a - t

to fiscal policy, while consumption and investment will be more sensitive to these alternative assumptions.
We resume this discussion when presenting baseline results in section 4.




                                                    13
       where

                                t (z, a; r, w) = max zk  l - (rt +  ) k - wt l
                                                     k,l

                                                    s.t.   k  a,

       and the occupation choice of an individual is denoted by ot (a, z )  {0, 1}, meaning
       people choose entrepreneurship (o = 1) if and only if the period profit exceeds the hiring
       market wage (which is the same as the unemployment benefit): wt < t (z, a; rt , wt ).
       The capital input of entrepreneurs is subject to the collateral constraint. We denote
       the labor and capital input choices of an entrepreneur by lt (a, z ) and kt (a, z ), both of
       which are zero for employed and unemployed workers.
           The problem of the entrepreneurs unexpectedly classified as non-essential and shut
       down in period 1 is as follows.

                                                          -
                   NE                                  c1
                                                        1
                  v1  (z1 , a1 , k1- ) = max 1              +  E1 v2 (z2 , a2 )                            (9)
                                         c1 ,a2 0      1-
                                         s.t.   c1 + a2 = - (r1 +  ) k1- + (1 + r1 ) a1 - 1 .

       The timeline is such that the unanticipated shutdown shocks hits after the occupational
       choice and capital rental have been set, given the expectation of factor prices before
       the shock. Non-essential entrepreneur still pay for the capital rental, denoted by
       k1- = k (z1 , a1 ), while no output gets produced. In our baseline quantitative exercise,
       we assume that non-essential entrepreneurs temporarily lay off all their employees,
       who enter rest unemployment. In Section 4.4, we also consider the case where the
       non-essential entrepreneurs must also pay the wage bill even though no output gets
       produced. Once the shutdown shock disappears in period 2, there is no distinction
       between essential and non-essential entrepreneurs, so the continuation value does not
       have the superscript N E anymore.


       3.3      Competitive Equilibrium
       Given an initial distribution of wealth, the previous period's labor input, and en-
       trepreneurial productivity G1 (a, l-1 , z ), initial and terminal values of government debt
       B1 = BT = 0, and tax policy t , a competitive equilibrium comprises prices {wt , rt }t=1 ,
       allocations {ct (a, z ) , at+1 (a, z ) , kt (a, z ) , lt (a, z ) , ot (a, z )}t=1 , the measure of unem-
       ployed workers {Ut }t=1 , the rest unemployed in period 1, R2 , and lump-sum taxes
                   T -1
        t =  B     t=1
                          and {t = wt Ut+1 }t=T such that:
                                                           14

  14
    To be precise, we need to define a binary variable j which takes the value of zero if the individual
is unemployed and one otherwise. The proper cumulative distribution function is then Gt (a, l-1 , z, j ),


                                                           14
         1. Given prices {wt , rt }                               
                                   t=1 and the lump-sum taxes {t }t=1 , the allocations are so-
            lutions to the individual problems (8) and (9) for all t  1;
         2. The measure of unemployed workers follows the equilibrium law of motion (3)
            and (5);
         3. The government budget constraints given by (6) and (7) are satisfied for all t  1;
         4. Asset markets clear for all t  1:

                       Kt        kt (a, z ) Gt (da, dl-1 , dz ) =        aGt (da, dl-1 , dz ) - Bt ;     (10)

                                       capital demand                          capital supply


         5. Labor markets clear for all t  1:

                   lt (a, z ) Gt (da, dl-1 , dz ) = 1 -        I{ot = 1}Gt (da, dl-1 , dz ) - Ut+1 ,     (11)

                        labor demand                               workers in hiring market


            where the left-hand side is the demand for labor and the right-hand side is the
            measure of workers in the hiring market, which is the total population net of
            entrepreneurs and unemployed workers;
         6. The joint distribution of wealth, previous period's labor input, and en-
            trepreneurial productivity {Gt (a, l-1 , z )}t=1 evolves according to the following
            equilibrium mapping:


              Gt+1 (a, l-1 , z ) =                                      ~, d~
                                                                   Gt (da   l-1 , z )
                                             a,z )a,lt (~
                                       at+1 (~          a,z )l-1

                                         + (1 -  ) µ (z )                                     ~, d~
                                                                                          Gt da   l-1 , dz
                                                                                                         ~ .
                                                                at+1 (~ ~)a,lt (~
                                                                      a,z         ~)l-1
                                                                                a,z


          In the capital and labor market clearing conditions, one could have integrated out
      the previous period's employment from aggregate capital and labor demand. This
      is because, in general, the previous period's employment is not in the state space
      underlying the firms' capital and labor demand, kt (a, z ) and lt (a, z ). In the period
      right after the lockdown, however, past employment does constrain firms' labor and
      capital choices, as recalled workers cannot exceed the employment level of a given non-
      essential firm prior to the lockdown. For this reason, and to economize on the number
      of equations, we carry l-1 as a state variable in every period.
j = 0, 1. However, because the market wage and the unemployment benefits are always the same, trivially,
Gt (a, l-1 , z, j = 0) = Ut Gt (a, l-1 , z ) and Gt (a, l-1 , z, j = 1) = (1 - Ut )Gt (a, l-1 , z ).




                                                          15
3.4     Calibration
Our model is parameterized so that the stationary equilibrium matches relevant aggre-
gate and establishment-level moments in the US economy. We set the length of a time
period to be a quarter.
   Following the standard practices, we set the coefficient of relative risk aversion  to
1.5, the annual depreciation rate to 0.06, that is, (1- )4 = 0.94, and the ratio /( + )
to 0.33, to match the aggregate capital income share. As for the parameter for the
hiring market matching function, we set  = 0.37 so as to obtain an unemployment
rate of 4 percent in the stationary equilibrium.
   Entrepreneurial productivity is assumed to follow a Pareto distribution, with cu-
mulative density given by µ (z ) = 1 - z - for z  1. Each period, an individual retains
his z with probability  , while a new entrepreneurial productivity is drawn with the
complementary probability 1 -  .
   The remaining parameters to be calibrated are  + ,  ,  ,  and the collateral
constraint  of the initial stationary equilibrium. To do so, we target the following
moments in the US data: employment share of the top decile of establishments by
size (number of employees), the top 5 percent earnings share, the annual exit rate of
establishments, the real interest rate, and the ratio of external finance to total non-
financial assets of the non-financial business sector.

                                                         US Data   Model   Parameter
   Top 10% Employment Share                               0.69     0.69      = 5.25
   Top 5% Earnings Share                                  0.30     0.30     +  = 0.79
   Establishment Exit Rate (Annual)                       0.10     0.10      = 0.97
   Real Interest Rate (Annual)                            0.04     0.04      = 0.98
   Credit Market Instruments to Non-Financial Assets      0.70     0.70      = 7.5

                                 Table 1: Calibration

   Table 1 shows the moments in the US data and their counterparts in the calibrated
model. The decile of the largest establishments (in terms of employment) accounts for
69 percent of total employment in 2000. The earnings share of the top 5 percentiles is
30 percent in 1998. The annual establishment exit rate is 10 percent in the Business
Dynamics Statistics from the US Census. We assume that the annual interest rate is 4
percent. Lastly, we target the ratio of credit market instruments to total non-financial
fixed assets in the non-financial business sector of 0.7, a level attained one year before
the 2008 financial crisis.
   Although all parameters are jointly pinned down in the model equilibrium, we can
determine which empirical moments are mostly dependent on each parameter. For
instance, the tail parameter of the Pareto distribution of entrepreneurial productivity,


                                           16
       holding other parameter values constant, controls the fraction of employment accounted
       for by the decile of largest establishments. Similarly,  +  can be mapped into the
       earnings share of the top 5 percent of the population, who are mostly entrepreneurs in
       the model as well as in the data. There is also a direct link from the parameter governing
       the persistence of the entrepreneurial productivity process  to the probability that
       an entrepreneur exits from production and hence the annual establishment exit rate in
       the data. The discount factor, unsurprisingly, is closely tied to the target interest rate.
       The collateral constraint parameter  is primarily responsible for the ratio of external
       finance to capital in the aggregate,

                                 max {kt (a, z ) - a, 0} Gt (da, dl-1 , dz )
                                                                             ,                (12)
                                                   Kt

       which corresponds to the ratio of credit market instruments to total non-financial assets
       in the non-financial business sector in the Flow of Funds data.
           In our benchmark exercise, we assume  = 10% of firms are non-essential and
       shut them down for one quarter. This matches the fall in the US GDP in the second
       quarter of 2020. As for the unanticipated demand or preference shock accompanying
       the shutdown shock, we calibrate the preference shock 1 so that the ratio of the fall
       in consumption to the fall in investment in period t = 1 is similar to the one observed
       in the US data in the second quarter of 2020 (see Figure 2 )-- i.e., I1 /I0 = 0.92C1 /C0 .
       Finally, we assume that the debt issued during the lockdown gets fully repaid over
       T = 48 quarters.



       4     The Ripple Effect of a Lockdown
       In this section, we show the transition dynamics following an unexpected shock that
       shuts down  = 10% of firms for one quarter and a concurrent unexpected demand
       shock that lowers the marginal utility of consumption during the lockdown. Unem-
       ployed workers that were employed in these firms receive full unemployment insurance
       benefits financed by government debt and can be reemployed directly by their previ-
       ous employers without going through the matching process in period 2.15 During the
       shutdown, non-essential entrepreneurs have to pay the rental cost of capital, which can
       be viewed as a fixed cost, and decide how much to draw their assets down and how
       much to consume.
           We first present the aggregate implication of the lockdown, and then dive into the
       micro-level implications for employment and consumption dynamics across different
  15
    An equivalent interpretation is that the government provides locked-down firms with a 100% wage
subsidy to finance the wage bill during the temporary shutdown, conditional on "employing" their existing
workers.


                                                    17
firms and individuals.


4.1     Aggregate Variables

                            Fig. 4: Aggregate Variables




   Figure 4 shows the trajectory of aggregate variables. The left panel shows GDP,
investment, consumption, and total factor productivity, while the right panel illustrates
the dynamics of unemployment. The most salient feature of the figure is the swift
recovery of the aggregate output. After falling by 10% on impact, GDP bounces back
to just 0.4% below the initial steady state level in the quarter following the lockdown.
The behavior of the unemployment rate shows that, to a large extent, the swift recovery
in GDP is a reflection of the swift recovery in employment. The decline in investment
explains the slight delay in the recovery of output. The fall in T F P on impact is simply
a reflection of the unused physical capital by non-essential entrepreneurs.
   Figure 4 also shows that, with the aid of a demand shock, the model generates a
large drop in consumption as in the data, which is calibrated to the relative decline
of consumption and investment in the US data. The dynamics thereafter, however,
are driven by the endogenous model mechanism. In particular, the quick recovery in
consumption and the sluggish recovery in investment are the result of the interaction
between the non-Ricardian structure of the model and the repayment scheme for the
government debt. In the model, because of the borrowing constraint (a  0) the
consumption of workers is more sensitive to temporary changes in income and the


                                           18
       profile of taxes.16 Fiscal policy, which fully replaces the wage income to the unemployed
       through debt financing, allows constrained workers to sustain a high consumption. At
       the same time, the government debt crowds out private investment from aggregate
       savings. Given the protracted repayment path of the government debt, investment
       remains depressed for longer than aggregate output. As further discussed in Appendix
       C, increasing lump-sum taxes to balance the government budget reverses this pattern.

                                         Fig. 5: Factor Prices




          Figure 5 shows the behavior of factor prices. Wages and the interest rate barely
       move in the benchmark. Rest unemployment plays a crucial role here. Despite the
       massive rise and fall in unemployment, wages barely move as most changes in em-
       ployment are not intermediated through the hiring market. This is because newly
       unemployed workers wait to be recalled. The interest rate falls following the shutdown
       shock, because non-essential entrepreneurs demand less capital due to their deterio-
       rated balance sheet and more binding credit constraint. The interest rate is above the
       steady state level later in the transition, as the marginal product of capital is high due
       to the temporarily low capital stock.17
          The quick recovery in the unemployment rate is explained by the rest unemployment
       and the fact that the negative balance sheet effect is not large enough, especially for
  16
     More specifically, as is typically the case in models with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets,
the interest rate is lower than the rate of time preference. Workers are in the lowest income state, so their
wealth converge to zero in finite time. As a results, workers with low wealth consume a large fraction of a
transfer that is financed with taxes that are levied far enough into the future.
  17
     The decline of the interest rate in the second period, and the subsequent reallocation of capital to the
essential sector, explains the temporary rise in the wage. Essential firms with access to cheaper funding have
an incentive to hire more workers, but the reallocation of non-essential workers who are not rehired is slowed
by the labor market friction. Therefore, the wage rate in the hiring market is temporarily high.

                                                     19
       the old and relatively unconstrained non-essential firms, which account for a large
       fraction of employment among non-essential firms. After the sudden layoff of their
       workers, which increases the unemployment rate by 9 percentage points, non-essential
       entrepreneurs recall 89% of the resting workers as soon as the shutdown is lifted, leaving
       the unemployment rate only slightly above the initial level.18 Despite a depletion of the
       non-essential firms' financial assets, credit conditions are such that, in the aggregate,
       these firms can re-hire a large fraction of their initial level of employment.


       4.2     Micro-Level Implications
       The quick recovery of the aggregate variables masks substantial heterogeneity in the
       pace of recovery across firms. The shutdown shock by construction affects non-essential
       firms but not the essential firms. Within the set of non-essential firms, the shock has
       a longer-lasting effect on the young firms, because they are more likely to be credit-
       constrained even before the shock and suffer more from the large hit to the balance
       sheet when shut down.

                 Fig. 6: Micro-Level Implications: Employment Dynamics




          The dynamics of employment across different types of firms are shown in Figure 6.
       The left (right) panel shows the employment dynamics of a cohort of young (old)
       entrepreneurs, defined as less (more) than 5 years old. That is, we identify the firms 5
       years and younger (older) prior to the lockdown, and track the aggregate employment
  18
    Ganong et al. (2021) estimate, using the data on the customers of JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A., that
75% of unemployment-to-employment transitions in May/June 2020 was such recalls, and this number fell
to 50% by October 2020.


                                                  20
dynamics of the cohort over time. In each panel we separately present the dynamics
for essential (dashed line) and non-essential (solid line) entrepreneurs, together with
their common life-cycle in the stationary equilibrium (dash-dot line). In all cases, we
normalize employment to its value in the initial period, before the unanticipated shock
is realized.
   Beginning with each cohort's life cycle in the stationary equilibrium, Figure 6 shows
the importance of financial frictions in shaping the patterns of life-cycle dynamics of
young and old cohorts. Young firms are dominated by productive but relatively poor
entrepreneurs whose efficient scale is limited by collateral constraints. As time elapses
and net worth is accumulated, these young businesses grow out of their constraints,
hence exhibiting a period of employment growth. Old firms, on the contrary, have
mostly grown out of the financial constraint so employment dynamics follow the fate
of the average entrepreneurial productivity of the cohort, which drifts down due to the
mean reversion of the entrepreneurial productivity shocks.
   Consider next the dynamics of essential and non-essential firms in the aftermath
of the lockdown. Following the drastic initial drop, the employment of young non-
essential firms is 20% below trend on impact, and does not catch up with their essential
counterpart for over 20 quarters. This is explained by the fact that the net worth of
young firms is low to begin with and then negatively affected by the need to pay for the
capital rental without generating any revenue during the shutdown. On the contrary,
the employment of old non-essential firms recovers almost completely the period after
the shock. This is because old entrepreneurs tend to be richer and can overcome the
credit constraint rather easily.
   To further illustrate the large persistent effects for a subset of firms in the context
of the negligible persistent effects in the aggregate, Figure 7 shows the weighted (top
panels) and unweighted (bottom panels) distributions of employment growth, for both
essential (left panels) and non-essential firms (right panels). In the horizontal axis we
report the deviation in employment relative to the counterfactual employment that
firms would have had in the second period absent the shutdown shock. In the top
panels, the vertical axis shows the fraction of firms falling in different employment
growth bins, while in the bottom panels it shows the fraction of employment accounted
for by the firms in each bin. To focus on the impact of the unanticipated aggregate
shock, we only look at the set of firms that maintained their idiosyncratic productivity
(fraction  ).
   The top-left panel shows that the majority of non-essential firms experienced large
declines in employment, more than 20% on average, and 5% of the firms exited because
of the shutdown shock. These large effects are diluted in the aggregate because, first,
only 10% of the firms are affected directly by the shutdown and, second, even among



                                           21
Fig. 7: Micro-Level Implications: Distribution of Employment Growth




                                                                         ss    ss
     Note: The fraction of steady state employment corresponds to (l2 - l2  )/l2  ,
     where is the employment one period after the lockdown (t = 2) of the firms
     active in the steady state.




                                          22
the non-essential firms, the negatively affected firms, which tend to be young and
financially constrained, account for a small fraction of the total employment, as can be
clearly seen by comparing the top and bottom left panels. In contrast, the distribution
of employment growth of essential firms is concentrated around zero, with some gaining
employment thanks to the lower capital rental rate in t = 2.


         Fig. 8: Micro-Level Implications: Consumption Dynamics




   The heterogeneous responses of employment across firms have a close parallel in the
differential responses of consumption across workers and entrepreneurs, as shown by
Figure 8. For workers and essential entrepreneurs, consumption drops in the first period
as a consequence of the aggregate preference shock. For non-essential entrepreneurs,
the decline is two to three times larger, and very persistent. Entrepreneurs operating
young firms (bottom left panel), who likely have a low net worth and are constrained,
experience a larger and more protracted decline in consumption, since they have have
to rebuild their wealth to overcome the credit constraint. Wealthier non-essential
entrepreneurs (bottom right panel) can smooth out their consumption better once the
shutdown shock and the preference shock disappear.




                                          23
4.3     Effect of the Size and Duration of the Lockdown
In the benchmark exercise, the lockdown closed 10% of the firms for a single quar-
ter. The temporary nature of the shock gives us a stark illustration of its persistent
consequences, but the cross-country experiences documented in Section 2 show large
heterogeneity with respect to the magnitude and duration of the shock. We explore
these dimensions next.


4.3.1   Lockdown Size
In addition to the 10% in the benchmark, we explore the implications of shutdowns of
20% and 30% of the economy. In each case, the demand shock is re-calibrated to achieve
the same relative decline between investment and consumption as in the benchmark.
Figure 9 illustrates the dynamics of GDP, the unemployment rate, investment, and
the capital stock. We do not show the effects during the lockdown period, which are
in any case merely mechanical, and focus on the ripple effects of the shocks in the
post-lockdown quarters.


         Fig. 9: Aggregate Variables: Alternative Size of Lockdown




   The main takeaway from Figure 9 is the magnification of the ripple effects from
stronger lockdowns. The unemployment rate is 1 and 1.5 percentage points above the
initial level relative to the 10% lockdown baseline, reflecting a more widespread balance

                                           24
sheet deterioration across firms. The capital stock declines by more and remains below
the initial level for much longer, explained by the larger decline of output on impact
and the more persistent fall in employment. The stronger ripple effects stem not
from making a given non-essential firm's balance sheet worse, but from expanding the
number of firms being shut down. The effects of the lockdown size on wages and the
interest rate are rather small.

                           Fig. 10: Aggregate Variables


               -0.38




               -0.81




                -1.1

                   10                             20                       30
                                        Size of lockdown (%)



   Figure 10 shows the loss in output in the period after the lockdown (t = 2) from the
initial level on the vertical axis against the size of the lockdown in the horizontal axis.
It reveals that the output response is close to linear with respect to the magnitude of
the lockdown. Figure 9 suggests that we should obtain similar results if we plotted this
relationship for other periods.
   Turning to the heterogeneity of the effects, Figure 11 shows that the life-cycle
dynamics by firm type are nearly indistinguishable across lockdowns of varying sizes.
For instance, the left panel illustrates the employment dynamics of the cohorts of young
essential and non-essential firms, and the life-cycles are almost on top of each other
across all lockdown sizes. This again shows that the magnification of the aggregate
ripple effects from large lockdowns stems not from a strengthening of the effect on a
given set of affected firms but, rather, from the expansion of the number of affected
firms. There is, however, a slight improvement in the dynamics of young essential
businesses under bigger lockdowns which is worth emphasizing, as it reflects an insight
from our general equilibrium framework. The larger falls in wages and interest rates


                                             25
        Fig. 11: Micro-Level Implications: Alternative Lockdown Size




following bigger lockdowns mean that essential firms benefit from lower labor and
capital costs.


4.3.2     Lockdown Duration
We now turn to the macroeconomic and micro-level implications of longer lockdowns.
We maintain the size of the lockdown at 10% of all firms as in our benchmark but
extend the lockdown to multiple periods. We keep the assumption that non-essential
firms furlough their workers, who remain in rest unemployment and receive the un-
employment benefit for the duration of the lockdown. Once the lockdown ends, non-
essential firms can recall their former employees bypassing the labor market friction,
as many as their financial capabilities permit. Regarding the rental cost of capital of
continuing non-essential firms, we assume that they have to pay the rental cost of the
undepreciated portion of their rented capital. This way, we parsimoniously introduce
irreversibility in capital decisions while allowing for some capital reallocation during
lockdown periods. Additional capital reallocation occurs from non-essential firms that,
while in lockdown, draw new idiosyncratic productivity shocks and exit as a result.
These exiting entrepreneurs and the workers they laid off join the regular unemploy-
ment pool and, hence, are subject to the labor market frictions in entering the hiring
market.
   We first show the behavior of the aggregate variables in Figure 12. The horizontal
axis is quarters after the lockdown, so in the case of a 2-period lockdown, the first
observation corresponds to period t = 3, while it corresponds to period t = 2 in
the benchmark. The figure shows that GDP after a 2-period lockdown falls roughly


                                          26
Fig. 12: Aggregate Variables: Longer Lockdown




                     27
 twice as much as in the benchmark. The deeper contraction reflects a higher rate of
 unemployment and a more pronounced fall in investment. Unlike with lockdown size,
 a longer lockdown drags on the economy by further weakening the financial position of
 the same set of non-essential firms, which are now undergoing longer periods of capital
 expenses without revenue. When the lockdown is over, this further erosion of their net
 worth implies they can recall fewer workers, and as a result the unemployment rate is
 higher and recovers more slowly after the lockdown.


Fig. 13: Micro-Level Implications: Employment Dynamics, Longer Lockdown




    The life-cycle implications of longer lockdowns, illustrated in Figure 13, reveal the
 channels through which the aggregate economy enters a deeper recession. In this case,
 a cohort of non-essential entrepreneurs undergoing a two-period lockdown (dashed
 red line in the left panel) resumes operations about 40% below the scale they would
 have achieved in the absence of the lockdown and 20% below the level they would
 have achieved under a 1-period lockdown. Unlike lockdown size, for which the cohort
 dynamics of the non-essential firms are unchanged and it is all about the number of
 firms hit by the shock, longer lockdowns deepen the recession by worsening the financial
 position of a given number of non-essential firms. The general equilibrium forces, i.e.,
 lower factor prices, partially mitigate this effect, improving the prospects of essential
 firms, particularly the older and less credit-constrained ones. Despite this force, the
 aggregate impact is larger and lasts longer.




                                            28
4.4    Unpacking the Ripples: Shocks, Policies, and Mech-
anisms
With the aim of capturing the policy and behavioral responses to the Covid-19 pan-
demic, our baseline characterization of the economy compounds several shocks, policies,
and market frictions. What is the role played by these shocks and policies in the swift
recovery predicted in the benchmark exercise? In this section we decompose the con-
tribution of the following key ingredients: (i) the demand shock accompanying the
lockdown, (ii) the rest unemployment, and (iii) the unemployment insurance transfers
to the non-essential workers (or equivalently the wage subsidy to non-essential firms).
   Figure 14 illustrates the dynamics of output, unemployment, consumption, and the
capital stock in the following counterfactual scenarios following a one-period shutdown
of 10% of all firms. Alongside the benchmark, we report the case without the demand
(or preference) shock, which we label "No Demand Shock." Preserving the interaction
between the lockdown and the demand shock, we also study the role of the rest unem-
ployment by requiring that the unemployed and the returning non-essential businesses
go through the regular labor market frictions ("No Rest"). Lastly, in terms of policies,
we assess the importance of the unemployment insurance and costless firing of workers
by working out an alternate case where non-essential entrepreneurs must pay for their
wage bills during the lockdown ("No Wage Subsidy").
   As for the no demand shock case, Figure 14 shows a slightly slower recovery in
GDP with virtually indistinguishable effects on unemployment. Without a compen-
sating preference shock favoring future consumption, standard consumption smoothing
incentives imply a smaller fall in consumption and a stronger decline in investment,
responses that can be seen in the bottom panels. As a result, the recovery in GDP
weakens. The swift recovery in the labor market remains the same thanks to the rest
unemployment and also a larger decline in wages (due to the lower capital stock).
   The economy enters the most protracted recession when we do not allow rest unem-
ployment. In this case, despite the temporary nature of the lockdown shock, returning
non-essential businesses and unemployed workers must go through the labor market
frictions to resume operations. While calibrated to an annual unemployment rate of
4% in the steady state, which implies only moderate frictions, the mass of temporarily
laid off workers congests the labor market when the shutdown is lifted, leading to a
higher wage in the hiring market and a lengthy rehiring process. The capital stock
dynamics in the bottom right panel accompany the persistently high unemployment.
Consumption, in turn, overshoots the quarter after the lockdown in reflection of the
rise in wages in the hiring market and the fall in investment. In short, incorporating
rest unemployment is important for the model to match the quick dissipation of recall
unemployment in the US data in Hall and Kudlyak (2020).

                                          29
                                  Fig. 14: Shocks, Policies, and Mechanisms
                                     GDP                                                            Unemployment
                                                                                   10.0
% change from SS




                                                                % change from SS
                   -0.5
                   -1.5

                                                                                    2.5
                   -4.0
                                                                                    1.5
                   -6.0                                                             1.0
                                                                                    0.5
                   -9.5                                                             0.0
                            2        4          6        8                                    2            4        6   8
                                    quarters                                                             quarters

                                 Consumption                                                         Capital Stock
% change from SS




                                                                % change from SS
                    2.00
                    0.85
                                                                                   -0.5
                    0.00
                                                                                   -1.0
                   -2.00
                                                                                   -1.5
                   -5.00
                   -7.50
                             2        4         6        8                                    2            4        6   8
                                    quarters                                                             quarters

                                    benchmark       no demand                       no rest       no wage subsidy



                    Lastly, we discuss the role of debt-financed unemployment insurance and costless
 firing of workers. As a reminder, non-essential entrepreneurs in our baseline can lay
 off their workers during the lockdown without any severance payment or firing cost.
 The government issues new debt to provide full wage replacement to the unemployed.
 The "no wage subsidy" case in Figure 14 is the case in which non-essential businesses
 have to pay their wage bills while in lockdown. This keeps the unemployment rate low
 during the lockdown, since idled workers are still employed, but the unemployment
 rate goes up by 1 percentage point when the lockdown ends and remains persistently
 higher than in the benchmark. The GDP also recovers more slowly. The reason
 for the excess unemployment lies in the interaction between the balance sheet effect
 exacerbated by the wage bill payment during the lockdown and the capital rental
 constraint. Unlike in the benchmark, the additional financial wealth that must be
 devoted to wage payments during the lockdown (and no revenue) period deteriorates
 the non-essential firms' balance sheet more significantly, leading to a smaller labor
 demand after the lockdown and to a rise in unemployment.




                                                             30
5     Complementary Impulse: Reallocation Shock
Previous sections considered three plausible channels through which cross-country dif-
ferences in the recovery from a lockdown may emerge: difference in lockdown size,
duration, and policies supporting firms and workers. Here, we consider another chan-
nel, which we label as reallocation shock. The idea is that the pandemic renders some
goods and services less appealing (e.g. cruises) and others more appealing (e.g. tele-
conferencing and online shopping) to consumers more permanently.
    Since in our model all firms produce the same good, a tractable way to mimic
this kind of reallocation shock is to temporarily change the persistence parameter 
governing the evolution of entrepreneurial productivity. We force a larger-than-normal
fraction of non-essential entrepreneurs to re-draw their entrepreneurial productivity in
period 1 independently of their wealth or entrepreneurial productivity. In other words,
we set 1 - t=1 > 1 -  for period 1 and  returning to its normal value thereafter only
for non-essential firms. In terms of disciplining the choice of t=1 , we appeal to Bick
and Blandin (2020), who provide survey evidence on the rest unemployed's expectations
of being recalled by their former employer. Since the persistence parameter  has
a direct mapping to the fraction of firms that recall resting unemployed workers--
see Equation (4), this empirical moment is a useful calibration target. Following
this strategy, we obtain 1 - t=1 = 0.36 for non-essential firms, which is larger than
1 -  = 0.03.
    Before going into the results, two comments are in order. First, the reallocation
shock has aggregate effects in our model only if there are financial or labor market
frictions. In a perfect-credit benchmark with frictionless labor markets, a reshuffling of
entrepreneurs, who re-draw idiosyncratic productivity from the same distribution, has
no bearing on aggregate quantities. Second, as a result of the same model assumptions,
while the reallocation shock lives for only one period, it carries persistent effects. This
is because it takes time for the frictional labor market to reallocate workers and for
firms that become suddenly productive to build up their internal funds and overcome
the financial constraint.
    In Figure 15, the solid lines are the benchmark case with the lockdown and the
demand shock, and the lines with circles are the result of adding the reallocation
shock. By construction, there is no difference between the two cases on impact, because
the reallocation shock affects the transition of non-essential entrepreneurs from the
lockdown period to the next. Thereafter, however, we observe a notable weakening
of the recovery. The unemployment rate is almost 3 percentage points higher than
its t = 2 value in the benchmark and decreases slowly. Investment, capital stock and
output remain below their initial levels for a longer period of time.
    As mentioned above, financial and labor market frictions are at the core of the


                                            31
           Fig. 15: Lockdown, Demand, and Reallocation Shocks




weaker recovery. As older businesses exit and are replaced by newcomers, financial
frictions impede the growth of those productive entrants who are not yet wealthy
enough to overcome credit constraints. Furthermore, as workers leave their former
employers and wait to be hired by newcomers, the labor market is congested by the
matching friction, so the unemployment rate remains high for many quarters after the
combination of shocks disappear. The evidence of a strong rise in business formation
in the US in Section 2 provides a measure of empirical support for this reallocation
channel.



6     Concluding Remarks
The Covid-19 pandemic triggered a burst of economic research seeking to understand
its economic implications. Motivated by this episode, and also noting a scarcity of
quantitative frameworks that can help us think about large temporary shocks more
broadly, we propose one in this paper. Our model incorporates the main elements
that can capture the first-order effects that operate upon impact and during the re-
covery: imperfect access to credit, costly reallocation of workers, recall unemployment
(especially relevant to the temporary nature of the shock), and imperfect consumption


                                          32
insurance.
   Disciplining the degree of the market frictions in the economy to the US data, we
show that the deep but short-lived shutdown results in a deep but short-lived recession
followed by a swift recovery. While the recovery is fast in the aggregate, it carries
lasting scarring effects on young non-essential firms. Paying for capital costs while
generating no revenue for one period, these firms sustain a significant damage to their
balance sheets, which shows up as significantly lower growth over their entire life-cycle.
Nevertheless, these firms do not account for a large share of the aggregate employment
or output, and this channel has only a small macroeconomic effect and the aggregate
variables bounce back quickly.
   More protracted ripple effects are possible, as shown by alternative specifications
of the shocks and the government policies. Longer and bigger lockdowns generate per-
sistently higher unemployment rates. The recovery is slower if a reallocation shock
interact with the lockdown and demand shocks. Without government policies sup-
porting the firms and workers, the worsening balance sheets of non-essential firms can
have significant negative effects in the aggregate, as is the case in the model under a
requirement that these businesses pay their wage bills in lockdown. These alternative
specifications show that our model can explain the wide heterogeneity in aggregate
outcomes among the OECD countries in terms of the depth of the recessions and the
speed of the recoveries.
   In conclusion, our laboratory economy has sufficient richness and can speak to the
main channels driving the downturn and the subsequent recovery from large temporary
shocks. As time elapses and a better identification of shocks and policies is permitted
by the data, our model can be a useful framework through which to interpret the shock
transmission channels and study policy counterfactuals.




                                           33
Bibliography
Alvarez, F. and R. Shimer (2011, January). Search and Rest Unemployment. Econo-
  metrica 79 (1), 75­122.

Alvarez, F. and M. Veracierto (2001). Severance payments in an economy with frictions.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (3), 477­498.

Aum, S., S. Y. T. Lee, and Y. Shin (2021, February). Inequality of fear and self-
  quarantine: Is there a trade-off between GDP and public health? Journal of Public
  Economics 194, 104354.

Barrero, J. M., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2020, May). COVID-19 Is Also a Reallo-
  cation Shock. SocArXiv bw7vz, Center for Open Science.

Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989). Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctu-
  ations. The American Economic Review 79 (1), 14­31.

Bick, A. and A. Blandin (2020, July 24). Real-time labor market estimates during the
  2020 coronavirus outbreak. Real-time population survey, Federal Reserve Bank of
  Dallas.

Buera, F., R. Fattal-Jaef, and Y. Shin (2015). Anatomy of a Credit Crunch: From
  Capital to Labor Markets. Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (1), 101­117.

Buera, F. J. and Y. Shin (2013). Financial frictions and the persistence of history: A
  quantitative exploration. Journal of Political Economy 121 (2), 221­272.

Cajner, T., L. D. Crane, R. A. Decker, J. Grigsby, A. Hamins-Puertolas, E. Hurst,
  C. Kurz, and A. Yildirmaz (2020, May). The U.S. Labor Market during the Begin-
  ning of the Pandemic Recession. Working Paper 27159, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Dinlersoz, E., T. Dunne, J. Haltiwanger, and V. Penciakova (2021, January). Business
  Formation: A Tale of Two Recessions. Working Papers 21-01, Center for Economic
  Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.

Eichenbaum, M. S., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020, March). The Macroeconomics
  of Epidemics. NBER Working Papers 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Ganong, P., F. Greig, M. Liebeskind, P. Noel, D. Sullivan, and J. Vavra (2021). Spend-
  ing and Job Search Impacts of Expanded Unemployment Benefits: Evidence from



                                         34
  Administrative Micro Data. Working Papers 2021-19, Becker Friedman Institute for
  Research In Economics.

Ganong, P., P. Noel, and J. Vavra (2020). US unemployment insurance replacement
  rates during the pandemic. Journal of Public Economics 191, 104273.

Guerrieri, V., G. Lorenzoni, L. Straub, and I. Werning (2020, April). Macroeconomic
  Implications of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?
  NBER Working Papers 26918, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Guilford, G. and C. L. Scott (2020, Sep. 26). Is it insane to start a business during
  coronavirus? Millions of Americans don't think so. Wall Street Journal .

Hall, R. E. and M. Kudlyak (2020, October). Unemployed With Jobs and Without
  Jobs. Working Paper 27886, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hevia, C., M. Macera, and P. A. Neumeyer (2021, April). COVID-19 in Segmented
  Societies. Unpublished manuscript, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella.

Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. L. Violante (2020, September). The Great Lockdown and
  the Big Stimulus: Tracing the Pandemic Possibility Frontier for the U.S. NBER
  Working Papers 27794, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Lee, S. Y. T., M. Park, and Y. Shin (2021, January). Hit harder, recover slower?
  Unequal employment effects of the Covid-19 shock. Working Paper 28354, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Leibovici, F., A. M. Santacreu, and M. Famiglietti (2020, March 24). Social Distancing
  and Contact-Intensive Occupations. On the economy blog, St. Louis Fed.

Moll, B. (2014, October). Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-
  Financing Undo Capital Misallocation? American Economic Review 104 (10), 3186­
  3221.

Neumeyer, P. A., P. Restrepo-Echavarr´
                                     ia, and L. Belmudes (2020, November 12). The
  COVID-19 Recession in Historical Perspective. On the economy blog, St. Louis Fed.

Veracierto, M. (2016, November). Establishment Dynamics, Vacancies, and Unemploy-
  ment: A Neoclassical Approach. International Economic Review 57 (4), 1201­1236.




                                         35
A   GDP in OECD countries

                 Table 2: GDP in OECD Countries

                              Q2-2020 Q3-2020 Q4-2020
            Spain               0.78     0.91      0.91
            United Kingdom      0.79     0.91      0.92
            France              0.81     0.96      0.95
            Italy               0.82     0.95      0.93
            Mexico              0.82     0.93      0.96
            Portugal            0.83     0.94      0.94
            Colombia            0.83     0.91      0.96
            Belgium             0.85     0.95      0.95
            Hungary             0.85     0.95      0.96
            Slovenia            0.86     0.96      0.95
            Iceland             0.86     0.90      0.94
            Austria             0.87     0.97      0.94
            Canada              0.87     0.95      0.97
            Greece              0.87     0.90      0.92
            Slovak Republic     0.87     0.97      0.97
            Czech Republic      0.88     0.95      0.95
            Germany             0.88     0.96      0.96
            Chile               0.89     0.94      1.00
            Turkey              0.89     1.03      1.05
            Israel              0.90     0.98      0.99
            United States       0.90     0.97      0.98
            New Zealand         0.90     1.03      1.01
            Netherlands         0.90     0.97      0.97
            Poland              0.91     0.98      0.97
            Latvia              0.91     0.97      0.98
            Switzerland         0.91     0.98      0.98
            Japan               0.91     0.96      0.99
            Luxembourg          0.91     1.00      1.01
            Denmark             0.92     0.97      0.97
            Sweden              0.92     0.98      0.98
            Australia           0.93     0.96      0.99
            Lithuania           0.93     0.99      0.99
            Estonia             0.94     0.96      0.98
            Ireland             0.94     1.05      1.00
            Norway              0.94     0.98      0.99
            Finland             0.95     0.98      0.98
            Korea               0.96     0.98      0.99
     Source: OECD statistics (downloaded March 31st , 2021.).



                                  36
B       Mobility in New Zealand and the United
States

             Fig. 16: Mobility in the United States and New Zealand
               Retail and recreation                            Workplaces
  20                                                 20


                                                     10

    0
                                                      0


                                                    -10
  -20

                                                    -20


  -40                                               -30


                                                    -40

  -60
                                                    -50


                                                    -60
  -80

                               United States        -70
                               New Zealand
 -100                                                -80
  Jan 2020        Jul 2020        Jan 2021          Jan 2020   Jul 2020      Jan 2021

     Source: Google Mobility Reports (downloaded April 5th , 2021.).



C       Debt Repayment Strategies
The baseline exercise assumes the financing of the unemployment insurance benefits
through debt issuance and a constant lump sum tax that is chosen so that the debt is
fully repaid in T periods. To understand the sensitivity of the model dynamics to this
assumption, we here consider the following two alternatives alongside the benchmark.
First, we consider a case where lump-sum taxes are left unchanged for 12 quarters and
then increased so that the debt is brought down to zero in 12 years. This differs from
the benchmark in that the lump sum tax does not increase initially, instead of going up
instantaneously. In both cases, the debt is repaid over 12 years. At the other extreme,
we consider a case where the lump sum tax is adjusted every period to balance the
budget. In both cases we adopt the baseline 10% lockdown shock and preserve the
same calibrated value of the demand shock. Figure 17 illustrates the dynamics of the
relevant aggregate variables in the three policy counterfactuals.



                                               37
                                                  Fig. 17: Debt Repayment Strategies


                                                   GDP                                                               Unemployment Rate




                                                                             difference from SS
                         1.005




                                                                                                         0.008
    relative to SS

                         0.995




                                                                                                         0.004
                                                     baseline
                                                     No repay 12 quarters
                         0.985




                                                                                                         0.000
                                                     No Debt

                                 0       5   10      15     20    25                                             5     10     15      20   25

                                                  quarter                                                                   quarter



                                                  K stock                                                              Consumption




                                                                                                         1.010
    relative to SS




                                                                             relative to SS
                         1.000




                                                                                                         1.000
                         0.990




                                                                                                         0.990




                                     5       10     15      20    25                                             5     10     15      20   25

                                                  quarter                                                                   quarter



                                             Debt to GDP                                                                Interest Rate
                         0.020




                                                                             basis point diff. from SS

                                                                                                         5
    share (annualized)




                                                                                                         0
                         0.010




                                                                                                         -5
                         0.000




                                                                                                         -10




                                     5       10     15      20    25                                             5     10     15      20   25

                                                  quarter                                                                   quarter




   The first key implication from Figure 17 is the insensitivity of the unemployment
rate to the alternative financing schemes. As explained in the text, unemployment
dynamics are mostly accounted for by young non-essential entrepreneurs. For them,
the adjustments in the lump sum taxes do not carry enough weight on the balance sheet
to alter the disruption caused by the lockdown. Therefore, their recall capabilities in
the aftermath of the shock are roughly unchanged.
   The second implication from Figure 17 is that consumption and investment are
significantly affected by the time profile of taxes and debt. In the cases where net
transfers to workers are maximized, as in the benchmark and even more so in the long

                                                                            38
repayment scenarios ("No repay 12 quarters"), investment falls by more and recovers
more slowly. Conversely, when lump sum taxes are adjusted upfront, consumption
falls the most and the capital stock booms after the shock (due to the boom in savings
implied by the preference shock). Alongside such adjustments in quantities is a larger
reduction in the interest rate under balance budget than under smooth repayment.
   The cause for the heterogeneous response of consumption and investment lies in
the non-Ricardian nature of many workers in the economy, whose consumption is more
sensitive to temporary changes in income and the profile of taxes. More specifically,
as is typically the case in models with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets,
the interest rate is lower than the rate of time preference. Workers are in the lowest
income state, so their wealth converges to zero in finite time. As a results, workers
with low wealth consume a large fraction of a transfer that is financed with taxes that
are levied far enough into the future.
   Under the benchmark and the long repayment cases, income is transferred towards
workers with elastic consumption, while the financing of government debt crowds out
constrained entrepreneurs from increasing capital demand. On the other hand, when
the government balances the budget every period, workers' income declines and so
does consumption. Despite the full wage repayment offered by the government to
the unemployed, income flows back to the government in the form of higher taxes.
Unconstrained entrepreneurs, in this case, increase capital demand stimulated by a
lower cost of capital (see the bottom right panel).




                                          39
