                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE RUBLE COLLAPSE IN AN ONLINE MARKETPLACE:
                     SOME LESSONS FOR MARKET DESIGNERS

                                       John J. Horton

                                     Working Paper 28702
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28702


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




Thanks to Bo Cowgill, Josh Angrist, David Autor, Alan Benson, Richard Zeckhauser, Alex
Tabarrok, Jonathan Meer, Apostolos Filippas, Simon Jäger, Paul Oyer, Bob Hall, Christina
Patterson, and Judith Chevalier for helpful comments. I consult with a number of online
marketplaces on issues related to market design. None of these marketplaces had the right to
review this work, nor did they. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by John J. Horton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Ruble Collapse in an Online Marketplace: Some Lessons for Market Designers
John J. Horton
NBER Working Paper No. 28702
April 2021
JEL No. J01

                                          ABSTRACT

The sharp devaluation of the ruble in 2014 increased the real returns to Russians from working in
a global online labor marketplace, as contracts in this market are dollar-denominated. Russians
clearly noticed the opportunity, with Russian hours-worked increasing substantially, primarily on
the extensive margin--incumbent Russians already active were fairly inelastic. Contrary to the
predictions of bargaining models, there was little to no pass-through of the ruble price changes in
to wages. There was also no evidence of a demand-side response, with buyers not posting more
"Russian friendly" jobs, suggesting limited cross-side externalities. The key findings--a high
extensive margin elasticity but low intensive margin elasticity; little pass-through into wages; and
little evidence of a cross-side externality--have implications for market designers with respect to
pricing and supply acquisition.


John J. Horton
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Sloan School of Management
100 Main St
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
john.joseph.horton@gmail.com
1       Introduction
After a marketplace business has overcome the "cold start" or "chicken-and-
egg" problem (Rochet and Tirole, 2006; Caillaud and Jullien, 2003), it has
to decide much to invest in acquiring more buyers or sellers. This investment
can mean subsidizing participation for one side or the other, lowering the
platform's take rate, building features that are attractive to market partici-
pants, or spending on marketing. How should a platform think about these
decisions? Will these expenditures be effective at attracting more partici-
pants? What will the additional participants do to prices and quantities in
the marketplace--and hence platform revenue under common price struc-
tures? How much will acquiring one side stimulate usage from the other
side?
    In this paper, I report the results of a natural experiment that approxi-
mated a massive subsidy to a select group of sellers in an online labor market
(Horton, 2010). This "subsidy" was not a platform decision, but rather was
caused by the collapse of the Russian ruble, which nearly doubled the real
returns to Russians from working in the marketplace, as contracts in the
marketplace are dollar-denominated. This ruble collapse was not due to a
general appreciation of the US dollar, but rather had Russia-specific causes,
namely the imposition of sanctions following Russia's annexation of Crimea
and military intervention in Ukraine; a fall in oil prices is also thought to have
played a role. As there are few employers from Russia in the marketplace,
the ruble collapse was not a demand shock.1
    To estimate effects of the ruble collapse, I primarily use a difference-in-
differences design, where Russians are the treated group and non-Russians
are the control group. Of course, as the market is international, Russians and
non-Russians compete, creating the possibility of spill-overs. To address this
concern, I exploit the fact that individuals from a particular country tend
    1
    I use the terms "worker" and "employer" to be consistent with the labor literature,
and not as a commentary on the relationships created on the platform.


                                          2
to specialize in the same areas of work, and so countries and workers varied
in how "exposed" they were to the Russian influx. As it is, the degree of
competition seems to matter little, which is perhaps unsurprising given that
Russians were relatively small players in the market.
    I analyze the Russian response at two levels: the "macro" country level
and the "micro" individual level, using a sample of workers active pre-
collapse. At the macro level, a 10% rise in the value of the US dollar measured
in rubles led to a 14% increase in the number of applications sent per week by
Russians. The number of Russians hired increase by a similar amount. These
macro estimates are about 5 times larger than the equivalent micro elasticity
estimates. The reason for the gap is that the macro estimates capture a
substantial extensive margin response.2
    On the intensive margin, the individual elasticity of hours-worked is 0.16,
though there is substantial individual heterogeneity in labor supply. I find
that the individual hours-worked and application elasticities are similar in
magnitude. This similarity implies Russian workers scale up their search
intensity and hours-worked in the same proportion, with no apparent loss of
job search efficiency.
    Russian wages did not fall by an economically significant amount. In the
micro panel of incumbent Russians, the elasticity of the average wage to the
US dollar priced in rubles is just -0.03, implying little to no pass-through.
Although there is a slight decline in wages in the macro panel, this can be
explained by changes in composition.
    The paper provides a case study of how workers respond to changes in
real returns on a marketplace, and offers insight how the market "works."
But it also has several practical implications relevant to market designers.
    All marketplace designers worry about attracting buyers and sellers to
their platform. The ruble episode shows that the supply side of the market
is collectively quite elastic with respect to the financial pay-off obtained on
  2
      See Chetty et al. (2011) for the macro/micro reconciliation in conventional settings.



                                              3
the platform. Although it is perhaps no surprise that greater earning possi-
bilities would influence sellers, if we thought horizontal preferences were very
important in sellers choosing a marketplace (Hossain et al., 2011), then ef-
fects could have been small. They were not. Furthermore, with labor, it also
not always widely accepted that labor supply curves are even upward slop-
ing, due to target earning (Camerer et al., 1997) or income effects. Neither
concern seems to have been borne out in practice. In short, money matters.
    Also relevant to would-be market designers is the source of additional
supply. Most of the supply increase was on the extensive margin, rather
than the intensive margin--Russians already active on the platform only
expanded their hours-worked slightly. This has implications for where more
supply can (cheaply) come from--namely from new suppliers rather than
hoping existing suppliers can increase output. For some marketplaces, we
might expect a different result--particularly when sellers are firms--but when
sellers in a marketplace are individual workers providing their own labor, they
are inherently supply-constrained (Horton, 2019). In this case, increases from
already active sellers are likely to be expensive.
    For platforms that tax transactions, a concern with adding supply is that
is might lower prices and thus potentially revenue, depending on changes in
marketplace quantities. This concern was not borne out--added supply did
not discernibly lower wages, either at the market level or for the subsidized
sellers. The likely reason wages did not fall is that Russians are apparently
good substitute for other workers on the platform. As such, the increase in
Russians was not a large change in supply, properly defined. Although the
fraction of Russians increased dramatically, they are not a large component
of the market as a whole, and so it was not a market-moving shock: 1.4% of
hired workers at the start of the period I examine were Russian, compared
to 2.4% at the end.
    One might have thought Russians would have lowered their wage asks
in order to obtain more work, consistent with bargaining models of price


                                       4
formation, but this was not the case. The market was better characterized
by the competetive market model in which workers and employers are price-
takers.
    The classic way to think of price-setting in a two-sided marketplace, is
that the two sides--buyers and sellers--exert different cross-side externali-
ties, which in turn should affect the price the platform wants to charge, as
well as the cost of servicing that side and that side's elasticity of demand
(Armstrong, 2006). In the case of the ruble collapse, there is no evidence of
a demand response--there was no discernible demand increase in "Russian
compatible" job posts. This might suggest cross-side externalities might be
weak in an established market, but recall the lack of a price effect. As there
was no pass-through of lower wages, there was no obvious additional benefit
accruing to buyers from more Russians. With a more massive shock that
moved on-platform prices, this would perhaps not be the case.3
    If the market were different and Russians offered some kind of benefit to
would-be employers that was distinctive and differentiated, then perhaps we
would have observed some demand response. However, it is not clear that
even for large "shocks" we would see large changes if the supply curve is de
facto horizontal. In a fairly commodified market with low barriers to entry
and lots of atomistic sellers, marketplace supply could be inherently highly
elastic. Although this paper only adds some evidence for this point of highly
elastic supply curves, results from several other online marketplaces all point
towards highly elastic supply.
    In terms of related literature, there are several papers that have a plau-
sibly exogenous increase in sellers due to policy changes or market mergers.
For example, Reshef (2020) examines the role of additional sellers on a mar-
ketplace, finding that the market expansion effects were generally positive for
incumbents, but not for lower quality incumbents who experience a business
   3
    Not all cross-side externalities show up in prices--Hall et al. (2017) shows that when
the number of drivers in a city increases, wait-times falls.



                                            5
stealing effect. Farronato et al. (2020) examines the effects of a platform ac-
quisition, finding that although some incumbent users benefited. There was
enough platform differentiation that users of the acquired platform experi-
enced worse outcomes. There are also papers looking at entirely new kind of
competitor, as in Seamans and Zhu (2014), or a new kind of product offering
in an ecosystem, as in Li and Agarwal (2017). There are no papers I am
aware of that have a distinct group of sellers entering who are not necessarily
strongly differentiated form incumbents.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follow. I first discuss the empirical
context in Section 2. Results at the "macro" country-level are presented in
Section 3. Results at the "micro" individual level are presented in Section 4.
In Section 5, I show how little effect the Russian influx had on the demand
side of the market. Section 6 discusses the results and Section 7 concludes.


2    Empirical context
The empirical context is a large online labor market (Horton, 2010; Horton
et al., 2017; Agrawal et al., 2015). In these markets, firms hire workers to
perform tasks that can be done remotely, such as computer programming,
graphic design, data entry, research and writing. Markets differ in their scope
and focus, but common services provided by the platforms include maintain-
ing job listings, hosting user profile pages, arbitrating disputes, certifying
worker skills and maintaining feedback systems.
    Although the context is online, many of the same market features found
in conventional labor markets also exist in this market. Employers post job
descriptions which workers can search for and apply to. Employers can assess
candidates through interviews and negotiate over wages. In online labor
markets more generally, there are still substantial search frictions (Horton,
2019, 2017a), barriers to entry (Stanton and Thomas, 2016; Pallais, 2014),
information asymmetries (Benson et al., 2019), and even compelling evidence


                                      6
of employer monopsony power (Dube et al., 2020).
    Several marketplace features are worth noting. The platform can observe
nearly all job search behavior: it observes which job openings job-seekers ap-
ply to, and at what terms; it also observes whether the employer interviewed
the applicant and ultimately hired them, forming a contract.4 If a contract
is formed, the platform observes how many hours are worked, and at what
wage. Although some workers and firms do haggle, most employers seem
to take worker wage bids as take-it-or-leave-it offers (Barach and Horton,
Forthcoming). There is no collective bargaining or even channels for workers
to confer with each other--factors that might otherwise lead to sticky wages,
as in Saez et al. (2019).
    To work on hourly contracts, workers use a kind of digital punch clock,
and so hours are measured essentially without error. Hourly contracts are
the focus on this market, though fixed price contracts are allowed. For this
paper, I exclusively focus on hourly contracts. For hourly contracts, the
hired worker is free to bill hours as they see fit, though employers can cap
hours-per-week ex ante and can file a dispute if they object to the quality
of the work. Disputes are fairly rare, as employers can observe worker effort
in real-time through platform-mandated screen capture software and offer
guidance or criticism.
    In addition to market wages and wage bids, the platform can also observe
a worker's "profile wage" or the wage they list on their worker profiles, which
is a kind of online resume. Employers view these profiles when deciding whom
to recruit, and so it tends to be close to what a worker is actually willing to
accept.
    In terms of market composition, most employers are from the US and the
   4
    Observing job search effort and intensity is fairly rare, though there are exceptions.
Mukoyama et al. (2018) examine job search intensity over the business cycle using the
ATUS. Typically, job search intensity is only seen indirectly, such as through reduced
unemployment duration, as in Woodbury and Spiegelman (1987) in response to a time-
limited bonus for finding a new job. Adams et al. (2018) does find some increases in search
intensity among those already looking for work in response to minimum wage increases.


                                            7
remainder of the demand side are typically from other high-income countries.
The supply side is far more diverse. The platform knows which country
each worker is from, and all market participants can observe the country of
every other market participant (who also know this). Regardless of which
countries the employer and worker are from, all contracts are denominated
in US dollars.
    Earnings from contracts are kept in account for the worker. Workers are
free to keep their earnings with the platform, but the account is not inter-
est bearing. This gives workers an incentive to frequently transfer from the
platform to their home country bank--at least for workers from countries
where transfer fees are ad valorem and with a minimum fixed component.
The platform transfers earned money to the worker's bank when the worker
requests it. The worker's bank then does the currency conversion. My un-
derstanding is that at the time of the ruble collapse, Russian workers faced
small transactions costs in transferring their earnings from the platform to
Russian banks.
    Prior to the Russian financial crisis, the exchange rate between the ruble
and the dollar had been fairly stable since the great recession. The ruble
began to fall in earnest in the middle of 2014. Although I will plot time price
over time, to give a sense of the fall, in the 2nd week of 2014, one US dollar
cost about 33 rubles; by the 2nd week of 2015, one US dollar cost about 63
rubles at official Bank of Russia exchange rates.
    Although much of the platform literature has focused on platform compe-
tition, the Russian outside option was not necessarily of being on some other
two-sided platform, but simply working in the larger labor market or enjoying
leisure. This is likely commonplace in many online marketplaces where there
is still a substantial offline counterpoint; people still find spouses, drive taxis,
walk dogs, assemble furniture, and so on outside of a computer-mediated
platform context.




                                         8
2.1    Conceptual issues
Before getting into the details of how Russians on the platform behaved, it
is useful to consider what can be learned from this context. The Russian
financial crisis changed many things that could potentially have had an in-
dependent effect on Russians. These other factors could cause an under-
or over-statement of the effects of changes in the ruble price. Furthermore,
we need a framework for interpreting what we observe in terms of economic
theory.
    The claim that the ruble decline increased the real returns to on-platform
work deserves greater scrutiny. For earning dollars to become more attractive
to Russians, we need to assume that Russians were mostly consuming in
rubles. This seems likely. But we also need to know about the price level in
Russia, both for consumption and in the labor market. There was substantial
inflation in goods prices in Russia (Liefert et al., 2019). I have no good
evidence on Russian home country wages for my population--which is mainly
software developers--but overall, in 2014 and 2015, inflation was overcoming
any nominal wage growth and Russian real wages were likely declining, at
least on average.5
    It seems likely working online was becoming more desirable for Russians.
How much more desirable is hard to say, but the dramatic increase in Rus-
sian participation makes the sign of the effect clear. Furthermore, the close
tracking of the ruble price and the Russian response (which I will show)
suggests it was primarily what Russians were responding to--or they were
responding to something that was moving more or less in lockstep with the
ruble. All these issues aside, my interest is less in precisely estimating vari-
ous labor supply elasticities but more in seeing what steps Russians took to
act on their changed preferences, and how these decisions affected outcomes,
  5
    "How falling wages are squeezing Russian households," World Economic Forum,
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2015/08/how-falling-wages-are-squeezing-russian-
households/ Accessed Online: 3/29/2020.



                                       9
without caring too much why those preferences changed, or by how much.
    It is important to note that even if the ruble collapse likely changed the
real returns to working, it only had the potential to change market wages.
The effects on realized wages depends on how Russian workers changed their
wage bidding, if at all, and how employers reacted to those wage bids. This
point is not typically applicable in the labor supply literature, which starts
from the assumption that workers are price-takers with respect to the wage
and are costlessly adjusting hours-worked in response.6
    Assuming we can treat the ruble collapse as a de facto wage shock, there
are obstacles if the goal were to estimate a life-cycle model of labor supply.
We do not know what Russians believed about the time courses of the ru-
ble, nor do we know their wealth, consumption, non-labor sources of income,
or what borrowing constraints they faced. That being said, given that the
proximate cause was geopolitical events that could in principle be resolved
quickly, it seems likely that Russians viewed the higher real wage opportunity
as unexpected and temporary. Furthermore, if Russians believed in long-run
purchase price parity, they would expect this change to be temporary, though
given how persistent gaps exist between nominal and real exchange rate fluc-
tuations, how "temporary" is not clear. Even if the course of the ruble was
unclear, Russians surely know about the changes, unlike, for example, work-
ers needing to learn about UI benefit generosity before being affected by
them (Lemieux and MacLeod, 2000). As a transient change observed more
or less immediately by Russians, the elasticity estimated in a panel is ar-
guably "Frisch-like" even though we lack some of the right measurements for
this claim (MaCurdy, 1981).
   6
     Obviously, many workers on conventional markets face hours restrictions (Ham and
Reilly, 2002), but the competitive perspective has workers choosing employers offering
different hours-worked bundles or even flexibility in light of their preferences, even if it
takes some time to act on those preferences (Kuhn, 2004). There is substantial evidence
that at least some workers value flexibility in hours-worked (Chen et al., 2019), though
how widespread and strong these preferences is less clear (Mas and Pallais, 2017).




                                            10
3         The "macro" view of the ruble collapse
To begin, I compare country-level outcomes over time in a panel: numbers of
active workers, the number of applications sent, the number of hires made,
the average wage bid, and so on. I compare Russia to non-Russian countries
that experienced relatively small currency fluctuations during the period cov-
ered by the data.


3.1         Panel definition
I use 9 different countries as the comparison units, with Russia included.
These are the largest participating countries by worker count, excluding
Ukraine which was removed because it was also affected directly by the Rus-
sian financial crisis.7 I construct a balanced weekly panel, with 61 weeks per
country, for a total of 549 observations. The panel starts on 2014-01-08 and
ends on 2015-03-19, which is where my data end. This panel is constructed
from all applications sent during the period covered by the panel.
    Table 1 presents data from the panel from two points in time: the 2nd week
of 2014 and the 2nd week of 2015. I use the 2nd week to avoid the New Year's
holiday week. Comparing the Russia rows, we can see a more than 3x increase
in the number of active Russians, where "active" is defined as sending at least
one job application. Most other countries show no large changes. There is
also an increase in applications per active Russian worker, though other
countries also show changes of similar or greater magnitude. The Russian
win rate--the probability they are hired for a given application--does not
change.
    The Russian average wage bid is slightly lower at the end of the period
covered by the panel. Some countries experience large wage increases over
the time period, particularly countries that started with relatively low wages
at the start of the panel This was due to a minimum wage change on the
    7
        Some other countries were removed because of data quality issues.


                                              11
Table 1: Country-level measures in the 2nd week of 2014 and 2015, during
which ruble lost approximately half its value against the US dollar


                                                     Means
               Year   Active    Apps/Active   Wage (log)   Win Rate   Hires    Rus-Index
 Philippines
               2014   10, 204          5.77         1.49      0.029   1, 703        0.007
               2015    9, 615          5.71         1.67      0.026   1, 413            -
 Kenya
               2014      693           5.34         1.82      0.033     121         0.008
               2015      776           5.10         2.01      0.027     106             -
 Bangladesh
            2014       9, 748         10.43         1.17      0.013   1, 354        0.008
            2015       9, 392          9.45         1.54      0.013   1, 180            -
 United States
            2014       5, 241          4.36         2.75      0.040     919         0.014
            2015       5, 149          4.45         2.82      0.039     886             -
 United Kingdom
            2014         877           4.69         2.64      0.030     124         0.016
            2015         981           4.80         2.79      0.041     195             -
 Pakistan
            2014       5, 196          7.56         1.78      0.020     795         0.018
            2015       5, 117          7.69         1.98      0.018     706             -
 Canada
            2014         709           5.20         2.65      0.039     144         0.020
            2015         755           5.51         2.84      0.038     160             -
 India
            2014      19, 078          8.54         2.09      0.011   1, 873        0.022
            2015      21, 454          9.15         2.17      0.009   1, 771            -
 Russia
            2014          623          5.51         3.00      0.027      92             -
            2015       1, 480          6.01         2.96      0.026     234             -

Notes: Country-level comparisons of activity in an online labor market across the
second week of January, in 2014 and 2015. The column labeled "Rus-Index" is
measure of how closely workers from a country compete with Russians, on average
prior to the ruble collapse.



                                        12
platform, which I will discuss at length.
    The number of Russians hired per week increased substantially, going
from 92 to 234, while other countries show no changes nearly as large. Some
of the lower wage countries show fairly large declines; some of the higher
wage countries show increases. This is also likely the result of the minimum
wage, as it caused a substantial degree of labor-labor substitution towards
relatively high-wage workers.
    In Table 1, countries are ordered from least to most similar to Russian in
terms of application overlap i.e., workers from the Philippines tend to work
in very different categories from Russians, while workers from India compete
more directly, on average. However, a comparison of summary statistics for
India and Russia show that they are not that similar on many dimensions--
Russians have far higher wages, send fewer applications and have nearly
double the per-application win rate. In terms of application behavior and
outcomes, Russians are more similar to workers from countries like Canada
and the United States.


3.2    Market quantities over time
The by-week log price of one US dollar in rubles, is plotted in the top facet of
Figure 1. Each facet below the ruble facet shows the time series for country-
level outcomes. All time series are de-meaned to 0 at the start of the panel.
Russia is a heavy black line in shape, while all other countries are light gray
lines. The average for all non-Russian countries is a heavy dashed line.
    In the second facet from the top, labeled "Log number of active workers
(at least one application)," we can see the dramatic increase in Russians
engaged in job search on the platform. For Russia, the log number active
line tracks the log US dollar in ruble line, but with a larger magnitude. The
number active line tops out at nearly 1, despite the US dollar-to-ruble line
topping out at about 0.75, giving an eyeballed elasticity greater than 1.
    The third facet from the top, labeled "Log number of applications sent"

                                      13
Figure 1: The ruble collapse and weekly country-level market outcomes, de-
meaned

                                                 Log price of USD (in rubles)
    1.0
                                                                                                         RUS.
    0.5
    0.0
   -0.5

                                  Log number of active workers (at least one application)
    1.0
                                                                                                         RUS.
    0.5
    0.0                                                                                                  Non-RUS
                                                                                                           Avg.
   -0.5

                                               Log number of applications sent
    1.0
                                                                                                         RUS.
    0.5
    0.0                                                                                                  Non-RUS
                                                                                                           Avg.

   -0.5

                                        Mean log wage bid proposed by job-seekers
    1.0
    0.5                                                                                                  Non-RUS
                                                                                                           Avg.

    0.0
                                                                                                         RUS.
   -0.5

                                                       Log number of hires
    1.0                                                                                                  RUS.

    0.5
    0.0                                                                                                  Non-RUS
                                                                                                           Avg.
   -0.5
                             14

                                   14

                                          14



                                                         14

                                                                  14

                                                                        14

                                                                                14




                                                                                                           5

                                                                                                         15
          14



                        14




                                                 14




                                                                                      14

                                                                                             15


                                                                                                    M 5
                                                                                                         15
                14




                                                                                                       r1
                                                                                                         1




                                                                                                     ay
         n



                     ar

                             r
                                  ay

                                          n



                                                         g

                                                                p

                                                                       ct

                                                                             ov
                                                  l




                                                                                     ec

                                                                                             n

                                                                                                    b

                                                                                                      ar
                b




                                               Ju




                                                                                                    Ap
                          Ap




                                                             Se




                                                                                          Ja
      Ja




                                       Ju



                                                      Au




                                                                                                 Fe
             Fe




                                                                    O
                    M




                                                                                                    M
                                 M




                                                                            N

                                                                                  D




Notes: This figure shows the time series of a collection of country-level outcomes. All
series are de-meaned to the first period. The non-Russian countries are the same as those
listed in Table 1.


                                                             14
shows a large increase in applications from Russians. The curve closely tracks
the number of active workers, not just in shape but also in magnitude. An
implication of the "active" and "applications" curves having the same mag-
nitude is that there is no evidence of an intensive margin effect (i.e., number
of applications send conditional upon sending any). However, it is important
to remember that given the large extensive margin effects, an aggregate in-
tensive margin calculation is likely masking important composition changes.
The kinds of Russians joining the platform in response to the ruble collapse
might have relatively little capacity to take on more work, and thus send rel-
atively few applications compared to "incumbent" Russians already active.
To explore these issues, I will turn to an individual worker panel analysis in
Section 4.
     The facet labeled "Mean log wage bid proposed by job-seekers" we can see
that the Russian line eventually dips below 0, but eventually returns to 0 at
the end of the panel. However, other countries go up: in the light gray lines,
we can see that he mean wage for some other countries shows a substantial
and sudden increase indicated at the vertical dashed line. As mentioned ear-
lier, the cause is the imposition of a platform-wide minimum wage of $3/hour
in mid-November 2014, which strongly increased average wages in several low
income countries (Horton, 2017b). This platform wide minimum wage will
require us to take care when doing a difference-in-differences analysis.
     Prior to the minimum wage imposition, note that the Russian average is
right with the other countries, despite there already being enormous Russian
increases in market participation by then. This is suggestive evidence of
little pass-through of the ruble decline into wage bids. A gap emerges later
between Russia and other countries, but to the extent there is a real relative
Russian decline, it could be a composition effect--new entrants could be less
productive--or a market effect, with increased competition in Russian-heavy
categories.
     The outcome in the bottom facet of Figure 1 is the "Log number of hires."


                                      15
For Russians, we can see hires curve closely tracks the applications curve and
has a similar magnitude. The similarity in magnitude implies no change in
per application win rates--the added Russian applications seemingly convert
into hires at the same rate as before.
    The count of hires is not the same as the count of hours-worked. How-
ever, the size of contracts won (in terms of hours-worked) did not change on
average, and so this hires elasticity is likely equivalent to the hours-worked
elasticity, though there are some conceptual issues with this claim, and labor
supply is better investigated at the micro level.8


3.3     Russian work specialization
The increase in the number of applications from Russians was not evenly
spread across all kinds of work. Figure 2, shows how the fraction of applicants
from Russia changed over time. The right panel, labeled "collapse year",
shows the fraction of applications during two periods: The pre-period is
April 1, 2014 to July 1st, 2014, which is indicated by a circle, and a post
period from January 1st, 2015 to March 1st, 2015, which is indicated by
triangle. The left panel, labeled "1 year before collapse year" is the same as
the right panel, but with the observations shifted back one year. In collapse
year, in both the pre- and post-periods (in the right panel) and the same
comparisons pushed one calendar year in the past (in the left panel). A
circle corresponds to the "pre" period and the triangle to the "post" period.
    We can see that in certain categories and sub-categories, the collapse of
the ruble lead to large increases in the fraction of applications coming from
Russians, whereas in other areas, there was minimal impact. The plot makes
it clear that the influx of Russians was concentrated in categories of work
that Russians already focused on before the ruble collapse.
   8
    I could plot hours-worked here, but there is an issue of whether to allocate those hours
to the date the contract was formed, or the date the hour was actually worked. As much
contracts are short in duration, this not likely to create much of a difference empirically.



                                            16
           Figure 2: Changes in the fraction of applicants from Russia

                                                              1 year before collapse year                                       Collapse year
             Other - Administrative Support      q                                                       q
                            Web Research         q                                                      q
                        Personal Assistant       q                                                      q                                                        Administrative Support
                                 Data Entry      q                                                      q
                              Transcription      q                                                      q

                       Business Consulting                    q                                                     q

                      Project Management          q                                                                 q

                         Statistical Analysis                                                               q

                 Other - Business Services       q                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                   Business Services
                                   Recruiting                                                               q

                                       Legal     q                                                      q

                                  Accounting     q                                                      q
                               Bookkeeping       q                                                      q


               Customer Service & Support        q                                                      q
                           Phone Support         q                                                      q                                                          Customer Service
                 Other - Customer Service                                                               q


                                 Animation                       q                                          q
                                Illustration          q                                                         q
              Other - Design & Multimedia            q                                                          q
                       3D Modeling & CAD              q                                                     q
                              Voice Talent                                                                      q

            Engineering & Technical Design        q                                                         q                                                     Design & Multimedia
                           Graphic Design        q                                                          q
                          Video Production        q                                                         q
                              Print Design       q                                                          q
                              Logo Design        q                                                      q
                             Presentations       q                                                      q


                      Server Administration                           q                                                         q
                    Network Administration                    q                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                            Networking & Information Systems
  Other - Networking & Information Systems               q                                                              q
            DBA - Database Administration                         q                                                     q


               Market Research & Surveys                     q                                              q
                 Other - Sales & Marketing q                                                                q
       Business Plans & Marketing Strategy q                                                                q
                           Email Marketing q                                                            q
                  Sales & Lead Generation q                                                             q
                                Advertising q                                                           q                                                          Sales & Marketing
                 Telemarketing & Telesales q                                                            q
           SEM - Search Engine Marketing q                                                              q
                     PR - Public Relations q                                                            q

        SEO - Search Engine Optimization q                                                              q
            SMM - Social Media Marketing q                                                              q
                          Scripts & Utilities                                     q                                                      q
                         Software Plug-ins                                            q                                                  q

                      Desktop Applications                                    q                                                      q
                       Game Development                               q                                                          q                               Software Development
             Other - Software Development                                 q                                                     q
                               Mobile Apps                            q                                                     q
               Application Interface Design                       q                                                         q


                        Web Programming
                                 UI Design                q
                                                                     q                                              q
                                                                                                                        q
                Other - Web Development                   q                                                     q
              Website Project Management                 q                                                      q                                                  Web Development
                               Ecommerce                 q                                                      q
                               Web Design            q                                                   q
                               Website QA            q                                                      q


                                 Translation    q                                                                   q
               Other - Writing & Translation  q                                                         q
                           Website Content q                                                            q
                          Technical Writing q                                                           q                                                         Writing & Translation
                                Copywriting q                                                           q
                            Creative Writing q                                                          q
                      Blog & Article Writing q                                                          q
                                                0.0%              2.5%         5.0%       7.5%   10.0% 0.0%             2.5%         5.0%    7.5%   10.0%
                                                                              Percentage of applications from Russians


Notes: This figure shows fraction of applicants from Russia, per the platform sub-
category. The right panel, labeled "collapse year", shows the fraction of applications
during two periods: The pre-period is April 1, 2014 to July 1st, 2014, which is indi-
cated by a circle, and a post period from January 1st, 2015 to March 1st, 2015, which
is indicated by triangle. The left panel, labeled "1 year before collapse year" is the
same as the right panel, but with the observations shifted back one year. Point sizes
are scaled by the number of total job openings in that sub-category. The sample is
restricted to categories with at least 300 total openings in both pre- and post periods
for the collapse year and the year before the collapse.
                                                                                                 17
3.4     Accounting for competition among countries and
        the minimum wage issue
One limitation of the graphical approach of Figure 1 is that it does not
account for the fact that some countries are closer competitors with Russians
than others.9 A sudden influx of Russians affected certain kinds of work--
namely work that Russians tend to specialize in--which in turn could affected
certain workers--namely non-Russians that tend to focus on the same kinds
of work as Russians. This could make some countries bad controls.
    To create a measure of Russian competition exposure, I start with each
application sent by any worker from any country and compute the fraction
of their fellow applicants to that job opening that were Russian. I then
average this measure over all workers in a particular country. This is done
with applications prior to the start of the panel. In a regression, I can
then interact this measure with the ruble price, allowing close competitors
to Russians to be more affected.
    I can do something similar for the minimum wage, by computing the
lowest pre-minimum wage average wage per country and interacting this
with a post minimum wage imposition indicator. This allows countries that
were affected by the minimum wage to have a different response after the
minimum wage imposition. As it turns out, the competition/overlap issue
seems to be more of a problem in theory than in practice; the minimum wage
issue matters more.
   9
    Coincidentally, this "ethnic specialization" design mirrors the design of Borjas and
Doran (2012), which relied on a previous Russian economic crisis to estimate the effects
on American mathematicians that were in Russian-heavy sub-fields of mathematics.




                                          18
3.5     Country-level regression evidence
To address the competition/overlap and the platform minimum wage issues,
I switch to a regression framework. My preferred specification is:

              yct = 1 (log pt × Russianc ) +                                            (1)
                 2 (log pt × RIc ) + 3 (Postt × wc ) + t + c + c ,

where yct is some outcome of interest, such as log applications sent per week
by workers from country c during week t, pt is the price of one US dollar
in rubles at the start of week t, Russianc is an indicator for whether the
observed country c is Russia, RIc is the Russian competition index (set to 0
for Russia), wc is the lowest observed log wage for a country c, Postt is an
indicator for periods after the imposition of the minimum wage, and finally,
t and c are week- and country-specific fixed effects. I report four different
specifications:

    · Russian Index Interaction and Min Wage Interaction (full Equation 1)

    · No Interaction (2 := 0 and 3 := 0).

    · Min Wage Interaction only (2 := 0).

    · Russian Index Interaction only (3 := 0).

    Figure 3 reports 1 from Equation 1, with each facet reporting the effect
on a different outcome. All of the specifications are shown; my preferred
specification is in black, while the others are in gray.10 Standard errors are
clustered at the level of the country.11 In the top facet, the outcome is the
log number of active workers. The point estimates are similar regardless of
  10
     The full regressions in table form are in Appendix A.1.
  11
     To check for Bertrand et al. (2004) problems, I also did block bootstrap on the country
(leaving Russia in every sample). The bootstrap standard errors were nearly identical, and
so I report the conventional standard errors with the appropriate clustering.



                                            19
the specification: the number of active Russians increased dramatically, with
a 10% associated with about a 13% increase in active Russians.
     In the next facet, the outcome is the log number of applications. Again,
the precise specification does not seem to matter much, in that the effects
are similar to what we saw with the number of active Russians: 10% increase
in the value of a US dollar in rubles is associated with 14% more applications
from Russians.
     Given that the effects of the ruble decline has similar percentage effects on
the number of active workers and the total number of applications, we expect
little effect on the intensive margin with respect to applications. In the third
facet from the top, the outcome is the log of the number of applications sent
divided by the number of workers active. Given the large extensive margin
effect relative to the overall increase, there is not much room for an intensive
margin effect among Russians. Indeed, the point estimates are all close to
zero. As mentioned earlier, this country-level regression is not capturing an
intensive margin effect--I will turn to this issue in the micro analysis.
     The third facet from the bottom shows the effect on win rates. All the
specifications are close to zero, implying no change. As such, we should
expect the total number of hires to be proportional to the number of appli-
cations. In the second panel from the bottom, we see that prediction is borne
out: the number of Russian hires increases dramatically, with elasticity point
estimates similar to what we observed for applications and active workers.
     In the bottom facet, the outcome is the mean log wage bid. For this out-
come, the specification matters. Although all point estimates are negative,
the two specifications that have the minimum wage interaction term have
estimates closer to zero. As the minimum wage imposition occurred when
the ruble was near its minimum, the inclusion of minimum-wage affected
countries (without 3 := 0) makes Russian wages look worse when this effect
is not captured with the appropriate specification.




                                       20
     Figure 3: Effect of ruble price changes using a country-week panel

                               No Interactions                                                q

                        Russian Index Interact.                                               q
                                                                                                          Num. Active
                         Min Wage Interaction                                                 q

   Min Wage Interact. + Russian Index Interact.                                               q



                               No Interactions                                                    q

                        Russian Index Interact.                                                       q
                                                                                                          Num Apps
                         Min Wage Interaction                                                 q

   Min Wage Interact. + Russian Index Interact.                                               q



                               No Interactions                          q

                        Russian Index Interact.                             q
                                                                                                          Apps/Active
                         Min Wage Interaction                       q

   Min Wage Interact. + Russian Index Interact.                     q



                               No Interactions                          q

                        Russian Index Interact.                     q
                                                                                                           Win Rate
                         Min Wage Interaction                       q

   Min Wage Interact. + Russian Index Interact.             q



                               No Interactions                                                    q

                        Russian Index Interact.                                                       q
                                                                                                          Num Hires
                         Min Wage Interaction                                                 q

   Min Wage Interact. + Russian Index Interact.                                           q



                               No Interactions          q

                        Russian Index Interact.    q
                                                                                                          Mean wage
                         Min Wage Interaction                   q

   Min Wage Interact. + Russian Index Interact.             q


                                                       -0.25                    0.50   1.00
                                            Coefficient on the log USD price in rubles
                                                interacted with Russian indicator


Notes: This panel reports estimates of Equation 1. These results in table form are in
Appendix A.1.




                                                  21
4      The "micro" view of the ruble collapse
I now take an individual worker perspective, using only workers that were
active pre-collapse, thus fixing the composition of the panel. To avoid the
complexities associated with the minimum wage policy change (and the un-
natural "exit" this created for at least some low-wage workers), I restrict
the countries to: Canada, Russia, United Kingdom and the United States.
These are higher wage countries that are also in somewhat less competition
with Russian workers.
    To define the sample, I take all workers that were active--defined as
sending at least one job application--from 2013-01-01 to 2014-01-01. There
are a total of 106,879 unique workers, of whom 5,789 are Russian. Mirroring
the country-level panel, the individual level panel covers 2014-01-07 to 2015-
03-17. There are 63 one week periods, giving a panel of 6,733,377 worker-week
observations.12
    Given the lack of importance of the "overlap" measures and the exclusion
of minimum-wage affected countries, I use a simpler specification:

                    yit = 1 (log pt × Russiani ) + t + i + i ,                          (2)

where yit is some weekly outcome for worker i in week t, Russiani is an
indicator for the worker being from Russia, pt is the average price of one US
dollar in rubles during the week t, t is a week-specific fixed effect and i is a
worker-specific fixed effect. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the
individual worker.
    The first outcome of interest is the extensive margin, or whether the
worker was active on the platform in the sense of earning some amount
of money. Unlike the other individual outcomes, this cannot be estimated
using a log specification, and the change has to be compared relative to some
  12
    It is slightly larger that the country panel because of slight differences in panel con-
struction.



                                            22
Figure 4: Individual-level estimates of effects of ruble prices changes on in-
dividual outcomes


      Log number of Apps                                       q          Job search


                  Log hours                               q                 Hours


              Log earnings                            q                   Earnings


         Log avg. wage bid      q



             Log avg. wage       q                                          Prices

       Log avg. profile rate        q



                                     0.0        0.1           0.2   0.3
                                 Coefficient on
                        log USD price in rubles x Russian
                                interaction term
 Notes: This figure reports estimates of ^1 from Equation 2. These results
 in table form are in Appendix A.1.

baseline to construct an elasticity. Using the Russian baseline probability of
working some number of hours in the first 4 weeks of the start of the panel,
the implied extensive margin elasticity with respect to the log price of the
US dollar in rubles is 0.24.
    For the rest of the outcomes, the sample is conditioned on the worker
being either working some number of hours and/or sending an application.
These estimates of 1 from Equation 2 are presented in Figure 4.
    In the top facet of Figure 4, the outcome is the log number of applications
sent by a worker per week, conditional upon sending any. The outcome, in
levels, has summary statistics µ   ^ = 4.63;^
                                             = 6.13. The implied elasticity


                                           23
with respect to the US dollar price in rubles is 0.21. This is considerably
smaller than the application macro estimate--which included extensive and
intensive margin effects--but it is also non-zero, whereas in the macro panel,
there was no evidence of an intensive margin increase in applications.
    In the second facet from the top, the outcome is the log number of hours-
worked by a worker per week, conditional upon any.13 This outcome, in levels,
has summary statistics µ  ^ = 18.24;^ = 20.20. The hours-worked elasticity is
0.16, which is similar to the application intensity elasticity.
    The outcome in the third facet from the top is the log earnings by a
worker per week, conditional upon any. The estimated elasticity is also sim-
ilar in magnitude to the hours-worked and application-intensity elasticities.
That the effects on hours and earnings are similar foreshadows the effect on
wages--namely that there is little effect.
    For wages, I report the effect on three outcomes: the log average wage bid,
the log average wage worked at, and the log average profile rate. Summary
statistics for the actually worked-at wages are, in levels, are µ^ = 21.62;^
                                                                           =
15.75. There is some slight evidence of decline in the average wage and a
decline in the wage bid; the profile wage is unchanged. The effect on the
individual wage estimate is negative and statistically significant, but fairly
close to zero: the implied elasticity is just -0.03. Note that this estimate is
about 1/10th the size of the macro panel estimate, with the difference likely
explained by composition effects.
    There is no evidence that workers lowered their wage bids by an eco-
nomically significant amount to obtain more hours of work. If we take the
bargained wage view, this results implies workers have nearly all the bargain-
ing power. However, a more sensible interpretation is that job-seekers and
employers act as price-takers and a bargaining lens is the wrong lens.
  13
    Manual hours are possible, giving implausibly high values. I cap hours-per-week at
100, replacing those entries with 100 exactly. This affects less than 1% of observations in
the panel.




                                            24
4.1    Intensive margin labor supply elasticity by current
       hours-per-week
Given the large extensive margin effects revealed in the macro panel, it is use-
ful to consider whether Russians lightly attached to the market pre-collapse
were particularly elastic. A stylized fact from the labor supply literature is
that workers who are less "attached" to the market tend to be more elastic
(Blundell and MaCurdy, 1999). Adapting this to our setting, it seems likely
that incumbent Russian workers would respond differently depending on how
many hours they were already working pre-collapse.
    To assess whether intensive margin elasticities vary by pre-collapse hours-
worked, I compute the fraction of all weeks that workers were working at
least some number of hours in the 6 months prior to the start of the panel.
Note that this sample is defined by actually working, not just sending an
application. For weeks where they were active, I compute the average hours
per week, and I compute the fraction of weeks active. I then divide workers
into quartiles based on the their average hours per week, conditional upon
working.
    Figure 5, in the upper left facet, shows the average hours-worked by
quartile pre-collapse. The highest quartile is working close to full time, on
average, while the bottom quartile is only working a few hours per week. In
the top right facet, the per-week probability of being active pre-collapse is
reported. Even in the top quartile it is only 60%, but recall that in the pre-
period, workers are "joining" the platform and so some of these non-working
weeks were before they had joined.
    To estimate effect of the ruble collapse, I use the specification

          yit =       g (log pt × Russiani × Hg ) +       gt + i + i ,      (3)
                  g                                   g


which has the Russian indicator and log US dollar price in rubles interacted
with the quartile indicators. There is now a separate time effect, gt , for

                                      25
Figure 5: Hours-worked and estimated intensive margin elasticities for work-
ers active before the ruble collapse

                            Avg. hours-per-week                                          Per-week probability of
                             before ruble collapse                                   being active before ruble collapse
            30                                                    q                                                                 q
                                                                             0.6

            20                                                                                                           q
                                                                             0.4
                                                                                                        q
                                                       q
            10                                                               0.2          q
                                      q
                        q
             0                                                               0.0
                        Intensive margin elastcity                                        Extensive margin effect on
                             of hours-worked                                              probability of working (LPM)
          1.25                                                              0.20
          1.00                                                              0.15
                                                                                          q
          0.75          q                                                   0.10
          0.50                        q
                                                       q                    0.05                        q                q          q

          0.25                                                    q         0.00
          0.00
                     5]


                                       5]


                                                      5]


                                                                  1]




                                                                                       5]


                                                                                                         5]


                                                                                                                        5]


                                                                                                                                    1]
                   .2


                                    0.


                                                  .7


                                                             5,




                                                                                     .2


                                                                                                      0.


                                                                                                                    .7


                                                                                                                               5,
                   ,0


                                 5,


                                                 ,0


                                                             .7




                                                                                     ,0


                                                                                                   5,


                                                                                                                   ,0


                                                                                                                               .7
                 (0


                             .2


                                             .5


                                                           (0




                                                                                   (0


                                                                                               .2


                                                                                                               .5


                                                                                                                             (0
                            (0


                                            (0




                                                                                              (0


                                                                                                              (0




                                      Pre-collapse hours-worked/week quartiles


       Notes: This figure reports characteristics of Russian workers by decline
       in terms of pre-collapse activity. The bottom panels report estimates of
       k from Equation 3.




                                                                       26
each quartile, which is indexed by g , as well as an individual fixed effect, i .
Standard errors are clustered at the level of the individual worker.
    For the probability of being active, in the bottom right facet of Figure 5,
we can see there is an increase across quartiles, with effects largest in the
lowest quartile. However, effects are generally imprecise.
    In the bottom left facet of Figure 5, the outcome is the log hours-worked,
conditional upon any. For the intensive margin, we see fairly high point
estimates for workers that where weakly attached, but the estimates are
highly imprecise. The elasticity declines with greater pre-collapse usage, in
the top quartile, the point estimate is about 0.12.
    Despite the limitations the setting imposes on the interpretability of the
elasticities, if we take them at face value, the results are broadly inline with
other Frisch labor supply estimates in Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), though
they are considerably smaller than the estimates in settings where the changes
are much more obviously temporary (Angrist et al., 2017; Fehr and Goette,
2007). The finding of heterogeneity in elasticity by labor market attachment
is also found in conventional settings.


5     Evidence of a demand response?
Employers posting jobs that would appeal to Russians presumably received
more applications and--our panel evidence notwithstanding--perhaps lower
wage bids. This could cause them to post more Russian-friendly jobs or be
more likely to fill them. To see how this affected the employers, we need to
switch to the job post as our unit of analysis. A key complication is that we
now need some measure of how appealing a job opening would be to Russian
applicants.
   To construct a measure of Russian exposure, I first construct a historical
dataset of pre-collapse job openings, recording the fraction of those applicants
that were Russian. Then, I use the full document-term-matrix for the skills


                                       27
required for that opening, as well as other characteristics set by the employer
as predictors. I then use gradient boosting (using the xgboost R package)
to train a linear model (Friedman et al., 2000; Chen et al., 2015). I use the
fitted model out of sample to make predictions for all job openings posted
during our panel year. The predictive model can explain about 25% of the
variance in the realized fraction of Russian applicants in the panel sample.
    Figure 6, in the right panel, I plot the mean predicted score (the fraction of
Russian applicants), by quantile (with the cut points determined by pooling
over the entire panel) and by week. We can see that the predicted score shows
no time trend in any level. This is consistent with there being no demand
shift or compositional shift in the kinds of jobs being posted. If instead more
Russian-friendly jobs were posted, these time series would rise as the model
would observe more jobs with Russian-friendly characteristics and predict
a greater fraction of Russians. This is not the case. In short, there is no
evidence employers posted more Russian-compatible job openings.
    In the left panel, I plot the mean actual, realized fraction of Russian ap-
plicants, but by predicted quantile. At first, the predicted and actual match
during the period before the ruble began to strongly depreciate. However, as
the ruble depreciates, we can see somewhat of an increase in every quantile--
even the lowest--there is an increase in the fraction of actual applicants,
though the increase is concentrated among those job openings expected to
receive the largest number of Russian applicants. Among the top 25%, the
fraction of Russian applicants nearly doubles.


5.1    Job opening level outcomes
To see how this Russian supply shock affected the openings, I discretize the
Russian compatibility score in a collection of k percentile intervals, from




                                       28
Figure 6: Comparison of the predicted fraction of Russian applicants (based
on job opening characteristics) versus the realized fraction

                  Mean Actual Russian Fraction                      Mean Predicted Russian Fraction
           0.06




           0.04
                                              (0.75,1]
Fraction




                                                                                                      (0.75,1]



           0.02


                                             (0.5,0.75]
                                                                                                  (0.5,0.75]


                                             (0.25,0.5]
           0.00                                                                                   (0.25,0.5]
                p 4
             O 14
              o 4
              ec 4

             Fe 15
               a 5
             Apr 15
              ay 5
             Ju 15
              Ju 15
                    5




              ay 5

              Ju 15
                    5
             Fe 14
               a 4
             Apr 14
              ay 4
             Ju 14
              Ju 14
                    4




             Ja 14




             Fe 14
               a 4
             Apr 14
              ay 4
             Ju 14
              Ju 14
                   4
                p 4
             O 14
              ov 4
              ec 4
             Ja 14
             Fe 15
               ar 5
             Ap 15

             Ju 15
             Au l 1
             Seg 1

             N t1
             D v1


             Mb1

             M r1


                 l1




             Seg 1

             N t1
             D 1


             Mb1

             M r1


                 l1
             Mb1

             M r1




             Mb1

             M r1


             Au l 1
                n




                n
                n




                n
                n




                n




                n




                n
               c




               c
             Ja




             Ja




                                                          By week


Notes: This figure shows the predicted and actual fraction of Russian applicants for job
openings, with the predictions derived from the text of the job description, skill required
and job title. The different lines correspond to the different quantiles of the predicted
Russian applicant fraction distribution.




                                                          29
lowest score to highest score. I then estimate regression of the form

    yj =       k RcsIntk(j ) +       k RcsIntk(j ) × log pt(j ) + t(j ) +   (4)
           k                     k


where yj is some outcome for job opening j , RcsIntk(j ) is an indicator for
whether the Russian-compatibility score for job opening j is in the k th in-
terval, and pt(j ) is the price of one US dollar in rubles when opening at time
t, which is when opening j was posted, and finally, t is day fixed effect.
    Table 3 reports the    ^k of the regressions where the outcomes are various
job opening level measures. In Column (1), the outcome is the log number of
Russian applications received, plus 1. For job openings with relatively lower
Russian-compatibility scores, the effect is positive but not large in magnitude.
However, the effect is increasing in the Russian compatibility score. At the
highest band--the most Russian compatible openings--the increase is large
and the elasticity is 0.71.
    How this Russian influx translated into the size of the actual applicant
pool is considered in Column (2), which reports the results of a regression
where the outcome is the log number of applicants. The results are highly
imprecise and none of the effects are statistically significant. Similarly, in
Column (3), the outcome is the log number of non-Russian applicants, plus
1 and again, the point estimates are imprecise. In short, there is little that
can we said about the effects of Russian entrants on applicant pool sizes.
As it will be more informative to view the collection of elasticities for other
outcomes graphically, in Figure 7, we re-report the coefficients from Table 3.
    Now we turn to wage bidding and hiring. In Figure 8, I turn to the
effects of the ruble collapse on measures of wage bids and hiring at the job
opening level. In the leftmost panel, the outcome is the average log wage of
interviewed candidates. There is no evidence of that the ruble collapse had
any effect on the wage bid of interviewed applicants, even among the most
Russian-compatible openings. In the next facet, we look at whether the


                                         30
Table 3: Effects of the ruble collapse on per-vacancy measures of competition,
wage bidding, hires and total wage bill

                                                               Dependent variable:
                                         Log # Russian apps     Log # apps      Log # non-Russians apps
                                                   (1)               (2)                     (3)
log pt(j ) × RcsInt = (1.8e - 06, 0.1]           -0.002           -0.021                   -0.005
                                                 (0.171)          (0.681)                  (0.666)

log pt(j ) × RcsInt = (0.1, 0.25]                 0.001           -0.010                    0.003
                                                 (0.171)          (0.595)                  (0.584)

log pt(j ) × RcsInt = (0.25, 0.5]                 0.004            0.015                    0.028
                                                 (0.168)          (0.563)                  (0.552)

log pt(j ) × RcsInt = (0.5, 0.75]                 0.102           -0.113                   -0.097
                                                 (0.162)          (0.561)                  (0.550)

log pt(j ) × RcsInt = (0.75, 1]               0.709                0.376                    0.307
                                               (0.173)            (0.502)                  (0.482)

Day FE                                              Y                Y                        Y
Mean outcome (in levels)                           0.3             31.81                    31.51
Observations                                     303,104          303,104                  303,104
R2                                                0.216            0.007                    0.008
Adjusted R2                                       0.216            0.007                    0.008
  Notes : This table reports regressions on vacancy level outcomes on changes in the
  price of the USD (measured in rubles) and its interaction with indicators how Russian-
  compatible that opening is, based on a model fit with historical data. Significance
  indicators: p  0.05 : , p  0.01 :  and p  .001 :   .




                                            31
Figure 7: Elasticities of per-application measures of supply with respect to
the price of the US dollar, in rubles

                                           Log # Russian apps                                                Log # apps                                     Log # non-Russian apps
                       1.5
wrt USD (in rubles)




                       1.0
Elasticity for band




                                                                                q
                       0.5                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                     q
                       0.0          q          q          q                                   q          q          q                                   q          q          q
                                                                                                                               q                                                         q


                      -0.5

                      -1.0

                      -1.5
                                 ]

                                             5]


                                                        5]


                                                                  5]


                                                                                ]



                                                                                             ]

                                                                                                       5]


                                                                                                                  5]


                                                                                                                            5]


                                                                                                                                          ]



                                                                                                                                                       ]


                                                                                                                                                                  ]


                                                                                                                                                                            ]


                                                                                                                                                                                        ]

                                                                                                                                                                                                 1]
                               .1




                                                                              1



                                                                                           .1




                                                                                                                                        1



                                                                                                                                                     .1

                                                                                                                                                               25


                                                                                                                                                                          .5

                                                                                                                                                                                     75
                                           .2


                                                      0.


                                                                .7


                                                                           5,




                                                                                                     .2


                                                                                                                0.


                                                                                                                          .7


                                                                                                                                     5,




                                                                                                                                                                                               5,
                               ,0




                                                                                         ,0




                                                                                                                                                   ,0




                                                                                                                                                                         ,0
                                                                                                                                                              0.




                                                                                                                                                                                    0.
                                           0


                                                      ,

                                                                ,0


                                                                           .7




                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                                ,

                                                                                                                          ,0


                                                                                                                                     .7




                                                                                                                                                                                               .7
                             06




                                                   25




                                                                                       06




                                                                                                             25




                                                                                                                                                 06




                                                                                                                                                                       25
                                        1,




                                                                                                  1,




                                                                                                                                                            1,




                                                                                                                                                                                  5,
                                                              .5


                                                                         (0




                                                                                                                        .5


                                                                                                                                   (0




                                                                                                                                                                                             (0
                           -


                                       .


                                                  .




                                                                                       -


                                                                                                 .


                                                                                                            .




                                                                                                                                                 -


                                                                                                                                                           .


                                                                                                                                                                      .


                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                    (0


                                               (0


                                                          (0




                                                                                              (0


                                                                                                         (0


                                                                                                                    (0




                                                                                                                                                        (0


                                                                                                                                                                   (0


                                                                                                                                                                              (0
                        8e




                                                                                    8e




                                                                                                                                              8e
                         .




                                                                                   .




                                                                                                                                             .
                      (1




                                                                                (1




                                                                                                                                          (1
Notes: This figure plots the k coefficients from an estimate of Equation 4 for several
outcomes.


employer hired anyone at all. The point estimates are all centered around
zero and there is no evidence that more Russian-compatible openings had
higher hiring rates.
    In the rightmost panel, the outcome is whether the employer hired a
Russian. Here we see positive effects from about the 75th percentile onward,
and large effects at the highest percentile.
    In short, at the level of the applicant, even for job openings most exposed
to the Russian influx, the effects on realized wage bids and hiring was non-
existent. The only finding that seems fairly clear is that more Russians were
ultimately hired among the most Russian compatible job openings.


6                       Discussion
One way to characterize the effects of the ruble collapse is with a simple
supply and demand model. In the left panel of Figure 9, I draw overall
supply and demand curves in the market for labor to the platform. The

                                                                                                         32
Figure 8: Elasticities of per-application measures of wage bids and hiring
with respect to the price of the US dollar, in rubles

                                             Log wage bid of
                                                                                                              Any hires?                                        Any Russian hires?
                                          interviewed applicants
wrt USD (in rubles)
Elasticity for band




                       0.25
                                     q          q          q                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                       0.00                                           q                                                                                  q          q          q          q


                                                                                               q          q          q
                      -0.25                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                q


                      -0.50
                                  ]

                                              5]


                                                         5]


                                                                    5]


                                                                                 ]



                                                                                              ]

                                                                                                        5]


                                                                                                                   5]


                                                                                                                              5]


                                                                                                                                           ]



                                                                                                                                                        ]

                                                                                                                                                                  5]


                                                                                                                                                                             5]


                                                                                                                                                                                        5]


                                                                                                                                                                                                     ]
                                .1




                                                                               1



                                                                                            .1




                                                                                                                                        ,1



                                                                                                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                            .2


                                                       0.


                                                                  .7


                                                                            5,




                                                                                                      .2


                                                                                                                 0.


                                                                                                                            .7




                                                                                                                                                                .2


                                                                                                                                                                           0.


                                                                                                                                                                                      .7


                                                                                                                                                                                                5,
                                ,0




                                                                                          ,0




                                                                                                                                      75



                                                                                                                                                    ,0
                                            0


                                                       ,

                                                                  0

                                                                            .7




                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                 ,

                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                           ,

                                                                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                                                                                .7
                              06




                                                    25




                                                                                        06




                                                                                                              25




                                                                                                                                                  06




                                                                                                                                                                        25
                                         1,




                                                               5,




                                                                                                   1,




                                                                                                                         5,


                                                                                                                                       .




                                                                                                                                                             1,




                                                                                                                                                                                   5,
                                                                          (0




                                                                                                                                    (0




                                                                                                                                                                                              (0
                            -


                                        .


                                                   .


                                                              .




                                                                                        -


                                                                                                  .


                                                                                                             .


                                                                                                                        .




                                                                                                                                                  -


                                                                                                                                                            .


                                                                                                                                                                       .


                                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                     (0


                                                (0


                                                           (0




                                                                                               (0


                                                                                                          (0


                                                                                                                     (0




                                                                                                                                                         (0


                                                                                                                                                                    (0


                                                                                                                                                                               (0
                         8e




                                                                                     8e




                                                                                                                                               8e
                          .




                                                                                    .




                                                                                                                                              .
                       (1




                                                                                 (1




                                                                                                                                           (1
Notes: This figure plots the k coefficients from an estimate of Equation 4 for several
outcomes.


ruble collapse pushes out the supply curve from S to S , but given that
Russians make up a small fraction of the market, it is a small shift. This
shift causes little change to overall quantities or wages.
    Now imagine there is also a market for Russian labor specifically, illus-
trated in the right panel of Figure 9. There is a demand curve for Rus-
sian labor, but because a would-be buyer of Russian labor has many good
substitutes--namely workers from other countries with similar skills--the
demand curve is de facto horizontal. In the market for Russian labor, the
supply shift from the ruble collapse is obviously much larger. However, be-
cause of the horizontal demand curve, the supply shock leads to a change
in quantities (QRU S to Q ) rather than prices. This explains the Figure 3
result of large increases in hires (and thus hours-worked) for Russians, but
no apparent changes in wages. This simple supply and demand explanation
succinctly characterizes all of the main results of the paper.




                                                                                                          33
Figure 9: Simple supply and demand treatment of a Russian supply shock
to a global online labor market




6.1    What if the supply curve to a marketplace is de
       facto horizontal?
The left panel of Figure 9 still draws the market supply curve as upward
sloping. The explanation for why there is no evidence of a Russian decline in
wages is that the implied supply shock was small. But what if this curve was
horizontal, in which case even large supply shocks would do little to prices?
    Horizontal supply curves in the long-run are found in industries where
there are 1) limited capital requirements, 2) more or less free entry and 3)
there are constant returns to scale in production. This seems like a good
description of many online marketplaces. For (1), in most online market-
places, capital requirements (both physical and human) are minimal or at
least common and not specialized (e.g., ride-sharing requires a car). For (2)
platforms try to make it easy to join and remove entry barriers. And for (3)
when the supply side is a large number of smaller sellers, constant returns to


                                     34
scale is reasonable--doubling the number of sellers likely doubles platform
output. Furthermore, even if the industry supply curve was not horizontal,
platform competition would tend to make it de facto horizontal as market
participants multi-home or switch platforms.
    If horizontal supply curves are a reasonable characterization in many on-
line marketplaces, we should expect prices in the market to be quite stable,
regardless of demand. There is some evidence for this from multiple online
marketplace contexts. Hall et al. (2017) shows Uber driver hourly earnings
rates being largely insensitive to the platform imposed price due to a supply
response by drivers. Horton and Tambe (2020) finds no evidence that work-
ers specializing in Flash saw their wages decrease as the demand for Flash
plummeted, as workers quickly switched to other skills. Cullen and Far-
ronato (2020) finds evidence from TaskRabbit--a marketplace for in-person
services--that despite huge changes in demand, prices stayed roughly con-
stant and that large changes in scale had little effect on matching efficiency.
Agrawal et al. (2015) presents roughly contemporaneous times series evidence
on average platform wages, showing remarkable stability despite the platform
growing rapidly during this period.
    One could imagine the lack of prices effects from these difference cases
is the result of a sloped supply curve moving in at exactly the right rate
to keep prices constant despite enormous growth--and surely some demand
growth has to be met by supply growth--but this seems less plausible than
an alternative, which is that supply curve was de facto horizontal and so
prices never changed despite rapid changes in demand.
    If supply to a platform is highly elastic, it means that sellers will always
get about some market-determined rate of return. If the platform say, pays
bonuses of some kind, then under free entry, these would likely get dissipated
away by competition. This, in a nutshell, is the main finding of Hall et al.
(2017). From the profit-motivated market designer's perspective then, the
main supply strategy in an established marketplace is to try to lower on-


                                      35
platform costs for sellers. For example, they could lower costs by creating
feature that ease matching frictions or, in the spirit of the two-sided markets
literature, try to bring more buyers to the platform. These benefits would,
of course, still be dissipated by competition but can be paired with prices
increases or with greater revenue from an expanded market with greater
quantities. In short, the platform strategy in a world of horizontal supply
curves is to try to lower costs for buyers and sellers and then raising prices,
leaving buyers and sellers with unchanged pay-offs but with the platform's
revenue increased.


6.2    Implications of the results for the take rate
Although the much of the two-sided platform pricing literature has focused
on membership fees, many marketplace businesses use ad valorem charges
rather than membership/entrance fees. Despite the theoretical advantages
of taxing membership and pricing transactions at cost (Oi, 1971)--and their
use in some settings--many online platforms use ad valorem charges, as they
scale with user value (e.g., a person doing 2 rides on Uber would find any
fixed membership fee too high if the fee was priced to extract value from the
15 rides per week person). Furthermore, as the platform intermediates the
transaction, it observes and can tax that transaction, which might not be
the case in other offline settings (e.g., Jin and Rysman (2015)). The other
advantage of only taxing transactions is that users do not have to know their
valuation ex ante.
    The ruble episode strongly suggests that lowering the platform ad val-
orem fees would attract more supply. However, the economics of this being
profit-maximizing are challenging. Consider that the elasticity of Russians
appears to be about 1--a 10% increase in returns increases hours-worked
from Russians by 10%. As wages did not change, platform revenue is pro-
portional to hours-worked, as the platform taxes the wage bill (hours-worked
times the wage).

                                      36
    If the platform charges say 10%, even if the increase in hours-worked was
entirely incremental (not cannibalizing any other hours from non-Russians),
and the platform lowers its fee from 10% to 9%, this is a 10% reduction
in revenue but only leads to a 1% increase in platform earnings and a 1%
increase in hours-worked. The change in revenue is percentage change in
revenue is 0.90  1.01  0.91. This of course suggests higher fees would
increase revenue. However, the long-run elasticity is not known and is surely
greater than 1, as long-run elasticities are typically larger than short-run
elasticities. It is not obviously the case than the platform can profitably
raise prices, or lower prices for that matter.
    Pricing is hard and many platforms choose something simple and tend
to stick with it. While we should not assume what is is necessarily optimal,
that so many platform marketplaces choose a simple price structure suggests
most platform competition is about features and marketing rather than finely
tuned price structures and levels. This perspective might be quite sensible,
particularly for emerging platforms where even small differences in rates of
platform growth are likely to be far more important to ultimate platform
value.


7    Conclusion
For a would-be market designer, the ruble experience offers several lessons.
First, it is clear that workers responded strongly to the financial opportuni-
ties created on the platform. While platforms can and do make "horizontal"
changes to their platforms to attract buyers and sellers, the ruble experi-
ence illustrates the paramount role played by financial returns in explaining
market participation--even if lowering the take rate is not a viable way to
increase supply, given the relevant elasticities.
    Second, the price effects of adding more supply could be safely ignored.
Although the influx of Russians was small relative to the total collection of


                                     37
workers--and so we would not expect market wages to fall--it was conceiv-
able that incoming Russians would have underbid incumbents to get more
work, as in bargaining models, potentially lowering platform revenue. This
was not the case. There was not apparent downside to adding more supply
with respect to price. However, neither was there was there evidence of any
positive cross-side externality either--there was no evidence of more Russian
friendly job openings being posted. Given the lack of price effects, this is
perhaps unsurprising--though the lack of price effects was less predictable.
    In terms of generalization, it is important to note that the ruble-induced
influx was not a large supply shock at the market level. Larger shocks could
have different effects. Furthermore, this was a shock that occurred in an
established marketplace well past the chicken-and-egg stage. Marginal supply
for smaller markets could be worth a great deal more.




                                     38
References
Adams, Camilla, Jonathan Meer, and CarlyWill Sloan, "The Min-
 imum Wage and Search Effort," Technical Report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research 2018.

Agrawal, Ajay, John J Horton, Nicola Lacetera, and Elizabeth
 Lyons, "Digitization and the contract labor market: A research agenda,"
 in "Economic analysis of the digital economy," University of Chicago Press,
 2015, pp. 219­250.

Angrist, Joshua D, Sydnee Caldwell, and Jonathan V Hall, "Uber
 vs. taxi: A drivers eye view," Working paper, 2017.

Armstrong, Mark, "Competition in two-sided markets," The RAND Jour-
 nal of Economics, 2006, 37 (3), 668­691.

Barach, Moshe and John J Horton, "How do employers use compen-
 sation history? Evidence from the field experiment," Journal of Labor
 Economics, Forthcoming.

Benson, Alan, Aaron Sojourner, and Akhmed Umyarov, "Can repu-
 tation discipline the gig economy? Experimental evidence from an online
 labor market," Management Science, 2019.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, "How
 Much Should We Trust Differences-In-Differences Estimates?*," Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (1), 249­275.

Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy, "Labor supply: A review
  of alternative approaches," in "Handbook of labor economics," Vol. 3,
  Elsevier, 1999, pp. 1559­1695.




                                    39
Borjas, George J and Kirk B Doran, "The collapse of the Soviet Union
 and the productivity of American mathematicians," Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2012, 1143, 1203.

Caillaud, Bernard and Bruno Jullien, "Chicken and Egg: Competi-
 tion among Intermediation Service Providers," The RAND Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 2003, 34 (2), 309­328.

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard
 Thaler, "Labor supply of New York City cabdrivers: One day at a time,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112 (2), 407­441.

Chen, M Keith, Peter E Rossi, Judith A Chevalier, and Emily
 Oehlsen, "The value of flexible work: Evidence from Uber drivers," Jour-
 nal of Political Economy, 2019, 127 (6), 2735­2794.

Chen, Tianqi, Tong He, Michael Benesty et al., "Xgboost: extreme
 gradient boosting," R package version 0.4-2, 2015, pp. 1­4.

Chetty, Raj, Adam Guren, Day Manoli, and Andrea Weber, "Are
 micro and macro labor supply elasticities consistent? A review of evi-
 dence on the intensive and extensive margins," American Economic Re-
 view, 2011, 101 (3), 471­75.

Cullen, Zoe and Chiara Farronato, "Outsourcing Tasks Online: Match-
 ing Supply and Demand on Peer-to-Peer Internet Platforms," Management
 Science, 2020.

Dube, Arindrajit, Jeff Jacobs, Suresh Naidu, and Siddharth Suri,
 "Monopsony in online labor markets," American Economic Review: In-
 sights, 2020, 2 (1), 33­46.

Farronato, Chiara, Jessica Fong, and Andrey Fradkin, "Dog Eat
  Dog: Measuring Network Effects Using a Digital Platform Merger," NBER
  Working Paper, 2020, (28047).

                                   40
Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Goette, "Do workers work more if wages are
  high? Evidence from a randomized field experiment," American Economic
  Review, 2007, 97 (1), 298­317.

Friedman, Jerome, Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani et al., "Ad-
  ditive logistic regression: a statistical view of boosting (with discussion
  and a rejoinder by the authors)," The Annals of Statistics, 2000, 28 (2),
  337­407.

Hall, Jonathan V, John J Horton, and Daniel T Knoepfle, "La-
 bor market equilibration: Evidence from uber," URL http://john-joseph-
 horton. com/papers/uber price. pdf, working paper, 2017.

Ham, John C and Kevin T Reilly, "Testing intertemporal substitution,
 implicit contracts, and hours restriction models of the labor market using
 micro data," American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (4), 905­927.

Horton, John and Prasanna Tambe, "The Death of a Technical Skill,"
 Working Paper, 2020.

Horton, John J, "Online labor markets," in "International workshop on
 internet and network economics" Springer 2010, pp. 515­522.

  , "The effects of algorithmic labor market recommendations: Evidence
  from a field experiment," Journal of Labor Economics, 2017, 35 (2), 345­
  385.

  , "Price floors and employer preferences: Evidence from a minimum wage
  experiment," Working paper, 2017.

  , "Buyer uncertainty about seller capacity: Causes, consequences, and a
  partial solution," Management Science, 2019, 65 (8), 3518­3540.




                                     41
  , William R Kerr, and Christopher Stanton, "Digital labor markets
  and global talent flows," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2017.

Hossain, Tanjim, Dylan Minor, and John Morgan, "Competing
 Matchmakers: An Experimental Analysis," Manage. Sci., November 2011,
 57 (11), 19131925.

Jin, Ginger Zhe and Marc Rysman, "Platform Pricing at Sports Card
  Conventions," The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2015, 63 (4), 704­735.

Kuhn, Peter, "Is monopsony the right way to model labor markets? A
 review of Alan Manning's monopsony in motion," International Journal
 of the Economics of Business, 2004, 11 (3), 369­378.

Lemieux, Thomas and W Bentley MacLeod, "Supply side hysteresis:
  the case of the Canadian unemployment insurance system," Journal of
  Public Economics, 2000, 78 (1-2), 139­170.

Li, Zhuoxin and Ashish Agarwal, "Platform Integration and Demand
  Spillovers in Complementary Markets: Evidence from Facebooks Integra-
  tion of Instagram," Management Science, 2017, 63 (10), 3438­3458.

Liefert, William M, Olga Liefert, Ralph Seeley, and Tani Lee, "The
  effect of Russias economic crisis and import ban on its agricultural and
  food sector," Journal of Eurasian Studies, 2019, 10 (2), 119­135.

MaCurdy, Thomas E, "An empirical model of labor supply in a life-cycle
 setting," Journal of Political Economy, 1981, 89 (6), 1059­1085.

Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, "Valuing alternative work ar-
 rangements," American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3722­59.




                                    42
Mukoyama, Toshihiko, Christina Patterson, and Ay¸         seg¨
                                                             ul S
                                                                ¸ ahin,
 "Job search behavior over the business cycle," American Economic Jour-
 nal: Macroeconomics, 2018, 10 (1), 190­215.

Oi, Walter Y, "A Disneyland dilemma: Two-part tariffs for a Mickey Mouse
 monopoly," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1971, 85 (1), 77­96.

Pallais, Amanda, "Inefficient hiring in entry-level labor markets," Ameri-
 can Economic Review, March 2014, (18917).

Reshef, Oren, "Smaller Slices of a Growing Pie: The Effects of Entry in
 Platform Markets," Working Paper, 2020.

Rochet, Jean-Charles and Jean Tirole, "Two-Sided Markets: A
 Progress Report," The RAND Journal of Economics, 2006, 37 (3), 645­
 667.

Saez, Emmanuel, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim, "Payroll
  taxes, firm behavior, and rent sharing: Evidence from a young workers'
  tax cut in Sweden," American Economic Review, 2019, 109 (5), 1717­63.

Seamans, Robert and Feng Zhu, "Responses to Entry in Multi-Sided
  Markets: The Impact of Craigslist on Local Newspapers," Management
  Science, 2014, 60 (2), 476­493.

Stanton, Christopher T and Catherine Thomas, "Landing the first
  job: The value of intermediaries in online hiring," The Review of Economic
  Studies, 2016, 83 (2), 810­854.

Woodbury, Stephen A and Robert G Spiegelman, "Bonuses to workers
 and employers to reduce unemployment: Randomized trials in Illinois,"
 The American Economic Review, 1987, pp. 513­530.




                                    43
A   Online Appendix




                      44
A.1     Table versions
Table A1 has country panel results.

Table A1: Effects of the ruble collapse whether the worker worked any hours
in a week


                                              Dependent variable:
                      log(num.active)    log(num.apps)      log(num.hires)   mean.wage
                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)         (4)
log pt × Russianc        1.321                1.326            1.165         -0.208
                         (0.157)              (0.157)          (0.146)        (0.080)

log pt × RC                1.952               3.601            -6.444        -5.232
                          (7.787)             (7.246)           (6.871)       (5.029)

Post × wc                 -0.005               0.051            0.100        -0.119
                          (0.035)             (0.035)           (0.042)       (0.023)

Country FE                   Y                   Y                 Y             Y
Week FE                      Y                   Y                 Y             Y
Observations                549                 549               549           549
R2                         0.998               0.997             0.994         0.997
Adjusted R2                0.998               0.997             0.993         0.996
Notes : Significance indicators: p  0.05 : , p  0.01 :  and p  .001 :   .


   Table A2 has individual panel results.




                                         45
       Table A2: Effects of the ruble collapse on individual outcomes


                                          Dependent variable:
                             Apps        Hours      Earnings     Avg. Wage
                              (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)
      log pt × Russiani     0.213       0.174        0.138         -0.029
                            (0.043)     (0.051)      (0.053)       (0.015)

      Worker FE                Y           Y           Y              Y
      Observations          251,999     213,966     211,715        211,715
      R2                     0.435       0.611       0.681          0.940
      Adjusted R2            0.363       0.592       0.666          0.937
Notes : Significance indicators: p  0.05 : , p  0.01 :  and p  .001 :   .




                                         46
