                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MERCHANTS OF DEATH:
         THE EFFECT OF CREDIT SUPPLY SHOCKS ON HOSPITAL OUTCOMES

                                          Cyrus Aghamolla
                                        Pinar Karaca-Mandic
                                              Xuelin Li
                                         Richard T. Thakor

                                        Working Paper 28709
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28709


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2021




We thank Chris Whaley and seminar participants at the University of Minnesota, University of Missouri,
University of Wisconsin--Milwaukee, and Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad for helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Cyrus Aghamolla, Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Xuelin Li, and Richard T. Thakor. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Merchants of Death: The Effect of Credit Supply Shocks on Hospital Outcomes
Cyrus Aghamolla, Pinar Karaca-Mandic, Xuelin Li, and Richard T. Thakor
NBER Working Paper No. 28709
April 2021
JEL No. G21,G32,I11,I15

                                           ABSTRACT

This study examines the link between credit supply and hospital health outcomes. Using detailed
data on hospitals and the banks that they borrow from, we use bank stress tests as exogenous
shocks to credit access for hospitals that have lending relationships with tested banks. We find
that affected hospitals shift their operations to enhance their profit margins in response to a
negative credit shock, but reduce the quality of their care to patients across a variety of measures.
In particular, affected hospitals exhibit significantly lower attentiveness in providing timely and
effective treatment and procedures, and are rated substantially lower in patient satisfaction. This
decline in care quality is reflected in health outcomes: affected hospitals experience a significant
increase in risk-adjusted, unplanned 30-day readmission rates of recently discharged patients and
in risk-adjusted 30-day patient mortality rates. Overall, the results indicate that access to credit
can affect the quality of healthcare hospitals deliver, pointing to important spillover effects of
credit market frictions on health outcomes.

Cyrus Aghamolla                                   Xuelin Li
University of Minnesota                           University of South Carolina
321 19th Ave S                                    1014 Greene St
Minneapolis, MN 55455                             Columbia, SC 29208
caghamol@umn.edu                                  xuelin.li@moore.sc.edu

Pinar Karaca-Mandic                               Richard T. Thakor
Carlson School of Management                      University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota                           321 19th Avenue South, 3-255
321 19th Avenue South                             Minneapolis, MN 5545
Room 3-287                                        rthakor@umn.edu
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
pkmandic@umn.edu
1       Introduction
Hospitals play an essential role in maintaining public health. Hospitals are also crucial to
the economy, with healthcare spending in the U.S. accounting for nearly 18% of GDP, and
hospitals accounting for one-third of this spending.1 However, like other enterprises, hospitals
must obtain financing for their operations, and utilize credit markets for this financing. This
link between credit markets and hospitals raises an important question: Do shocks to credit
markets transmit to hospital finances, affect hospital performance in providing medical care,
and thus affect health outcomes? Put differently, do we observe indirect, negative effects
on actual patient health outcomes following lending supply shocks? Given their importance
to public health, we would expect (or hope) that hospitals can maintain the same quality
of care despite frictions in financial markets. This question highlights an important yet
overlooked negative societal externality--health consequences--that can arise from credit
shocks. Research on this topic may therefore have important social consequences and policy
implications.
    To help shed light on the above question, we utilize the staggered pattern of stress tests--
regulatory assessments by the Federal Reserve which are designed to gauge a bank's ability
to withstand an impending economic crisis--on U.S. banks implemented by the 2010 Dodd-
Frank Act in order to cleanly test the effects of shocks to the supply of credit. We use the fact
that a given hospital's bank experiences a stress test as an exogenous negative shock to credit
for the hospital. As noted by Gao et al. (2019), hospitals are particularly risky borrowers,
with higher than average yields and default rates for municipal bonds. Consequently, in order
to better manage their risk or improve their capital adequacy, stress-tested banks can lower
the amount of credit provided or demand higher rates from these risky borrowers (Acharya
                   es et al. (2020)).2
et al. (2018), Cort´
    Using a staggered difference-in-differences specification, we examine the change in per-
formance, as measured in patient health outcomes, between hospitals subject to a credit
supply shock--hospitals that had lending relationships with banks which were later stress-
tested--relative to hospitals which did not experience a shock. This empirical strategy has
    1
      Hospital employment in the U.S. exceeds 5.7 million, and hospitals are among the top employers across
U.S. cities (Samuelson (2017)). Moreover, the economic decline following the 2020 pandemic is reported to
be partly attributed to the large reduction in healthcare spending, leading to significant layoffs of hospital
medical staff. See, e.g., "Plunge in health-care spending a big reason US economy sank in first quarter,"
CNBC, April 29, 2020.
    2
      As shown by Acharya et al. (2018) and Cort´    es et al. (2020), banks trim their loan portfolios and charge
higher rates for riskier loans following a stress test, thus constituting a negative credit supply shock to firms
that borrow from these tested banks.



                                                        2
the advantage that (i) the stress tests themselves are unrelated to the underlying health of
a local population; (ii) the tests occurred in a staggered manner; (iii) the tests were applied
to banks based on size thresholds rather than on bank performance; and (iv ) it is unlikely
that hospitals could anticipate the negative bank responses following a stress test.
    We first establish that bank stress tests constitute a negative credit shock to their con-
nected hospital borrowers. In particular, we find that loan spreads increase while loan
amounts decrease for affected hospitals, and these hospitals are more likely to switch lenders
to one for which they did not have a previous relationship with.3 This is consistent with
bank stress tests increasing the cost of credit for an affected bank's hospitals, and reinforces
the results of Acharya et al. (2018) and Cort´
                                             es et al. (2020).
    We then explore how hospital financial outcomes change as a result. We find that,
in response to the credit shock, affected hospitals experience an increase in revenue and
profitability. For example, affected hospitals exhibit an 8.6% increase in patient revenues,
with the average patient paying $1,701 more for healthcare services. This increase appears
to be driven by changes in hospitals' operations. In particular, in response to tighter credit
conditions, we find evidence that hospitals rely more on their existing resources by increasing
bed utilization and physician billing, while decreasing their use of less-profitable services
such as ICU beds. In a given year, each bed in an affected hospital is occupied by eight
more days, on average, relative to an unaffected hospital, which amounts to 367 additional
patients accommodated per year. These utilization effects are consistent with prior literature
that has documented an increase in efficiency following stricter financial constraints (e.g.,
Hovakimian (2011)). Moreover, the number of hospital employees and cost-to-charge ratios
are insignificantly affected, which implies that hospitals are relying on increased inpatient
admissions and outpatient services and procedures without increasing rates or the medical
staff.
    While the previous results suggest that hospitals work to improve their financial efficiency
through expanding their profitable operations in response to tightening credit, we find that
this comes at the expense of healthcare quality for patients. More specifically, affected
hospitals experience a significant decline in quality of care and patient health outcomes. We
use three distinct measures for quality of care and health outcomes. First, we examine patient
health following treatment using 30-day risk-adjusted unplanned hospital readmission rates
for various health conditions; this is a widely used measure by both government agencies
   3
     Changing lenders or acquiring loans from new banks also proves problematic for hospitals, as new
lenders require a higher rate to compensate for the more severe information asymmetry due to the absence
of a previous relationship.


                                                   3
and academic researchers for quality of care and assesses the effectiveness of treatment.4 We
also gather data on 30-day risk-adjusted mortality rates for similar conditions. Second, we
use data regarding the hospitals' use of timely and effective treatment and procedures by
medical staff for certain medical conditions to measure attentiveness and care quality. As
an example, this includes the frequency with which patients suffering from a heart attack
received a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) within 90 minutes of arrival. Finally, as
a direct measure of patient satisfaction with the quality of care and attentiveness, we utilize
patient survey data. This data includes patient satisfaction following discharge regarding
hospital quality, communication with physicians and nurses, efficacy of pain control, and
other items relevant to the treatment and hospital stay.
   Across all three measures, the results show that hospital performance declines following
credit supply shocks. We find that affected hospitals exhibit increased delay in providing
critical treatment and a lower propensity in performing requisite medical procedures for the
specific medical conditions. For affected hospitals, the likelihood of failing to provide proper
treatment for five out of six quality metrics increases by 0.5­1.4%, which represents a 14­22%
increase relative to the sample mean of 3.2­6.4%, depending on the treatment or procedure.
This decline in the quality of care metrics is reflected in patient health outcomes. The re-
sults show that patients discharged from affected hospitals are significantly more likely to
be readmitted within 30 days. This result is strikingly consistent across the three diagnostic
groups for which we have detailed data (heart failure, acute myocardial infraction, pneu-
monia), and also holds for a wider set of medical conditions. The magnitude of the effect
is sizable; we find that restrictions to the access of credit for hospitals indirectly leads to
an additional 1,674 patients readmitted per year. Similarly, with respect to patient mortal-
ity from pneumonia--a common hospital-acquired condition (Rothberg et al. (2014))--the
results show an increase of 915 patient deaths a year.
   To provide additional context to these results, we consider readmissions in terms of
relative performance. In particular, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS; part of the Department of Health and Human Services) assesses excess hospital 30-
day readmissions relative to a hospital's peer group. CMS levies sizable, escalating penalties,
in the form of Medicare payment reductions, against hospitals which perform significantly
   4
     For example, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, under the Hospital Readmissions
Reduction Program, uses unplanned readmission rates as the central performance criteria when deter-
mining Medicare payment reductions. Moreover, re-hospitalization accounts for more than $17 billion
in avoidable Medicare expenditures and is associated with poor outcomes (Jencks et al. (2009)). See
also https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/AcuteInpatientPPS/Readmissions-
Reduction-Program.



                                                4
worse than their peers with respect to unplanned readmissions. We find that an affected
hospital is 4.6% more likely to be in the worst-performing group for general readmissions,
as determined by CMS, thereby triggering the heaviest payment penalty. This amounts to
a 58% increased propensity from the 7.9% unconditional average severe punishment rate.
These findings are also similar among the individual diagnostic conditions we consider.
   Lastly, patient evaluations regarding efficacy of treatment and attentiveness of the med-
ical staff are consistently lower for affected hospitals. Across all eight rating dimensions,
discharged patients from affected hospitals are significantly less satisfied. Collectively, these
results suggest that patient health outcomes and quality of care are adversely affected for
hospitals which experience a shock to credit access.
   Taken together, our findings imply that affected hospitals adjust for the increased cost of
debt or the decline in external financing by increasing revenues from patients. This includes
greater inpatient admissions. However, the heavier inpatient volume comes at the cost of
worse performance. Medical staff appear to be less attentive to patients, as evidenced by
a decrease in the quality and timeliness of care, and patient health outcomes decline, as
unplanned readmissions rise. In sum, hospitals attempt to "make up the difference" through
patient revenues, but sacrifice quality of care in the process, which in turn results in worse
health outcomes.5
   A question which arises from these results is whether the change in hospital operations
implies that hospitals were operating suboptimally prior to the credit shock. Hospitals aim
to maximize profitability, but, unlike other firms, hospitals also have a health provision
objective that can run counter to profitability. Consequently, hospitals optimize between
profits and health provision. Our results imply that heightened financial constraints can
lead hospitals to reevaluate and shift their decisions more towards profitability and away
from health care quality.
   In additional analyses, we further explore the channel driving the change in health out-
comes at affected hospitals. As discussed above, the primary channel through which hospital
performance declines is through frictions in credit access. Accordingly, under the predicted
channel, hospital borrowers that are more affected by credit supply shocks should experience
a more pronounced effect in outcomes and performance. We test for this heterogeneity in
a number of ways. First, banks which pass their stress tests with less distance from the
failure threshold have a stronger incentive to manage risk relative to banks which pass their
tests with a greater cushion (Cort´
                                  es et al. (2020)). This shorter distance from the failure
   5
     In line with this, we find that physician compensation increases, which is consistent with physicians
being busier with more services.


                                                    5
threshold translates to a more severe credit supply shock for a bank's corresponding hospital
borrowers (e.g., through a greater reduction in lending or higher interest rates). Our second
test for heterogeneous effects concerns reliance on debt: hospitals which are more reliant on
bank loan financing are naturally more affected by stress tests on their lenders. Finally, we
consider the proportion of a hospital's banks that were stress-tested. In particular, hospitals
for which the majority of their existing lenders are stress-tested have fewer options for alter-
native financing from establishing lending relationships, which implies a stronger negative
shock to credit access. Across all of these specifications, our findings indicate that hospitals
which are more exposed to a negative credit supply shock from stress-tests exhibit stronger
declines in quality of care, patient health outcomes, and patient satisfaction. These results
are in line with a credit supply channel driving the effects.
   This study relates to several different areas. Our paper contributes to the literature
that examines the impact of financial frictions. This includes studies that document a
negative impact on investment in the presence of constraints to credit access (see, e.g.,
Chava and Roberts (2008), Campello et al. (2010), Duchin et al. (2010), Lemmon and
Roberts (2010)). The current study shows that shocks to credit supply can influence distinct
firm decisions aside from investment, such as more granular firm operating and employment
activities. Moreover, our results indicate that such decisions can (indirectly) have real effects
on health outcomes. As such, our paper ties into the strand of literature that studies the real
effects of credit supply shocks (e.g., Gan (2007), Hombert and Matray (2017)). Our study
identifies a novel and important real effect--health consequences--arising from frictions in
financial markets. Relatedly, our results show unintended downstream consequences of public
policy decisions regarding the financial sector. This contributes to our understanding of how
changes in public policy can affect bank lending activities and the potential spillover effects
(see, e.g., Bernanke and Gertler (1995)). The current study is also related to the large
literature that studies relationship lending (e.g., Petersen and Rajan (1994), Boot (2000),
Detragiache et al. (2008)). We contribute to this literature by showing that a negative shock
to relationship lending which reduces credit supply in turn reduces the quality of service of
an important public good (healthcare). As a result, we provide novel evidence of how credit
markets may indirectly affect health outcomes.
   Our analysis is related to the literature at the intersection of healthcare and finance.
Adelino et al. (2015) use non-profit hospitals to test the investment cash-flow sensitivity
of non-profit firms, and find that these hospitals respond to increases in their cash flows
(due to financial investments) by increasing their investments, in a similar way to public


                                               6
firms. Adelino et al. (2019) examine the care delivery of hospitals that experienced a drop
in their investments due to the 2008 financial crisis, and find no aggregate evidence of
shifts in care due to the financial crisis, although they find some evidence of a shift toward
more profitable treatments for the most severely affected hospitals.6 Another stream of
research investigates the impact of government healthcare reforms, such as the Affordable
Care Act (ACA), on equity and debt prices. Gupta et al. (2021) examine the effect of
private equity investments in the quality of care delivered by nursing homes. Koijen et al.
(2016) consider medical innovation and R&D, and document a premium in the equity returns
of healthcare firms (including drug and biologic companies) due to the risk of government
reforms. Gao et al. (2020) examine the effect of the ACA on non-profit hospital municipal
bond spreads. Our paper contributes to the finance and healthcare literature by documenting
a link between hospitals and credit markets, and showing how credit markets may indirectly
affect healthcare. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to document the
impact of credit access on patient health outcomes, quality of care, and patient satisfaction
as indirectly arising from frictions in the credit market.
   Our study is also related to the literature which considers potential inefficiencies in
the healthcare sector. Prior studies have documented variation in treatment rates across
providers (e.g., Fisher et al. (2003), Abaluck et al. (2016) Chandra and Staiger (2020); see
Chandra et al. (2011) for a review). We document an important substitution effect that may
contribute to the observed heterogeneity: in the presence of (heterogeneous) financing con-
straints, hospitals turn to generating greater revenues from patients. This revenue increase
is contemporaneous with increases in treatment, including average length of inpatient stay,
hospital bed utilization, and outpatient services. As such, the present study is also related
to the stream of literature which examines overuse in medical treatment. Overuse in treat-
ment has been linked to physician pay structures (Clemens and Gottlieb (2014)), defensive
medicine (Frakes and Gruber (2019)), and overconfidence in specialized treatment (Chandra
and Staiger (2020)). Our findings contribute to this literature by identifying credit market
frictions as an important channel that can potentially influence care decisions. Moreover, we
show that quality of care and patient health outcomes decline following the observed shift
in utilization.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe our insti-
tutional setting and conceptual framework in detail. In Section 3, we discuss our empirical
strategy and data. Section 4 presents the main results, while Section 5 provides various
   6
       See also Dranove et al. (2017) for evidence on the effect of the financial crisis on hospitals.



                                                         7
robustness tests. The final section concludes.


2     Institutional setting and conceptual framework

Stress tests
Following the 2008 financial crisis, sweeping reforms regarding the regulation and monitoring
of financial institutions were enacted through the Dodd-Frank Wall Street and Consumer
Protection Act (DFA) of 2010. Among the reforms, Section 165(i)(2) of the DFA requires
large bank holding companies (hereafter "banks") to undergo annual stress tests generated by
the Federal Reserve under each of three scenarios (baseline, adverse, and severely adverse).7
The stress tests are intended to provide information about an individual bank company's
ability to withstand potential economic crises, and the resilience of the overall financial
system. The first set of stress tests as mandated by the DFA were required for banks with
assets of at least $50 billion, and had to be completed by September 30, 2012. However, the
Final Rule of the DFA required stress tests by all banks with assets of at least $10 billion
beginning in the following year (Federal Register (2012)). Summary results of the stress
tests are publicly disclosed and are closely watched by market participants.
    The Dodd-Frank Act stress tests (hereafter DFAST) are designed to gauge bank capital
adequacy following potential economic downturns and to assess bank risk taking. Conse-
quently, following a stress test, banks are more inclined to improve their capital adequacy
ratios and ensure that they have enough capital on hand in case of adverse economic events.
To this end, banks can lower the amount of credit provided or demand higher rates from
riskier borrowers. Consistent with this argument, Acharya et al. (2018) and Cort´
                                                                                es et al.
(2020) document that credit supply was negatively impacted among stress-tested banks.
In particular, stress-tested banks significantly increased loan spreads (defined as the interest
rate over LIBOR) and reduced lending to risky borrowers, and also maintained higher capital
ratios in response to the stress tests.
    7
      These scenarios are determined based on current economic conditions. For example, with respect to
the 2020 stress tests, the Federal Reserve announced: "The DFAST 2020 supervisory scenarios include
trajectories for 28 variables. These include 16 variables that capture economic activity, asset prices, and
interest rates in the U.S. economy and financial markets, and 12 variables made up of 3 variables (real
gross domestic product (GDP) growth, inflation, and the U.S./foreign currency exchange rate) for each of
4 countries/country blocks [...] The severely adverse scenario is characterized by a severe global recession
accompanied by a period of heightened stress in commercial real estate and corporate debt markets" (Board
Gov. Fed. Reserve Syst. (2020)). For more details, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/june-
2020-supervisory-scenarios.htm.



                                                     8
    We note that the Federal Reserve implemented other policies related to stress tests around
this time. We discuss these other programs further and examine their potential effects in
Section 5.3.


Hospital borrowing
Hospitals, both for-profit and non-profit, rely partially on debt to finance their operations
(Koijen et al. (2016)). Consistent with this, as we discuss in more detail in Section 3.1, the
vast majority of hospitals in our sample have leverage, and the average hospital holds a sub-
stantial amount of debt.8 Moreover, hospitals are particularly risky borrowers, as evidenced
by healthcare municipal bonds having significantly higher yields and lower ratings than non-
healthcare bonds. Furthermore, healthcare bonds accounted for 20% of all municipal bond
defaults from 1999 to 2010 (Gao et al. (2019)).9 To provide additional context, healthcare
municipal bonds have an average yield of 3.22%, while the average for non-healthcare mu-
nicipal bonds is 2.39% (Gao et al. (2020)). Therefore, in line with the evidence that banks
tend to reduce credit supply to risky borrowers following heightened risk-management in-
centives induced by stress tests (Acharya et al. (2018) and Cort´
                                                                es et al. (2020)), banks may
be inclined to reduce credit to risky hospital borrowers or to raise interest rates following
stress tests.
    Hospitals may react to this credit shock by seeking credit from alternative lenders. How-
ever, as has been well-established in the banking literature, long-term lending relationships
help to lower asymmetric information between borrowers and lenders, thus reducing the cost
of credit for borrowers.10 New lenders without an established relationship would thus require
higher interest rates or provide less credit as a result of greater asymmetric information. In-
deed, in line with this we show that after a bank is stress-tested, the hospitals that borrowed
from it experience a significant increase in loan spreads and decrease in loan amounts, and
are more likely to borrow from a new lender. These results reinforce the findings of Acharya
et al. (2018) and Cort´
                      es et al. (2020), and are consistent with the argument that hospital
borrowers experienced a shock to credit supply subsequent to a lender's stress test.
    Following a shock to credit supply, hospitals may be faced with less external financing or
   8
      Roughly 93% of the hospital-year observations in our sample have positive leverage, and the mean
(median) leverage ratio (Debt/Total Assets) in our sample is 56% (46%).
    9
      Non-profit hospitals may borrow through tax-free municipal bonds, however this option is not available
for most for-profit hospitals.
   10
      For example, see Rajan (1992), Petersen and Rajan (1994), Boot and Thakor (2000), Degryse and
Ongena (2005), Bharath et al. (2007), and Botsch and Vanasco (2019), among many others. Boot (2000)
and Elyasiani and Goldberg (2004) provide surveys.


                                                     9
a higher cost of debt. As a result, hospitals may implement cost-saving measures, such as
reducing hospital staff (including doctors and nurses), or more aggressively pursuing delin-
quent patient bills. Additionally, as patients are the primary source of revenue, hospitals
may be inclined to increase revenues through higher resource utilization, such as more in-
tensive use of outpatient hospital services, increased inpatient admissions, or longer stays
for admitted patients.11 Such hospital responses do not suggest a clear prediction on actual
patient health outcomes. In particular, reduced staff or greater admitted volume may lead
to less attention and thus worse quality of care (e.g., Silver (2020)). On the other hand,
if testing and procedures, some of which may be unnecessary, or in patient admissions are
increased in order to compensate for the decreased funds, then patient health may be un-
affected or even improved if such measures imply greater attention and care (e.g., Clemens
and Gottlieb (2014)).


3     Research Design

3.1     Data and Summary Statistics
We utilize a data on hospital characteristics and outcomes from a variety of sources. Medicare-
certified hospitals (providers), which include almost all hospitals in the U.S., are required
to submit an annual cost report to a Medicare Administrative Contractor, in which they
provide complete information on facility characteristics. The U.S. Centers for Medicare &
Medicaid Services (CMS), a federal agency within the Department of Health and Human
Services, maintains the cost report data in the Healthcare Provider Cost Reporting Infor-
mation System (HCRIS). We obtain all available reported information on hospitals from the
HCRIS database. For each provider, this covers common items in a financial statement such
as total assets (T A), income (Income), total liabilities (Debt), revenues,12 cash holdings
(Cash), and operational costs (Cost). In addition, the data include hospital utilization in-
formation, including total inpatient discharges, total occupied bed days, total available bed
   11
       Medicare payments to hospitals are based on the inpatient/outpatient prospective payment system.
Specifically, inpatient revenues are determined by the diagnostic related group (DRG) that the patient is
assigned to when admitted, with riskier or more complicated groups corresponding to higher payment rates.
Hence, increased admissions or assigning patients to higher-paying DRGs can generate higher revenues.
Similarly, outpatient service payments are set prospectively based on ambulatory payment groups. A new
procedure gets paid for the ambulatory group it is assigned. As a result, unlike inpatient services, additional
procedures for outpatient services can generate more revenue for the hospital.
   12
      This includes inpatient (InP atrev ), outpatient (OutP atrev ), and total patient revenues (P atrev ).




                                                      10
days (BedDay ),13 total number of employed physicians, nurses, interns, and residents,14 as
well as the total salary expenditure for them.
    Our sample includes yearly hospital observations from 2010 to 2016. Our sample begins
in 2010 because it is from this date that our key variables are consistently defined; prior to
this, a number of our key variables are missing or defined in an inconsistent way in data
reporting.15 Financial information is complete in the database for most hospitals up to
calendar year 2016. We restrict the sample to include only short-term acute care hospitals
(the most common type of hospital), though our results are robust to including other types
of providers, and controlling for hospital-type fixed effects. We further exclude government-
sponsored hospitals (such as Veterans Affairs hospitals and clinics), as they primarily rely
on municipal bond markets for external financing.16 Our final sample includes 3,658 unique
hospitals.
    To measure hospital care quality, we merge the above information with two other datasets
from CMS that provide objective measures of quality. The first measure of quality of care
is the risk-adjusted rate of unplanned readmission to an acute care hospital in the 30 days
after discharge from hospitalization, obtained from the CMS Hospital Compare program.
Readmission rates are informative about the efficacy of treatment upon hospitalization, and
are widely-used measures for quality of care by both government agencies and researchers
(e.g., Chandra et al. (2016), Beaulieu et al. (2020)). A high unplanned readmission rate,
for example, implies that the hospital provided inadequate care during the inpatient stay,
and thus patients unexpectedly required readmission. Readmission rates are provided for
all diseases combined, and also separately documented for three key acute conditions: acute
myocardial infarction (i.e., AMI or heart attack), heart failure (HF), and pneumonia (PN).
We additionally collect mortality numbers and risk-standardized rates for patients treated
for these conditions.
    The second dataset is also from the CMS Hospital Compare program. CMS requires
hospitals to submit information on timely and effective treatment for certain medical con-
  13
      An occupied bed day is a day during which a person is confined to a bed and in which the patient stays
overnight in a hospital. An available bed day is a day in which a bed is in the facility and can possibly be
occupied. This includes all types of beds (general and special care). We also extract the number of beds in
the ICU units.
   14
      These are reported in the unit of full-time equivalents. We refer to them as medical staff and obtain
hospital total salary expenditure from Worksheet S-3, Part II, Line 1 and Column 1. The average hospital
salary is calculated by total salary over number of medical staff.
   15
      One major change is due to the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, which motivated
hospitals to adopt healthcare IT (HIT) system. After 2010, total assets include accumulated HIT investment
net of depreciation.
   16
      Other examples of such hospitals include community hospitals specializing in charity care.


                                                    11
ditions. We examine six measures related to our conditions of focus--acute heart infarction
(AMI), heart failure, pneumonia--from 2010 to 2014.17 For AMI, we use three measures:
(i) the portion of patients that receive aspirin at discharge; (ii) the portion of patients that
receive percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) within 90 minutes of arrival; and (iii) the
portion of patients that receive a Statin prescription at discharge.18 For heart failure, we
use the portion of patients that receive left ventricular systolic evaluations (LVS) upon ar-
rival and ACE inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ACE/ARB) at discharge.19 For
pneumonia, we use the portion of patients that receive the most appropriate antibiotic at
discharge.
    These measures indicate the frequency for which medical staff has taken proper medical
procedures when dealing with certain common conditions. As such, these measures capture
attentiveness or competency of the medical staff. Furthermore, these measures are indicative
of whether there are systems in place for the hospital that ensure compliance with best
practices and quality metrics. We note that the selected measures are used widely for quality
of care in the extant literature (e.g., Cooper et al. (2019), Beaulieu et al. (2020)).
    We supplement these measures with additional measures which provide subjective eval-
uation by patients. In particular, we use the Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare
Providers and Systems (HCAHPS) data, which is a patient satisfaction survey required
by CMS and is administered to a random sample of adult patients across various medical
conditions between 48 hours and six weeks after discharge. The core questions cover the
critical aspects of patients' hospital experiences such as the overall rating of the hospital
(Overall), efficacy of pain control (P ainCtrl), whether they would recommend the hospital
(Recommend), communication with nurses (N urseCom) and doctors (DocCom), the clean-
   17
      While the CMS data has other measures, we focus on these six measures because they are the most
continuously-tracked and non-missing over our sample period. In 2005, the first set of 10 "core" process of
care measures were created for acute heart infarction, heart failure, pneumonia, and surgical care. Over the
years, the program has terminated existing measures and medical conditions and has added new measures.
This makes the other measures infeasible to use for our purposes.
   18
      PCI is a nonsurgical procedure performed to improve blood flow of coronary circulation. Research
evidence shows that it is preferable to intravenous thrombolysis for the treatment of AMI (Keeley et al.
(2003)). Statins are a class of drugs often prescribed by doctors to help lower cholesterol levels in the blood.
Treatment with Statins initiated within 3 to 6 months after AMI reduces mortality in patients with elevated
cholesterol levels (Group et al. (1994); Sacks et al. (1996)).
   19
      Systolic dysfunction--when the left ventricle of the heart fails to contract normally and distribute enough
blood into circulation--is a major cause of heart failure. In line with this, when the American College of
Cardiology and the American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) issued detailed guidelines for the evaluation
and management of heart failure in 1995, the primary focus was on systolic dysfunction. ACE inhibitors
relax the veins and arteries to lower blood pressure and significantly improve the long-term survival rate
after heart failure (Pfeffer et al. (1992)). ARBs are considered a reasonable alternative to ACE inhibitors,
particularly in patients with intolerance to ACE inhibitors.


                                                       12
liness (Clean) and quietness (Quiet) of the hospital environment, and discharge information
(Inf o). Because rating scales differ across categories, we calculate the proportion of patients
that give the highest rating instead of using average scores.20
   Lastly, we combine our hospital data with Dealscan loan data in order to identify treated
and control hospitals. We keep all loan facilities which have (i ) a borrower 3-digit SIC
code equal to 806 (Hospitals); (ii ) a facility start date after January 1, 2007; and (iii )
whose loan types are term loans or revolver. Following Ivashina (2009), we identify and
keep the lead bank in a syndicate deal.21 This generates 2,432 facility-lender combinations.
The hospital-related borrowers in Dealscan are either individual providers (e.g., Houston
Methodist Hospital) or hospital organizations and systems (e.g., HCA Healthcare). We
then manually match borrowers to the HCRIS sample. For each individual hospital, HCRIS
reports whether it belongs to a hospital chain and the organization name if it does. When
we identify a borrower that is a hospital system, we assign each of the individual hospitals
that are part of the system as being exposed to the loan deal. There are 1,447 facility-lender
combinations in which we identify that the borrower is a Medicare-certified hospital (or the
controlling system of a Medicare-certified hospital).22
   Panel A of Table 1 shows the yearly number of first-time stress-tested banks along with
the exposed hospital borrowers in our sample. From 2012 to 2016, 26 stress-tested banks
were lending to at least one sample hospital when tested for the first time. In total, this
leads to 537 hospitals being exposed to the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests (DFAST). Banks
with consolidated assets of $50 billion or above were required to conduct their first annual
stress tests using financial data as of September 30, 2012. Given their size, these banks
jointly held a significant market share for hospital lending. In our sample, 15 banks (58%
of the stress-tested banks) and 416 hospitals (77% of the affected hospitals) are exposed
to the first DFAST that occurred in 2012. Banks with total consolidated assets of more
than $10 billion but less than $50 billion were required to implement stress tests under the
Dodd-Frank Act in the following years. Panel B of Table 1 provides summary statistics for
the loan characteristics in our sample. The table shows that a typical loan deal has a size
of $737.37 million, and a maturity of 58 months. Summary statistics for all of our other
  20
      For example, the survey question for the variable Info is whether the patient was given information
about what to do during their recovery at home, where the answer choices are "Yes" or "No." The question
for the variable Overall is a star-rating system from 1 (worst) to 3 (best). We define "highest rating" as
answering "Yes" in the former and "3" in the latter.
   21
      In our sample, this includes the Dealscan lender roles "Admin agent," "Arranger," "Documentation
agent," "Senior managing agent," or "Syndications agent."
   22
      The major borrowers that we do not match include psychiatric hospitals, specialty hospitals, non-
Medicare hospitals, and telehealth service platforms.


                                                   13
variables are provided in Appendix Table A.1.


3.2     Empirical Specification
For our main specification, we examine a staggered difference-in-differences (DID) regression
to explore the effect of bank stress tests on hospital outcomes:

                Yi,t =  + ST Exposedi,t-1 +  Controlsi,t-1 + t + µi + i,t .                                  (1)

    In equation (1), ST Exposedi,t-1 is an indicator variable that takes a value of 1 if at least
one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0
otherwise. Hospital i's relationship bank is defined as a lending bank that has non-matured
loans with hospital i in year t. Controlsi,t-1 is a vector of control variables that include:
the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ),23 the logarithm
of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ),24 cash holdings scaled by total assets
(Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), liabilities scaled by total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and total patient revenue
scaled by total assets (P atrev/T Ai,t-1 ). Yi,t is the outcome variable, which includes measures
of hospital financial and care quality information. The parameters t and µi denote year and
firm fixed effects, respectively.
    The coefficient of interest in equation (1) is  , which captures the effect of bank stress-
tests on hospital outcomes. Put differently,  represents the change in hospital outcomes
after a stress test exposure in a year relative to the corresponding change for hospital-
year observations with no stress test exposure. Our variation in treatment comes from (i )
whether the hospital relies on loan financing from a bank that was subject to the DFAST
requirements, and (ii ) the staggered implementation of stress tests for different banks.
    The identifying assumption is that a stress test to an affected bank is exogenous to
the performance of the hospital which has a relationship with that specific bank. Reverse
causality is not likely to hold in this setting, since DFAST did not select a participating bank
based on the hospitals which borrowed from the bank. In particular, banks were selected to
be stress-tested based on whether their total assets exceeded a $10 billion threshold, which
is exogenous to the hospitals which borrowed from the banks. Self-selection by hospitals is
also not likely to happen. Although the Dodd-Frank Act was enacted on July 21, 2010, the
   23
      This variable controls for size based on total revenue, as in Adelino et al. (2019). An alternative control
for hospital size would be to include the lagged logarithm of total assets. Our results are robust to doing so.
   24
      A bed means an adult bed or other beds maintained in a patient care area for lodging patients in the
hospital. Bed days are computed by the number of available beds multiplying the number of days in the
reporting period.


                                                       14
FDIC issued a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on January 23, 2012. This NPR solicited
public comment to finalize the implementation of the Act, and the effective date and public
disclosure policy of results were changed due to major concerns. Furthermore, in the sample,
most of the borrowing hospitals entered into loans with the stress-tested banks before 2012.25
Thus, the actual timing of DFAST implementation was uncertain and therefore exogenous
to the loan initiation. Furthermore, a hospital had no incentive to borrow from a particular
bank based on the fact that this bank would be stress-tested soon. We further validate our
argument by showing that the parallel trends assumption holds in our setting.


4        Results

4.1      Stress Tests and Credit Supply
We begin our analysis by examining the effect of stress tests on hospital loans. While Acharya
et al. (2018) and Cort´
                      es et al. (2020) have previously shown that stress tests negatively
impact credit supply, we investigate whether these effects are present for our sample of
hospital borrowers as well. To do so, we estimate equation (2) at the loan facility level:

                      Yk,i,j,t =  + ST Exposedi,t-1 +  Controlsi,t-1
                                   +µj + t + T ypel + P urposem + k,i,j,t .                      (2)

The variable Yk,i,j,t represents the characteristics of loan k between hospital i and bank j
which was originated in year t. ST Exposedi,t-1 is equal to 1 if hospital i borrowed from a
bank that was stress-tested in year t - 1 or earlier, and thus has been indirectly exposed
to the stress tests. We note that outcome Y is measured for each loan k between hospital
i and bank j , but the value of ST Exposedi,t is determined by hospital i's exposure and is
independent of the particular lender j in this loan. For example, consider a hospital i that
has a lending relationship with a stress-tested bank j in year t - 1. If hospital i switches to
a new lender j (potentially untested) in year t, then ST Exposedi,t = 1 for this deal between
i and j . This specification allows us to capture the possibility that the hospital switches to
a new bank with potentially different loan characteristics (e.g., higher spread). As noted in
Section 2, starting a relationship with a new lender generally entails a higher cost of debt to
compensate for the greater degree of asymmetric information. We include control variables
    25
     For example, there were 39 existing loans affected by the 2012 DFAST; 31 (80% of affected loans)
started in 2011 or earlier.


                                                 15
for the hospital's logarithm of total assets, profitability (income over total assets), leverage
(total debt over total assets) and tangibility (total fixed assets over total assets). We also
include bank (µj ), year (t ), loan type (T ypel ), and loan purpose (P urposem ) fixed effects.
Following Drucker and Puri (2009), loan types include Revolvers and Term Loans. Loan
purposes include Acquisition, General, LBO, Recapitalization, Miscellaneous, and Other.
   Table 2 provides the results. In columns (1) and (2), we examine loan interest rates,
defined as the spread (in basis points, bps) over LIBOR plus one-time fees on the drawn
portion of the loan. We see that borrowing costs increase significantly by 63 bps, about 16%
of the sample average, for affected hospitals. Similarly, in columns (3) and (4), we find that
loan size decreases by 36% and loan maturity decreases by 8.4% for affected hospitals. These
results are consistent with Acharya et al. (2018) and Cort´
                                                          es et al. (2020), and suggest that
hospital credit access was negatively impacted by stress testing, as exemplified through a
higher cost of debt and lower loan amounts for affected hospitals.
   In column (5), we consider the possibility that hospitals may switch lenders following
a stress test. To explore this, we define a variable N ewLenderk,i,j,t , which is an indicator
variable equal to 1 if hospital i had no previous lending relationship with bank j . The
coefficient on N ewLenderk,i,j,t is positive and significant, which implies that hospitals are
13.2% more likely to switch to new lenders when their current lender is subject to a stress
test.
   Overall, these results are consistent with the notion that stress testing negatively im-
pacted credit supply for hospitals. As discussed in Section 2, banks subject to stress tests
are more inclined to improve their capital adequacy ratios by raising interest rates or low-
ering loan amounts. Moreover, hospitals may turn to new lenders to make up the loss in
credit access, but, due to higher information asymmetries, face higher interest rates in these
loans from new lenders. These results validate the use of the DFAST as a negative shock to
hospital credit access.


4.2     Hospital Financing and Operating Decisions
We next examine the direct impact that the negative credit supply shock had on hospital
financing and operating decisions, and outcomes for affected borrowers. In the following sec-
tion, we then investigate the indirect impact these decisions had on patient health outcomes.
   The results are presented in Tables 3 and 4. We first consider the effect of the credit
shock on the overall profit margin of the hospital. In column (1) of Table 3, we find that
affected borrowers saw a significant increase of 1.2% in their profit margin, which is about


                                              16
one-third of the sample mean of 3.4%. This is perhaps surprising, as we would not expect
borrowers to have increased profits following a higher cost of debt. To better understand this
result, we examine leverage and cash holdings in columns (2) and (3), respectively. We see
a significant reduction in both leverage and cash for affected hospitals. This suggests that
affected hospitals utilize debt less following the credit shock, and instead rely more on internal
cash reserves to finance operations and investment. We next consider revenues generated
from patients in columns (4) through (7). The results are strikingly consistent with a shift
in utilization--affected hospitals generate significantly more revenue per patient, including
from both inpatient and outpatient services, following the shock. Indeed, the average revenue
per admitted inpatient increases by about $1,701 for affected hospitals.26
    As noted earlier (see fn. 11), hospitals can influence revenues generated from patients by,
for example, increasing inpatient admissions, providing more tests and procedures for out-
patient services, coding inpatients to riskier diagnostic related groups (DRGs), or increasing
the length of stay for admitted patients. To further examine the potential sources of these
increased patient revenues, we consider occupancy and discharge rates in columns (1) and
(2) of Table 4. Occupancy in column (1) represents the utilized hospital bed days over all
available bed days. In other words, it is the fraction of time that a hospital bed is used
in a given year. Discharge Rate in column (2) is the total inpatient discharges in a year
over total available bed days. Hence, this measure represents the number of patients using
each hospital bed in a year. We see that both occupancy and discharge rates significantly
increase for affected hospitals. Affected hospitals accommodate 2.35 more patients per bed,
or equivalently 367 more patients per hospital per year.27 We examine the change in medical
staff compensation in column (3), and find that average compensation significantly increases
following the credit shock, consistent with physicians billing more or providing more services.
Finally, it is also possible that hospitals cut certain unprofitable services in order to reduce
bad debts. One such service is the intensive care unit (ICU), in which ICU patients typically
cost three times as much as floor patients, yet only 83% of their costs are successfully paid
(Cooper and Linde-Zwirble (2004)). As shown in column (4), the percentage of ICU beds
out of all beds decreases significantly after a hospital is exposed to the stress tests.28
  26
      Average payment per inpatient is defined as inpatient revenues divided by total inpatient discharges.
This measure is often viewed as a proxy for hospitalization price; see, e.g., Dafny (2005) and Dafny (2009).
   27
      This is calculated by multiplying 2.35 with the average number of hospital beds in our sample (156.28).
   28
      Another possibility for hospitals to increase revenues is to raise charges for tests and procedures. How-
ever, pricing and rates for procedures, tests, and services are typically negotiated with insurers in advance
with annual contracts. Hospitals are therefore less flexible in raising charges in response to recent shocks to
financing. Consistent with this notion, in Online Appendix Table A.2, we show that stress test exposure has
an insignificant effect on hospital cost-to-charge ratios.


                                                      17
    Put together, these results suggest that hospitals which experience a negative credit
supply shock--and thus reduced financial slack--respond by changing their operations. By
increasing bed utilization and shifting resources away from less-profitable areas such as ICUs,
hospitals are able to increase their profitability on the margin. This is consistent with other
papers that have shown an increase in financial efficiency for borrowers following tightening
financial constraints (e.g., Hovakimian (2011)). However, while these operation changes may
improve profit margins, they may not improve patient care--for example, by expanding the
tasks for physicians and utilizing the same facilities for more patients, the quality of care
may deteriorate. We explore this in the next section.


4.3       Main Results ­ Patient Health Outcomes and Care Quality
As the central analysis of this study, we investigate whether the shock to credit supply
indirectly affected patient health outcomes and quality of care. As noted in Section 2,
increased inpatient admissions and outpatient services and tests may improve quality of care
if this implies greater attentiveness. Conversely, a greater volume of patients more severely
strains staff and physician time, which may lead to less attention and a lower quality of
care.29
    We consider several measures of health outcomes and care quality to explore our central
research question. We first examine the impact on hospital performance using quality of
care performance metrics, as discussed in Section 3. We then investigate whether changes
in performance adversely affect patient health outcomes. Finally, we consider the potential
effect on patient experiences through the patient satisfaction surveys.

Timely and effective care

Our measures for timely and effective care include the frequency or speed with which patients
receive the appropriate treatment after being admitted or upon discharge for the three con-
ditions tracked closely by CMS (pneumonia, heart failure, and AMI). These measures thus
reflect attentiveness of the medical staff in treating patients. The results are presented in
Table 5. Columns (1) to (3) examine standard treatments for AMI, columns (4) and (5)
   29
      We note that the negative credit supply shock also constrains hospitals from investing in new equipment
and from hiring more physicians and staff. In Online Appendix Table A.2, we show that hospital tangibility
(total fixed assets over total assets) and the number of employees insignificantly decrease after exposure
to a stress-tested lender. We also find a significant reduction in building construction. These effects are
consistent with previous studies showing a reduction in investment following a negative credit shock (e.g.,
Campello et al. (2010), Duchin et al. (2010), Gropp et al. (2019), Dwenger et al. (2020)).



                                                     18
correspond to heart failure treatments, and column (6) corresponds to a routine pneumonia
treatment.30
   The results show a significant reduction in timely and effective care (with the exception
of receiving aspirin at discharge for AMI patients, which is marginally insignificant). As an
example, patients are 1.4% less likely to receive a percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
within the recommended 90 minutes of arrival to an affected hospital after a heart attack
(AMI, column (2)). PCI treatment within the 90-minute window is critical, as the survival
likelihood drops significantly when the time to treatment exceeds 90 minutes. Indeed, every
10-minute treatment delay beyond this window results in an additional 3.3 deaths per 100
patients (Scholz et al. (2018)).
   Across five of the six measures, the likelihood of failing to provide correct or timely
treatment increases by 0.5­1.4% for affected hospitals. This represents a 14­22% increase
relative to the sample mean of 3.2­6.4%, depending on the treatment or procedure. We note
that this comparison understates the magnitude of the increase, as the sample mean includes
the post-treatment rates. These results are particularly striking given that the procedures
and treatments captured by the measures are standard (indeed, necessary) practice.

Readmission and mortality

Our primary measures of health outcomes are unplanned risk-standardized readmission rates,
which tracks unplanned inpatient readmissions within 30 days from discharge. As noted in
prior studies, this measure reflects adequacy of care; a patient that was treated properly in the
original admission is less likely to be unexpectedly in need of care shortly following discharge.
The results are presented in Table 6 (we also include parallel trend figures, discussed in
Section 4.4). Columns (1)­(3) present the logarithm of the number of patients readmitted
within 30 days who were diagnosed with pneumonia, heart failure, or AMI, respectively. We
see significant increases across all three measures. The effects are also economically large--
affected hospitals have a 10.1% increase in unplanned pneumonia readmissions relative to
unaffected hospitals, a 2.5% increase in heart failure readmissions, and a 2.6% increase
in AMI readmissions. This translates to an additional 1,674 patients readmitted per year
indirectly due to the negative credit shock.31
   Columns (4)­(6) consider the rates of unplanned readmissions, which captures the per-
  30
      The meaning and relevance of these measures are discussed in Section 3.1.
  31
      We calculate this number based on the unconditional means for readmissions of each diagnostic group
and their estimated percentage increases among affected hospitals from Table 6. At the individual hospital
level, we observe 3.12 more readmissions per affected hospital per year.


                                                   19
patient likelihood of being readmitted for each medical condition, and shows a similar effect:
across all three diagnostic groups, we see a 0.3% increase in the readmission rate for affected
hospitals. Additionally, in column (7), we find that readmission rates increase for a broader
set of diagnostic groups, and with a similar magnitude, which suggests that the effect is not
limited to the three diagnostic groups for which we have detailed data.32 Moreover, we note
that the coefficient estimates belie the magnitude of the effects, as readmission rates are
extremely difficult for hospitals to reduce. To put this number in context, the Affordable
Care Act, in an attempt to improve healthcare quality, established the Hospital Readmissions
Reduction Program (HRRP) in 2010, which reduced the readmission rate for pneumonia by
only 0.4% after a substantial effort.33 As noted previously, CMS levies penalties, in the
form of reductions in Medicare payments, for high unplanned readmissions relative to the
hospital's peer group. For additional texture on the above effects, we consider the likelihood
that a hospital is in the worst-performing group relative to its peers in terms of readmissions,
as determined by CMS. Column (8) of Table 6 shows that an affected hospital is significantly
more likely to be in the bottom-performing group following a credit shock. This effect is also
large--affected hospitals are 58% likely to be in the worst-performing group relative to the
sample mean. These outcomes are also relevant from the hospital's perspective, as hospitals
in this set receive the maximum penalty by the federal government. This finding therefore
underscores the magnitude of the increase in unplanned readmission rates.
    Along similar lines, we consider mortality rates and levels as a measure of patient health
outcomes. One limitation of this analysis is that a significant number of observations for
heart failure and AMI mortality rates are missing from our dataset, since many hospitals
do not report these numbers. Moreover, mortality rates for certain diagnostic groups, such
as heart failure, exhibit considerable autocorrelation as a deterioration in quality of care
for these conditions may not readily impact the mortality rate. That is, unlike unplanned
readmissions within 30 days, patient deaths from heart failure may take months or years
to transpire, and thus may not be captured within our post-period. Therefore, we focus
primarily on pneumonia mortality, as we have more data for this condition, and pneumonia,
unlike heart failure, is a less persistent condition and thus the measure is more likely to
reflect changes in healthcare quality. In addition, pneumonia is a common hospital-acquired
condition which hospital overcrowding can increase the spread of, and so can be especially
  32
      In addition to the aforementioned three, this measure includes conditions such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, coronary artery bypass graft surgery, elective primary total hip arthroplasty and/or total
knee arthroplasty, as well as several others.
   33
      See "The Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program has succeeded for beneficiaries and the Medicare
program" by the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission in 2018.


                                                     20
indicative of quality of care (see, e.g., Rothberg et al. (2014)).34
   Table 7 presents the results of this analysis. Columns (1)­(3) show the coefficient esti-
mates for the change in the logarithm of mortality deaths from pneumonia, heart failure, and
AMI, respectively. We see a significant increase in pneumonia and AMI deaths for affected
hospitals, and an insignificant increase for heart failure mortality levels. With respect to
pneumonia, this is a 9.6% increase in mortality for affected hospitals; this amounts to an
additional 915 pneumonia deaths per year indirectly due to the shock to credit access (or
1.7 additional pneumonia deaths per affected hospital per year). We explore pneumonia
mortality further in columns (4)­(6) by considering the per-hospital mortality-level increase,
mortality rate, and the likelihood the hospital falls in the worst-performing group of pneu-
monia deaths relative to their peer group, respectively. We see a significant increase for
affected hospitals across all three measures.
   Collectively, the above results indicate a significant deterioration in patient health out-
comes indirectly caused by the negative credit supply shock. The decline in health outcomes
aligns with the heightened failure rates in providing effective and timely treatment observed
earlier. These findings are also consistent with our results in Section 4.2 that point to in-
creased inpatient admissions, which may lead to less attentiveness in care among hospital
physicians and staff.

Patient satisfaction

Finally, we explore patient satisfaction information from HCAHPS as a subjective measure of
care quality. These measures include survey responses from randomly chosen adult patients
shortly after discharge. Table 8 shows that across all question categories, patient satisfaction
significantly declines at affected hospitals relative to unaffected hospitals. The magnitudes
of reduction are also consistent across all measures. Notably, patient communication with
doctors and nurses becomes significantly worse, patients are less satisfied with pain control,
and are less likely to recommend the hospital. These results are in line with the aforemen-
tioned findings on timely and effective care, as the medical staff is less attentive to patients
in affected hospitals.
  34
    Rothberg et al. (2014) find that 34% of the pneumonia hospitalizations are due to hospital-acquired
pneumonia infections.




                                                  21
Summary

Put together, the strongly consistent results across our three disparate measures (readmission
and mortality, effective care, and patient satisfaction) indicate a decline in the quality of care
and patient health outcomes among hospitals that experience a credit supply shock. The
results also suggest a clear channel for how impediments to credit access indirectly translate
to a negative impact on patient health. In order to compensate for the increased cost of
debt or liquidity shortfall, hospitals turn to their own internally generated revenues and
cash reserves. To bolster revenues, hospitals admit more patients and provide more tests
for outpatient services (Section 4.2). This increase in hospital occupancy places a greater
strain on medical staff time and attention. As a result, patients receive less attention and
treatment quality deteriorates, as evidenced by the reduction in timely and effective care and
higher levels of patient dissatisfaction. In turn, patient health in affected hospitals suffers as
conditions are not treated properly.35 Consequently, both readmission and mortality rates
increase. Overall, the results indicate that frictions to credit markets can have negative
social externalities that relate to public health.
    The results also do not necessarily imply that hospitals were operating suboptimally prior
to the credit supply shock. While hospitals seek to maximize profitability like other firms,
they also have a health provision objective that may run counter to maximizing profitability.
As such, hospitals optimize between profits and health provision. Under tighter financial
constraints, our results show that hospitals are forced to shift their decisions more towards
profitability and away from health care quality.


4.4     Parallel Trends
The validity of our staggered DID approach rests on the parallel trends assumption, which
we now examine. Specifically, we estimate a variant of equation (1) as follows

                       -1                        k
       Yi,t =  +             s Exposeds
                                      i,t   +         s Exposeds
                                                               i,t +  Controlsi,t + t + µi + i,t .        (3)
                      s=-3                      s=1


In equation (3), Exposeds
                        i,t equals 1 if hospital i was exposed to a stress-tested bank for the
first time in year t - s, and is equal to 0 otherwise. For example, Exposed- 3
                                                                           i,t equals 1 for
the year t that is three years before when hospital i's lending banks are first stress-tested
  35
    This channel is also consistent with Silver (2020), who finds that quality of care is lower when emergency
room doctors work faster due to workplace peer effects.



                                                        22
("year 0"). When estimating equation (3), we omit Exposed0
                                                         i,t , thus setting year 0 as the
reference year. The interpretation of s is that it captures the relative difference between the
treatment and control groups in each year, relative to the reference year 0. The parameter
k denotes the maximum post-treatment year; k equals 5 for variables that are available in
2017, and is equal to 4 otherwise.36
    Figures 1­4 provide parallel trends for our main outcomes related to hospital financials,
bed utilization, readmission rates, mortality, and patient satisfaction. For all of the vari-
ables, there are no significant pre-trends prior to the treatment year. However, after the
treatment year, the variables all move immediately in the documented directions. This
provides evidence that the parallel trends assumption holds in our setting.


4.5     Treatment Heterogeneity
To further validate that our results are driven by a credit supply channel, we explore hetero-
geneity in hospitals' exposure to bank stress tests. In particular, if the credit supply channel
is at play, we would expect our results to be stronger for hospitals borrowing from banks
that are more affected by stress tests.
    To examine this, we first exploit the fact that lenders vary in their stress test performance.
Banks that are closer to failing their stress tests tend to reduce their credit supply more,
thus generating greater financial pressure for the hospitals they lend to. Following Cort´
                                                                                         es
et al. (2020), we calculate the minimum stress-test distance (msd), which measures how far
a tested bank is from the stress test failure threshold (with a higher msd indicating that it
is safer):

   msd = min(Tier 1 capital - 6%, Risk-based capital - 8%, Stressed leverage - 4%).                          (4)

    The logic behind equation (4) is as follows. The Dodd-Frank Act sets a different regu-
latory threshold for three capital ratios (6% for the tier 1 ratio; 8% for the total risk-based
capital ratio; and 4% for the leverage ratio). We calculate the distance that each stress-tested
bank is from these thresholds, and then use minimum distance out of these three measures.
This captures how binding the stress test is for each affected bank across the different reg-
ulatory measures.37 For each treated hospital i, we calculate the average msd for all of its
   36
      Since the outcome variables for timely and effective care in Table 5 are only available up to 2014, the
post-treatment period is too short to compare trends meaningfully.
   37
      Cort´
          es et al. (2020) note that in 42% of tests, the Tier 1 ratio is closest to the minimum; 26% of the
time, the total risk-based capital is closest to binding; and, 64% of the time, the leverage ratio is most likely



                                                       23
stress-tested lenders, weighted by loan amount. We then re-run equation (1), but split our
treatment variable into two separate variables which indicate whether a hospital was exposed
to a stress test through a bank that was close to the threshold or far from the threshold.
More specifically, we define CloseExposedi,t-1 to take a value of 1 if hospital i was exposed
to a stress-tested bank in year t - 1 or earlier and the average msd of its stress-tested lenders
was below-median, and 0 otherwise. Similarly, F arExposedi,t-1 takes a value of 1 if hospital
i was exposed to a stress-tested bank in year t - 1 or earlier and the average msd of its tested
lenders was above-median, and 0 otherwise.
    Table 9 provides the results for key outcomes from the previous tables.38 Table 9 shows
that the baseline effects are centered around the hospitals that are exposed to stress tests
through banks closer to the threshold. The economic magnitudes in the close-bank subgroup
are very similar to the estimates in Section 4.2 and 4.3. In contrast, the effects for the far-
bank subgroup are weaker--the coefficients are either insignificant or of a much smaller
magnitude.
    Another source of heterogeneity across hospitals is how reliant a hospital is on bank loans.
If a hospital is more dependent on loan financing, then the negative credit shock induced by
stress tests should be more severe. In order to explore this, we first calculate each hospital's
loan reliance, which we define to be the hospital's (non-matured) loan amount divided by
its total income. We then run a similar specification as in the previous table, except that
we split the treatment variable into HighLevExposedi,t-1 and LowLevExposedi,t-1 , which
take a value of 1 if hospital i was exposed to a stress-tested bank in year t - 1 or earlier
and its loan reliance was above- or below-median, respectively, and 0 otherwise. The results
are provided in Table 10 and show a consistent pattern of stronger effects for the affected
hospitals that were more reliant on loan financing.
    A final source of heterogeneity that we explore is related to the fact that hospitals can have
lending relationships with more than one bank. In particular, if a hospital is borrowing from
multiple banks, then it will be more affected when stress tests affect a greater fraction of the
hospital's bank relationships. Furthermore, if a hospital is left with, say, only one unaffected
relationship lender, it allows that lender to exploit its superior information and extract
monopoly rents through future loans. This hold-up problem would increase borrowing costs
for the hospital (Sharpe (1990), Rajan (1992)). Following this logic, we divide each treated
hospital's loan amount from stress-tested lenders by its total (non-matured) loan amount,
to bind.
   38
      We focus on a key subset of our outcomes in order to provide minimize clutter; we note that our results
are generally consistent across our other measures.


                                                     24
and run a similar specification splitting the treatment variable into HighST Exposedi,t-1 and
LowST Exposedi,t-1 , which take a value of 1 if hospital i was exposed in year t - 1 or earlier
and its stress-tested loan fraction is above or below 50%, respectively, and 0 otherwise. Table
11 provides the results, which confirm that hospitals with a greater portion of their total
loans from stress-tested banks are driving the baseline effects.


5        Robustness
In this section, we provide and discuss various robustness tests.


5.1      Controlling for Regional Differences
A potential concern with our results is that they are influenced by the geographical region
that a hospital is located in. For example, if hospitals that are borrowing from banks tend to
be geographically clustered, and the number of patients in such areas dramatically increased
after 2012, then we may obtain similar baseline results unrelated to stress tests and negative
credit supply.39 Alternatively, local economic conditions in an area may affect both bank
lending and hospital outcomes, thus potentially confounding the channels that we aim to
identify.40
     To address these concerns, we examine whether our main results are likely to be driven
by geographical clustering. More specifically, we map each hospital's location to a hospital
referral region (HRR), which we obtain from the Dartmouth Atlas database. These regions
are composed of zip codes grouped together based on the referral patterns for tertiary care
for Medicare beneficiaries. The United States is divided into 306 HRRs. The geographical
distribution of affected hospitals is provided in Figure 5. As the picture shows, we do not
find a systematic clustering of hospitals exposed to stress tests, as these hospitals are mostly
    39
      The literature has shown that geographical variation can matter in terms of explaining differences in
healthcare markets outcomes (Chandra and Staiger, 2007; Gottlieb et al., 2010; Finkelstein et al., 2016).
Furthermore, our sample period includes the enactment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
(ACA), which provides low-income residents with expanded access to health insurance. After a U.S. Supreme
Court ruling in June 2012, states gradually expanded their Medicaid programs over time, which studies have
shown increased hospital revenues and decreased the probability of hospital closures (e.g., Duggan et al.,
2019; Lindrooth et al., 2018). Thus, if stress-test-exposed hospitals are geographically clustered within areas
that experienced Medicaid expansion, this has the potential to explain some of our results. However, we note
that Borgschulte and Vogler (2020) find evidence of improved healthcare quality due to the ACA, which is
inconsistent with this channel driving our results.
   40
      We note that this latter channel is unlikely to explain our results, since the affected banks in our sample
are large national banks.




                                                       25
dispersed across the U.S.41 Furthermore, this figure shows that within a particular state or
even within an HRR, there is variation in terms of our treatment, suggesting that our effects
cannot be fully explained by changes occurring at different geographical levels.
    However, to formally control for time-varying geographic effects, we also include HRR ×
year fixed effects in our main specifications. The variation from these regressions therefore
comes from differences between treated and control hospitals in a given year within the same
geographical area. Table 12 provides the estimation results, and confirms that our results
are robust to controlling for time-varying geographical conditions.


5.2     Hospital Systems
A concurrent trend after 2010 in healthcare markets is that healthcare systems and organi-
zations engaged in more mergers and acquisitions (M&A). Hospital mergers generate local
market concentration, which tends to reduce healthcare quality while increasing prices (see
Gaynor et al. (2015) for review). Furthermore, M&A transactions can be funded with ex-
ternal debt financing, which generates a concern that the baseline effects we find are due to
this consolidation process; in other words, we are potentially capturing differential operating
trends between large healthcare system branches and independent hospitals.
    To address this concern, in Table 13, we restrict our sample to hospitals belonging to
a healthcare system from 2010 to 2016, and we add a System fixed effect in our regression
to denote the specific system a hospital is a part of.42 We further cluster the standard
errors at the hospital system level. The results in Table 13 are consistent with the baseline
estimation, showing that the effect is not driven by differences between hospital systems and
independent hospitals.


5.3     Other Stress Test Robustness
In this section, we discuss additional robustness tests related to the implementation of stress
tests. We provide the results in the Online Appendix.
    In addition to the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests (DFAST) there were also other stress
test programs implemented in the years prior. While the DFA implemented stress test
    41
       Although the Houston and Los Angeles areas have the largest number of affected hospitals, their closest
neighbor regions all tend to have low exposure and thus can serve as suitable local control groups.
    42
       Note that this fixed effect is not absorbed by the hospital fixed effects because, for a given hospital,
its parent organization can change over time due to M&As. We also include hospital-year observations for
independent hospitals that later are acquired by a healthcare system. For these cases, the hospital's parent
system is coded as "Independent."


                                                      26
requirements for large banks as a matter of law, the Federal Reserve began to more closely
monitor the capital adequacy of the largest banks during the 2008­2009 financial crisis.
In particular, the Federal Reserve initiated the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program
(SCAP) in February 2009, which implemented one-time preliminary stress tests on the 19
U.S. banks with assets of at least $100 billion in order to ensure solvency of the banking sector
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Ten of the banks were required to raise additional
capital, either privately or through the U.S. Treasury's Capital Assistance Program (only
one bank used the latter). Subsequently, the Federal Reserve initiated the Comprehensive
Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) program in 2011 to ensure that the 19 largest banks
had enough capital to resume capital distributions to investors through dividend payments
and share repurchases (Board Gov. Fed. Reserve Syst. (2011), Hirtle (2014), Hirtle and
Lehnert (2015)).
   The DFAST differs from both the 2009 SCAP and the 2011 CCAR. As noted above,
the SCAP was implemented during an emergency period to prevent collapse of the financial
system.43 The CCAR is intended for stronger governance and supervision of bank capital
planning, as banks must develop formal guidelines for capital distribution, and the Federal
Reserve can object to such plans. As such, the original aim of the 2011 CCAR was to provide
additional oversight regarding capital distributions to shareholders of the largest banks.44 In
contrast to these two prior programs, the DFA was passed by the U.S. Congress and signed
into law, and served as the country's central legislation regarding stress tests. Moreover,
the aim of the DFAST is to ensure the financial health of individual banks and the banking
system. Accordingly, the DFAST applied to a wider set of banks and, with its "severely
adverse scenario" tests, carried a stricter examination than the 2011 CCAR. (The CCAR
has since evolved to be run jointly with DFAST.)
   We argue that using DFAST is appropriate for our setting due to the fact that DFAST
applied to a wider set of banks and had more formal legal and regulatory ramifications. It
is possible, however, that the SCAP and CCAR tests also elicited similar responses. We
examine the effects of these tests further and our results suggest that this is not the case.
In terms of SCAP, while we cannot formally test its effects due to our data only being
consistently available after 2010, it is unlikely that SCAP drives our main results. In our
  43
      Moreover, Morgan et al. (2014) find no significant stock market responses to the disclosure of SCAP
results, which suggests that the program did not bring significant new information to the market.
   44
      See, e.g., "Revised Temporary Addendum to SR letter 09-4: Dividend Increases and Other Capital
Distributions for the 19 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program Bank Holding Companies." November17,
2010. Available at: http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/srletters/2009/SR0904_Addendum.
pdf.



                                                   27
sample, one third (188 out of 537) of the affected hospitals had non-matured loans with SCAP
participants in 2009. Furthermore, we see no indication of an effect in our pre-treatment
period from the parallel trend graphs, suggesting that SCAP did not generate any significant
effect on our outcome variables. In terms of CCAR, it is plausible that some of our effects
are driven by these stress tests given that they occur so close to DFAST. As a robustness
test, we also include CCAR stress tests when defining our treatment. We find similar results,
but with lower economic magnitudes and significance, suggesting that CCAR generates a
smaller effect than the DFAST stress tests. The results are provided in Table A.3 of the
Online Appendix.


6     Conclusion
This paper explores the effect of credit supply shocks on hospitals. We utilize variation in
stress tests conducted on banks, and examine outcomes for the hospitals that these tested
banks lend to. We find evidence that these hospitals tighten their operations in response
to a negative credit shock--they show increases in profits and revenues. However, we also
find that hospitals deliver lower quality care to patients in response to negative credit shocks
across a host of objective and subjective measures. In particular, we find that hospitals
experience a significant reduction in timely and effective care, an increase in readmission and
mortality rates for major conditions, and a reduction in patient satisfaction measures. Our
results are stronger for hospitals that are more affected by the stress-test-induced negative
credit shocks.
    Our results suggest that hospitals, like other for-profit businesses, respond to increased
financial pressure through changes in their operations, and in particular are dependent on
credit markets. However, hospitals also provide a unique societal role in terms of enhancing or
maintaining public health. Our results therefore provide evidence of an important connection
between credit markets and public health.




                                              28
References
Abaluck, J., L. Agha, C. Kabrhel, A. Raja, and A. Venkatesh (2016): "The de-
  terminants of productivity in medical testing: Intensity and allocation of care," American
  Economic Review, 106, 3730­64.
Acharya, V. V., A. N. Berger, and R. A. Roman (2018): "Lending implications of
  US bank stress tests: Costs or benefits?" Journal of Financial Intermediation, 34, 58­90.
Adelino, M., K. Lewellen, and W. B. McCartney (2019): "Hospital financial health
  and clinical choices: evidence from the financial crisis," Available at SSRN 3224667.
Adelino, M., K. Lewellen, and A. Sundaram (2015): "Investment decisions of non-
  profit firms: Evidence from hospitals," The Journal of Finance, 70, 1583­1628.
Beaulieu, N. D., L. S. Dafny, B. E. Landon, J. B. Dalton, I. Kuye, and J. M.
  McWilliams (2020): "Changes in quality of care after hospital mergers and acquisitions,"
  New England Journal of Medicine, 382, 51­59.
Bernanke, B. S. and M. Gertler (1995): "Inside the black box: the credit channel of
  monetary policy transmission," Journal of Economic perspectives, 9, 27­48.
Bharath, S., S. Dahiya, A. Saunders, and A. Srinivasan (2007): "So what do I get?
  The bank's view of lending relationships," Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 368­419.
Board Gov. Fed. Reserve Syst. (2011): "Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review:
  Overview and Objectives," Tech. rep., Board Gov. Fed. Reserve Syst.
------ (2020): "Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2020: Supervisory Stress Test Re-
  sults June - 2020," https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/june-2020-supervisory-
  scenarios.htm, Accessed: January 31, 2021.
Boot, A. W. (2000): "Relationship Banking: What Do We Know?" Journal of Financial
  Intermediation, 9, 7­25.
Boot, A. W. and A. V. Thakor (2000): "Can relationship banking survive competi-
  tion?" The Journal of Finance, 55, 679­713.
Borgschulte, M. and J. Vogler (2020): "Did the ACA Medicaid Expansion Save
  Lives?" Journal of Health Economics, 102333.
Botsch, M. and V. Vanasco (2019): "Learning by lending," Journal of Financial Inter-
  mediation, 37, 1­14.
Campello, M., J. R. Graham, and C. R. Harvey (2010): "The real effects of financial
  constraints: Evidence from a financial crisis," Journal of Financial Economics, 97, 470­
  487.
Chandra, A., D. Cutler, and Z. Song (2011): "Who ordered that? The economics of
  treatment choices in medical care," Handbook of health economics, 2, 397­432.


                                            29
Chandra, A., A. Finkelstein, A. Sacarny, and C. Syverson (2016): "Health care
  exceptionalism? Performance and allocation in the US health care sector," American
  Economic Review, 106, 2110­44.
Chandra, A. and D. O. Staiger (2007): "Productivity spillovers in health care: evidence
  from the treatment of heart attacks," Journal of Political Economy, 115, 103­140.
------ (2020): "Identifying Sources of Inefficiency in Healthcare," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 135, 785­843.
Chava, S. and M. R. Roberts (2008): "How does financing impact investment? The
  role of debt covenants," The journal of finance, 63, 2085­2121.
Clemens, J. and J. D. Gottlieb (2014): "Do physicians' financial incentives affect
  medical treatment and patient health?" American Economic Review, 104, 1320­49.
Cooper, L. M. and W. T. Linde-Zwirble (2004): "Medicare intensive care unit use:
  analysis of incidence, cost, and payment," Critical Care Medicine, 32, 2247­2253.
Cooper, Z., S. V. Craig, M. Gaynor, and J. Van Reenen (2019): "The price
  ain't right? Hospital prices and health spending on the privately insured," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 134, 51­107.
Corte ´s, K. R., Y. Demyanyk, L. Li, E. Loutskina, and P. E. Strahan (2020):
  "Stress tests and small business lending," Journal of Financial Economics, 136, 260­279.
Dafny, L. (2009): "Estimation and identification of merger effects: An application to
  hospital mergers," The Journal of Law and Economics, 52, 523­550.
Dafny, L. S. (2005): "How do hospitals respond to price changes?" American Economic
  Review, 95, 1525­1547.
Degryse, H. and S. Ongena (2005): "Distance, lending relationships, and competition,"
  The Journal of Finance, 60, 231­266.
Detragiache, E., T. Tressel, and P. Gupta (2008): "Foreign banks in poor countries:
  theory and evidence," The Journal of Finance, 63, 2123­2160.
Dranove, D., C. Garthwaite, and C. Ody (2017): "How do nonprofits respond to
  negative wealth shocks? The impact of the 2008 stock market collapse on hospitals," The
  RAND Journal of Economics, 48, 485­525.
Drucker, S. and M. Puri (2009): "On loan sales, loan contracting, and lending relation-
  ships," The Review of Financial Studies, 22, 2835­2872.
Duchin, R., O. Ozbas, and B. A. Sensoy (2010): "Costly external finance, corporate
  investment, and the subprime mortgage credit crisis," Journal of Financial Economics,
  97, 418­435.
Duggan, M., A. Gupta, and E. Jackson (2019): "The Impact of the Affordable Care
  Act: Evidence from California's Hospital Sector," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic


                                            30
  Research.
Dwenger, N., F. M. Fossen, and M. Simmler (2020): "Firms' financial and real
  responses to credit supply shocks: Evidence from firm-bank relationships in Germany,"
  Journal of Financial Intermediation, 41, 100773.
Elyasiani, E. and L. G. Goldberg (2004): "Relationship lending: a survey of the
  literature," Journal of Economics and Business, 56, 315­330.
Federal Register (2012): "Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation," Federal Register, 77,
  62417­62427.
Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow, and H. Williams (2016): "Sources of geographic
  variation in health care: Evidence from patient migration," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 131, 1681­1726.
Fisher, E. S., D. E. Wennberg, T. A. Stukel, D. J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas, and
  E. L. Pinder (2003): "The implications of regional variations in Medicare spending.
  Part 1: the content, quality, and accessibility of care," Annals of internal medicine, 138,
  273­287.
Frakes, M. and J. Gruber (2019): "Defensive medicine: evidence from military immu-
  nity," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11, 197­231.
Gan, J. (2007): "The real effects of asset market bubbles: Loan-and firm-level evidence of
  a lending channel," The Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1941­1973.
Gao, P., C. Lee, and D. Murphy (2019): "Municipal borrowing costs and state policies
  for distressed municipalities," Journal of Financial Economics, 132, 404­426.
------ (2020): "Good for your Fiscal Health? The Effect of the Affordable Care Act on
  Healthcare Borrowing Costs," Working paper.
Gaynor, M., K. Ho, and R. J. Town (2015): "The industrial organization of health-care
  markets," Journal of Economic Literature, 53, 235­84.
Gottlieb, D. J., W. Zhou, Y. Song, K. G. Andrews, J. S. Skinner, and J. M.
  Sutherland (2010): "Prices don't drive regional Medicare spending variations," Health
  Affairs, 29, 537­543.
Gropp, R., T. Mosk, S. Ongena, and C. Wix (2019): "Banks response to higher
  capital requirements: Evidence from a quasi-natural experiment," The Review of Financial
  Studies, 32, 266­299.
Group, S. S. S. S. et al. (1994): "Randomised trial of cholesterol lowering in 4444
  patients with coronary heart disease: the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S),"
  The Lancet, 344, 1383­1389.
Gupta, A., S. T. Howell, C. Yannelis, and A. Gupta (2021): "Does private equity
  investment in healthcare benefit patients? evidence from nursing homes," Tech. rep.,


                                             31
  National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hirtle, B. (2014): "Bank holding company dividends and repurchases during the financial
  crisis," FRB of New York Staff Report.
Hirtle, B. and A. Lehnert (2015): "Supervisory stress tests," Annual Review of Finan-
  cial Economics, 7, 339­355.
Hombert, J. and A. Matray (2017): "The real effects of lending relationships on inno-
  vative firms and inventor mobility," The Review of Financial Studies, 30, 2413­2445.
Hovakimian, G. (2011): "Financial constraints and investment efficiency: Internal capital
  allocation across the business cycle," Journal of Financial Intermediation, 20, 264­283.
Ivashina, V. (2009): "Asymmetric information effects on loan spreads," Journal of Finan-
  cial Economics, 92, 300­319.
Jencks, S. F., M. V. Williams, and E. A. Coleman (2009): "Rehospitaliza-
  tions among patients in the Medicare fee-for-service program," New England Journal of
  Medicine, 360, 1418­1428.
Keeley, E. C., J. A. Boura, and C. L. Grines (2003): "Primary angioplasty versus
  intravenous thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction: a quantitative review
  of 23 randomised trials," The Lancet, 361, 13­20.
Koijen, R. S., T. J. Philipson, and H. Uhlig (2016): "Financial health economics,"
  Econometrica, 84, 195­242.
Lemmon, M. and M. R. Roberts (2010): "The response of corporate financing and
  investment to changes in the supply of credit," Journal of Financial and quantitative
  analysis, 555­587.
Lindrooth, R. C., M. C. Perraillon, R. Y. Hardy, and G. J. Tung (2018): "Un-
  derstanding the relationship between Medicaid expansions and hospital closures," Health
  Affairs, 37, 111­120.
Morgan, D. P., S. Peristiani, and V. Savino (2014): "The information value of the
  stress test," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 46, 1479­1500.
Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1994): "The benefits of lending relationships:
  Evidence from small business data," The Journal of Finance, 49, 3­37.
Pfeffer, M. A., E. Braunwald, L. A. Moye            ´, L. Basta, E. J. Brown Jr, T. E.
  Cuddy, B. R. Davis, E. M. Geltman, S. Goldman, G. C. Flaker, et al. (1992):
  "Effect of captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction
  after myocardial infarction: results of the Survival and Ventricular Enlargement Trial,"
  New England Journal of Medicine, 327, 669­677.
Rajan, R. G. (1992): "Insiders and outsiders: The choice between informed and arm's-
  length debt," The Journal of Finance, 47, 1367­1400.


                                              32
Rothberg, M. B., S. Haessler, T. Lagu, P. K. Lindenauer, P. S. Pekow,
  A. Priya, D. Skiest, and M. D. Zilberberg (2014): "Outcomes of patients with
  healthcare-associated pneumonia: worse disease or sicker patients?" Infection Control &
  Hospital Epidemiology, 35, S107­S115.
Sacks, F. M., M. A. Pfeffer, L. A. Moye, J. L. Rouleau, J. D. Rutherford,
  T. G. Cole, L. Brown, J. W. Warnica, J. M. O. Arnold, C.-C. Wun, et al.
  (1996): "The effect of pravastatin on coronary events after myocardial infarction in pa-
  tients with average cholesterol levels," New England Journal of Medicine, 335, 1001­1009.
Samuelson, K. (2017): "The Role of Hospitals in Community and Economic Develop-
  ment," https://www.fels.upenn.edu/recap/posts/1071, May , 2021.
Scholz, K. H., S. K. Maier, L. S. Maier, B. Lengenfelder, C. Jacobshagen,
  J. Jung, C. Fleischmann, G. S. Werner, H. G. Olbrich, R. Ott, et al. (2018):
  "Impact of treatment delay on mortality in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
  (STEMI) patients presenting with and without haemodynamic instability: results from
  the German prospective, multicentre FITT-STEMI trial," European heart journal, 39,
  1065­1074.
Sharpe, S. A. (1990): "Asymmetric information, bank lending, and implicit contracts: A
  stylized model of customer relationships," The Journal of Finance, 45, 1069­1087.
Silver, D. (2020): "Haste or waste? Peer pressure and productivity in the emergency
  department," Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.




                                            33
Tables

 Table 1: Lender and Exposed Hospital Distributions and Summary Statistics
Panel A summarizes the yearly distribution of first-time stress-tested banks and exposed hospitals. In Panel
A, Column (1) shows the number of new banks that were stress-tested and were lending to hospitals in the
sample in a given year. Column (2) shows the number of existing loans to hospitals by these newly-tested
lenders in each year. Column (3) shows the affected number of hospitals that borrow from the lenders in
Column (1) in each year. Panel B provides summary statistics for the main loan variables in our sample.
Spread&F ee is the interest rate spread over LIBOR plus fees on the drawn portion of the loan (in basis
points). M aturity is the the loan facility maturity (in months). Amt is the facility amount (in millions).

                               Panel A: Tested Lenders Distribution
                                (1)                 (2)                   (3)
                  Year    Tested Lenders      Existing Loans        Exposed Hospitals
                  2012           15                   52                    416
                  2013           4                    26                    43
                  2014           3                    3                      32
                  2015           1                    4                      40
                  2016           3                    4                      6

                                      Panel B: Loan Characteristics
                                   (1)    (2)       (3)       (4)      (5)    (6)
                                   N      Mean      Std       P25      Median p75
                  Spread&F ee      1061   388.09 303.67 200.00 325.00             475.00
                  M aturity        1061   58.75 14.58 56.00 60.00                 60.00
                  Amt              1061   737.37 898.91 200.00 450.00             900.00




                                                    34
                              Table 2: Hospital Loan Characteristics
This table provides the regression results for equation (2). Each observation represents a loan facility k ,
borrowed by hospital i from bank j in year t. ST Exposed take a value of 1 if at least one of hospital i's
relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Spread&F ee is the
interest rate (in basis points) spread over LIBOR plus fees on the drawn portion of the loan. LogAmt is
the logarithm of the loan facility amount. LogM aturity is the logarithm of the loan facility maturity (in
months). N ewLender takes a value of 1 if hospital i has never borrowed from bank j before year t, and 0
otherwise. Control variables include borrower i's logarithm of total assets, profitability (income over total
assets), leverage (total liabilities over total assets), and tangibility (total fixed assets over total assets). Year,
bank, loan type, and loan purpose fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at
the lender level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level.


                                (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)
                            Spread&Fee        Spread&Fee          LogAmt         LogMaturity        NewLender

  ST Exposedi,t-1            74.764***          63.166**         -0.362***          -0.084*            0.132*
                              (2.968)            (2.020)         (-2.842)           (-1.718)           (1.834)
  Controls                        Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
  Year FE                         Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
  Bank FE                         Y                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
  Loan Type FE                    N                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
  Loan Purpose FE                 N                 Y                 Y                 Y                 Y
  N                             1,052              717               810               801               810
  Adj R2                        0.21               0.39              0.60              0.43              0.34




                                                          35
                             Table 3: Hospital Financial Performance
This table provides the regression results for equation (1) for financial outcome variables. ST Exposed takes a
value of 1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and
0 otherwise. M argin is profit margin, defined as (Income - Cost) /Income. LogP atRev is the logarithm
of one plus the total patient revenue. LogInP atRev and LogOutP atRev are the logarithm of one plus total
inpatient and outpatient revenues, respectively. AvgP ay is total inpatient revenue divided by total inpatient
discharges. Cash/T A is cash holdings over total assets. Debt/T A is total debt over total assets. Control
variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of
one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged
debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atrev/T Ai,t-1 ).
Year and hospital fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level
and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level.

                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)
                    Margin     Debt/TA      Cash/TA     LogPatRev    LogInPatRev     LogOutPatRev       AvgPay

 ST Exposedi,t-1    0.012** -0.052*** -0.006***           0.057*        0.086***         0.068*       1701.316***
                    (2.077) (-4.275)  (-2.583)            (1.903)        (2.845)         (1.851)        (3.172)

 Controls             Y           Y            Y            Y              Y               Y               Y
 Year FE              Y           Y            Y            Y              Y               Y               Y
 Hospital FE          Y           Y            Y            Y              Y               Y               Y
 N                  23,780      23,223       23,119       23,793         23,793          23,793          23,248
 Adj R2              0.22        0.81         0.76         0.93           0.95            0.81            0.87




                                                         36
                                Table 4: Hospital Bed Utilization
This table provides the regression results for equation (1), focusing on hospital bed utilization. Occupancy is
inpatient bed days utilized over total bed days. Discharge Rate is inpatient discharges over total bed days.
Salary is the average per capita salary for physicians, interns and residents. ICU Bed Rate is ICU beds over
available beds. ST Exposed takes a value of 1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a
stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus
total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ),
lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and
lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital fixed effects are included,
as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                                    (1)              (2)               (3)             (4)
                                 Occupancy      Discharge Rate        Salary       ICU Bed Rate

             ST Exposedi,t-1      0.022***         2.350***        1750.260***        -0.003**
                                   (5.973)          (5.752)          (5.017)          (-2.399)

             Controls                 Y                Y                Y                 Y
             Year FE                  Y                Y                Y                 Y
             Hospital FE              Y                Y                Y                 Y
             N                      23,245           23,243           23,148            16,445
             Adj R2                  0.94             0.80             0.93              0.83




                                                       37
              Table 5: Hospital Care Quality: Timely and Effective Care
This table provides estimation results for equation (1), focusing on timely and effective care quality. The
outcome variables in columns (1)­(3) measure the shares of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) patients
receiving Aspirin at discharge (Aspirin), percutaneous coronary intervention within 90 minutes of arrival
(P CI ), and Statin at discharge (Statin Rx). The outcome variables in columns (4)­(5) measure the shares
of heart failure patients receiving: evaluation of the left ventricular systolic function (LV S ), and angiotensin
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB) at Discharge (ACE/ARB ).
Column (6) measures the share of pneumonia patients receiving the most appropriate antibiotic (Antibiotic).
ST Exposed takes a value of 1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in
year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital
income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash
holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total
patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital fixed effects are included, as indicated.
Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                             (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)
                           Aspirin        PCI        Statin Rx       LVS        ACE/ARB        Antibiotic

       ST Exposedi,t-1      -0.001 -0.014***         -0.005**     -0.008***     -0.008***     -0.008***
                           (-1.155) (-3.112)         (-2.390)     (-5.712)      (-3.512)      (-3.388)

       Controls                Y            Y            Y            Y             Y              Y
       Year FE                 Y            Y            Y            Y             Y              Y
       Hospital FE             Y            Y            Y            Y             Y              Y
       N                     9,199        6,325        6,933        14,372        11,189         14,644
       Adj R2                 0.43        0.51         0.60          0.78          0.49           0.58




                                                       38
                                              Table 6: Hospital Care Quality: Readmission Rates
     This table provides the estimation results for equation (1), focusing on 30-day readmission rates. The outcome variables in columns (1)­(3) measure the
     logarithm of the number of unplanned readmissions for Pneumonia (LogP N Readm), heart failure (LogHF Readm), and acute myocardial infarction
     (LogAM IReadm), respectively. The outcome variables in columns (4)­(6) measure the readmission rates for Pneumonia (P N ReadmRate), heart
     failure (HF ReadmRate), and acute myocardial infarction (AM IReadmRate), respectively. The outcome variable in Column (7) is the readmission
     rate for all diseases (AllReadmRate). The outcome variable Column (8) is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the hospital's CMS-reported
     readmission rate for all diseases is in the worst-performing group among hospitals nation-wide, and 0 otherwise. ST Exposed takes a value of 1 if at
     least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control variables include the lagged
     logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings
     over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ).
     Year and hospital fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
     and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.




39
                            (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)                (7)               (8)
                        LogPNReadm      LogHFReadm      LogAMIReadm      PNReadmRate      HFReadmRate      AMIReadmRate      AllReadmRate     AllReadmWorst

      ST Exposedi,t-1      0.101***        0.027**          0.026**         0.003***         0.003***          0.003***         0.002***         0.046***
                            (8.678)        (2.475)          (1.972)          (5.763)          (4.898)           (5.070)          (5.103)          (3.500)

      Controls                Y               Y               Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y                Y
      Year FE                 Y               Y               Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y                Y
      Hospital FE             Y               Y               Y                Y                Y                 Y                Y                Y
      N                     21,588          20,062          12,668           23,408           22,165            14,341           17,678           19,336
      Adj R2                 0.96            0.98            0.97             0.72             0.77              0.82             0.67             0.48
                          Table 7: Hospital Care Quality: Mortality
This table provides estimation results for equation (1), focusing on mortality outcomes. LogP N M ort,
LogHF M ort, and LogAM IM ort are the logarithms of the number of pneumonia, heart failure, and AMI
deaths, respectively. P N M ortN um is the number of pneumonia deaths. P N M orRate is the mortality
rate for patients treated for pneumonia. P N M ortW orst is a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if
the hospital is in the worst category in terms of pneumonia deaths relative to the national average, and 0
otherwise. ST Exposed takes a value of 1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress
test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus
total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ),
lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and
lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital fixed effects are included,
as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                        (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)             (6)
                    LogPNMort     LogHFMort      LogAMIMort     PNMortNum       PNMortRate      PNMortWorst

 ST Exposedi,t-1     0.096***         0.001         0.020*         1.704***       0.002***          0.018*
                      (8.182)        (0.076)        (1.814)         (5.066)        (2.609)          (1.744)

 Controls                Y             Y              Y               Y               Y               Y
 Year FE                 Y             Y              Y               Y               Y               Y
 Hospital FE             Y             Y              Y               Y               Y               Y
 N                     21,543        19,834         14,065          21,543          23,372          23,820
 Adj R2                 0.96          0.98           0.97            0.90            0.84            0.31




                                                       40
                   Table 8: Hospital Care Quality: Patient's Perspective
This table provides the estimation results for equation (1), focusing on hospital care quality from the patient's
perspective. The outcome variables are the shares of patients that give the highest rating to questions on
overall care quality (Overall), pain control (P ainCtrl), recommendation of the hospital to similar patients
(Recommend), cleanliness (Clean), doctor communication (DocCom), nurse communication (N urseCom),
recovery information (Inf o), and quietness (Quiet), respectively. ST Exposed takes a value of 1 if at least
one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control
variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of
one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged
debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ).
Year and hospital fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level
and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
level.

                     (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)        (8)
                    Overall    PainCtrl   Recommend      Clean      DocCom     NurseCom       Info       Quiet

 ST Exposedi,t-1   -0.008*** -0.006***     -0.006***   -0.006*** -0.006***     -0.003***   -0.005*** -0.008***
                   (-4.561)  (-4.752)      (-3.430)    (-3.364)  (-6.076)      (-2.951)    (-5.108)  (-4.025)

 Controls             Y           Y           Y            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
 Year FE              Y           Y           Y            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
 Hospital FE          Y           Y           Y            Y           Y           Y           Y           Y
 N                  21,349      21,335      21,347       21,349      21,349      21,349      21,348      21,349
 Adj R2              0.82        0.59        0.85         0.76        0.77        0.78        0.72        0.85




                                                        41
                     Table 9: Heterogeneity Across Stress-tested Banks
This table provides estimation results when splitting the treatment group by the lending bank's stress test
performance. Following Cort´ es et al. (2020), we define the minimum stress-test distance (msd) for banks as

               msd = min(Tier 1 capital - 6%, Risk-based capital - 8%, Stressed leverage - 4%).

For each treated hospital i, we calculate the average msd for all of its tested lenders, weighted by the loan
amount. CloseExposedi,t-1 (F arExposedi,t-1 ) takes a value of 1 if hospital i was exposed in year t - 1
or earlier and the average msd of its tested lenders is below (above) median, and 0 otherwise. M argin
is profit margin, defined as (Income - Cost) /Income. AvgP ay is total inpatient revenue divided by total
inpatient discharges. Occupancy is inpatient bed days utilized over total bed days. Discharge Rate is
inpatient discharges over total bed days. AllReadmRate is the readmission rate for all diseases. Antibiotic
measures the share of pneumonia patients receiving the most appropriate antibiotic. Overall is the share of
patients that give the highest rating to questions on overall care quality. Control variables include the lagged
logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed
days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets
(Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital
fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                       (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)          (6)        (7)
                      Margin      AvgPay       Occupancy    Discharge Rate   AllReadmRate   Antibiotic   Overall

 CloseExposedi,t-1    0.012**    2515.681***   0.024***         2.013***       0.001***     -0.009*** -0.008***
                      (2.058)      (3.748)      (5.483)          (4.591)        (3.548)     (-3.200)  (-4.027)
 F arExposedi,t-1      -0.007      896.930     0.013***         0.783*         0.002***     -0.003***     -0.000
                      (-1.044)     (1.524)      (2.797)         (1.656)         (4.925)     (-0.674)     (-0.164)

 Controls                Y           Y            Y                Y              Y            Y            Y
 Year FE                 Y           Y            Y                Y              Y            Y            Y
 Hospital FE             Y           Y            Y                Y              Y            Y            Y
 N                     25,397      23,718       23,715           23,713         17,678       15,113       23,950
 Adj R2                 0.22        0.87         0.94             0.80           0.67         0.58         0.81




                                                           42
                   Table 10: Heterogeneity Across Bank Loan Reliance
This table provides estimation results when splitting the treatment group by the treated hospital's re-
liance on bank loans. We define reliance as a hospital's non-matured loan amount over its total income.
HighLevExposedi,t-1 (LowLevExposedi,t-1 ) takes a value of 1 if hospital i was exposed to a stress test in
year t - 1 or earlier and its reliance is above (below) median, and 0 otherwise. M argin is profit margin, de-
fined as (Income - Cost) /Income. AvgP ay is total inpatient revenue divided by total inpatient discharges.
Occupancy is inpatient bed days utilized over total bed days. Discharge Rate is inpatient discharges over
total bed days. AllReadmRate is the readmission rate for all diseases. Antibiotic measures the share of
pneumonia patients receiving the most appropriate antibiotic. Overall is the share of patients that give the
highest rating to questions on overall care quality. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus
total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ),
lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and
lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital fixed effects are included,
as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                        (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)              (5)          (6)        (7)
                       Margin      AvgPay       Occupancy      Discharge Rate   AllReadmRate   Antibiotic   Overall

 HighLevExposedi,t-1   0.018**   5778.657***    0.033***          3.008***        0.003***     -0.013*** -0.009***
                       (2.474)     (6.432)       (6.451)           (6.530)         (6.465)     (-3.815)  (-3.931)
 LowLevExposedi,t-1     0.001    -2141.341***    0.012**           0.656            0.001       -0.002       -0.004
                       (0.065)     (-3.329)      (2.342)          (1.187)          (1.464)     (-0.633)     (-1.629)

 Controls                 Y           Y            Y                 Y               Y            Y            Y
 Year FE                  Y           Y            Y                 Y               Y            Y            Y
 Hospital FE              Y           Y            Y                 Y               Y            Y            Y
 N                      25,397      23,718       23,715            23,713          17,678       15,113       23,950
 Adj R2                  0.22        0.87         0.94              0.80            0.67         0.58         0.81




                                                          43
     Table 11: Heterogeneity Across Hospital Exposure to Bank Stress Tests
This table provides estimation results when splitting the treatment group by the treated hospital's exposure
to bank lender stress tests. We define exposure as a treated hospital's loan amount from stress-tested lenders
scaled by its total non-matured loan amount. HighST Exposedi,t-1 (LowST Exposedi,t-1 ) takes a value of
1 if hospital i was exposed in year t - 1 or earlier and its exposure is above (below) 0.5, and 0 otherwise.
M argin is profit margin, defined as (Income - Cost) /Income. AvgP ay is total inpatient revenue divided
by total inpatient discharges. Occupancy is inpatient bed days utilized over total bed days. Discharge Rate
is inpatient discharges over total bed days. AllReadmRate is the readmission rate for all diseases. Antibiotic
measures the share of pneumonia patients receiving the most appropriate antibiotic. Overall is the share of
patients that give the highest rating to questions on overall care quality. Control variables include the lagged
logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed
days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets
(Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital
fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics
are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                        (1)          (2)           (3)               (4)              (5)          (6)        (7)
                       Margin      AvgPay       Occupancy       Discharge Rate   AllReadmRate   Antibiotic   Overall

 HighST Exposedi,t-1   0.014**    1659.881***   0.022***           2.373***        0.002***     -0.008*** -0.008***
                       (2.235)      (2.866)      (5.520)            (5.661)         (5.067)     (-3.216)  (-4.691)
 LowST Exposedi,t-1    -0.031**      3.286       0.014*             0.557            0.001       -0.001       0.002
                       (-2.432)     (0.003)      (1.673)           (0.524)          (1.056)     (-0.195)     (0.488)

 Controls                 Y           Y            Y                  Y               Y            Y           Y
 Year FE                  Y           Y            Y                  Y               Y            Y           Y
 Hospital FE              Y           Y            Y                  Y               Y            Y           Y
 N                      25,397      23,718       23,715             23,713          17,678       15,113      23,950
 Adj R2                  0.22        0.87         0.94               0.80            0.67         0.58        0.81




                                                           44
              Table 12: Robustness: Controlling for Regional Differences
This table provides estimation results for equation (1), controlling for regional differences in each year.
M argin is profit margin, defined as (Income - Cost) /Income. AvgP ay is total inpatient revenue divided
by total inpatient discharges. Occupancy is inpatient bed days utilized over total bed days. Discharge Rate
is inpatient discharges over total bed days. AllReadmRate is the readmission rate for all diseases. Antibiotic
measures the share of pneumonia patients receiving the most appropriate antibiotic. Overall is the share
of patients that give the highest rating to questions on overall care quality. ST Exposed takes a value of
1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0
otherwise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ),
lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings over total assets
(Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total
assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Hospital referral region (HRR)-by-year and hospital fixed effects are included, as
indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and
*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                     (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)         (7)
                    Margin    AvgPay    Occupancy   Discharge Rate   AllReadmRate    Antibiotic    Overall

 ST Exposedi,t-1     0.009    343.081   0.014***       1.886***         0.002***      -0.007**    -0.007***
                    (0.784)   (0.531)    (3.288)        (4.197)          (3.932)      (-2.304)    (-3.125)

 Controls             Y         Y          Y                Y              Y             Y           Y
 HRR × Year FE        Y         Y          Y                Y              Y             Y           Y
 Hospital FE          Y         Y          Y                Y              Y             Y           Y
 N                  23,611    23,087     23,087           23,082         17,565        14,947      21,231
 Adj R2              0.17      0.87       0.95             0.81           0.68          0.57        0.82




                                                     45
                Table 13: Robustness: Subsidiaries of Hospital Systems
This table provides estimation results for equation (1), only including hospitals that are subsidiaries of
hospital systems. M argin is profit margin, defined as (Income - Cost) /Income. AvgP ay is total inpatient
revenue divided by total inpatient discharges. Occupancy is inpatient bed days utilized over total bed days.
Discharge Rate is inpatient discharges over total bed days. AllReadmRate is the readmission rate for all
diseases. Antibiotic measures the share of pneumonia patients receiving the most appropriate antibiotic.
Overall is the share of patients that give the highest rating to questions on overall care quality. ST Exposed
takes a value of 1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or
earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital income
(LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings
over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient
revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Standard errors are clustered at the hospital system level and
t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                    (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)         (7)
                   Margin    AvgPay     Occupancy    Discharge Rate   AllReadmRate     Antibiotic    Overall

 ST Exposedi,t-1   0.013*    2161.931    0.023***       2.520***         0.002***      -0.008*** -0.009***
                   (1.924)    (1.557)     (3.217)        (3.582)          (3.321)      (-2.729)  (-3.048)

 Controls             Y         Y           Y                Y              Y              Y           Y
 Year FE              Y         Y           Y                Y              Y              Y           Y
 Hospital FE          Y         Y           Y                Y              Y              Y           Y
 System FE            Y         Y           Y                Y              Y              Y           Y
 N                  15,886    15,562      15,560           15,562         12,176         10,344      14,675
 Adj R2              0.36      0.87        0.94             0.81           0.65           0.50        0.82




                                                      46
Figures

Figure 1: Parallel Trends: Hospital Financial and Bed Utilization Performance
This figure provides parallel trends for the financial and bed utilization outcome variables by graphing
estimation results for equation (3). Each coefficient represents the relative difference between the treatment
and control group s years after the first exposure year ("year 0"). All coefficient estimates are relative to
year 0. 95% confidence intervals are indicated by the solid lines.




                                              Leverage                                     Cash                            Average Payment
                                                                                                               6000
                           .1                                       .01

                                                                                                               4000


                                                                        0                                      2000
                           0

                                                                                                                  0
  Coefficient Estimates




                                                                   -.01
                          -.1                                                                                 -2000


                                              Occupation                              Discharge                                 ICU Rate
                                                                    4                                           .01
                           .04

                                                                    2                                          .005
                           .02
                                                                    0                                            0

                                0
                                                                   -2                                         -.005


                          -.02                                     -4                                          -.01

                                    -3   -2   -1   1   2   3   4            -3   -2   -1    1     2   3   4           -3   -2   -1   1   2   3   4




                                                                                      47
                                        Figure 2: Parallel Trends: 30-day Readmission Rates
This figure provides parallel trends for readmission rate outcome variables by graphing estimation results for
equation (3). Each coefficient represents the relative difference between the treatment and control group s
years after the first exposure year ("year 0"). All coefficient estimates are relative to year 0. 95% confidence
intervals are indicated by the solid lines.

                                                  PN Readm Rate                       HF Readm Rate
                                  .01




                                 .005




                                   0
        Coefficient Estimates




                                -.005


                                                  AMI Readm Rate                      All Readm Rate
                                  .01




                                 .005




                                   0




                                -.005

                                        -3   -2    -1   1    2     3   4    -3   -2   -1    1     2    3   4




                                                                       48
                                                          Figure 3: Parallel Trends: Mortality
This figure provides parallel trends for mortality outcome variables by graphing estimation results for equa-
tion (3). Each coefficient represents the relative difference between the treatment and control group s years
after the first exposure year ("year 0"). All coefficient estimates are relative to year 0. 95% confidence
intervals are indicated by the solid lines.




                                            PN Mort Rate                      PN Mort Number                       Log(PN Mort Number)
                            .01                                      4                                   .2
  Coefficient Estimates




                           .005                                      2                                   .1


                             0                                       0                                   0


                          -.005                                     -2                                  -.1


                           -.01                                     -4                                  -.2

                                  -3   -2    -1   1   2     3   4        -3   -2   -1   1   2   3   4         -3    -2   -1   1   2   3   4




                                                                                   49
Figure 4: Parallel Trends: Hospital Care Quality from the Patient's Perspective
This figure provides parallel trends for patient rating of care quality outcome variables by graphing estimation
results for equation (3). Each coefficient represents the relative difference between the treatment and control
group s years after the first exposure year ("year 0"). All coefficient estimates are relative to year 0. 95%
confidence intervals are indicated by the solid lines.




                                               Overall                                PainCtrl                              Recommend                                          Clean
                                                                      .01                                    .01                                           .01
                           .01
                                                                     .005                                                                                 .005
                            0                                                                                 0
                                                                       0                                                                                        0

                          -.01                                                                              -.01                                         -.005
  Coefficient Estimates




                                                                    -.005
                                                                                                                                                          -.01
                          -.02                                       -.01                                   -.02


                                               DocCom                             NurseCom                                            Info                                     Quiet
                            .01                                       .01                                     .01                                         .02

                           .005                                                                              .005                                         .01
                                                                     .005
                                 0                                                                                 0                                       0
                                                                       0
                          -.005                                                                             -.005                                        -.01
                                                                    -.005
                           -.01                                                                              -.01                                        -.02

                                     -3   -2   -1   1   2   3   4           -3   -2   -1   1   2   3   4               -3   -2   -1    1     2   3   4              -3   -2   -1   1   2   3   4




                                                                                                       50
 Figure 5: Geographical Distribution of Hospitals Exposed to the Stress Tests
This figure shows the number of hospitals exposed to bank stress tests in different hospital referral regions
(HRRs). Grey areas represent the control group.




                                                                                                  16 - 20
                                                                                                  12 - 16
                                                                                                  8 - 12
                                                                                                  4-8
                                                                                                  1-4
                                                                                                  0




                                                     51
                                     Online Appendix
                  Table A.1: Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

Variable         Definition                                 N   Mean      Std      P25     Median    P75
Panel A: Financial Variables
Margin           Profit margin                         36,871 0.032    0.283 -0.009         0.038   0.092
TA               Total assets ($ millions)             34,559 208.865 473.230 24.725       75.030 214.807
Debt/TA          Total liabilities over total assets   34,526 0.565    0.516   0.248        0.467   0.724
Cash/TA          Cash holdings over total assets       34,042 0.073    0.117  0.002         0.034   0.099
PatRev           Total patient revenue ($ million)     37,342 555.005 901.017 62.933       239.742 693.586
InPatRev         Total inpatient revenues ($ mil-      37,342 310.637 555.333 18.041       102.666 376.104
                 lions)
OutPatRev        Total outpatient revenue ($ mil-      37,342 244.368 379.260     40.705   127.908 306.900
                 lions)
AvgPay           Total inpatient revenue over inpa-    35,000   33,707   29,256   16,925   26,496   41,466
                 tient discharges (dollars)
Occupancy        Proportion of time a hospital bed     34,988   0.443    0.231    0.263    0.450    0.614
                 is occupied in a year
Discharge Rate   Inpatient discharges over total       34,995   41.933   19.545   29.120   43.577   54.601
                 beds
ICU Bed Rate     ICU bed counts over total beds        24,753   0.116     0.055   0.078     0.104    0.142
Salary           Average salary of employees in        34,877   51,215   29,946   45,026   57,671   67,633
                 treatment units

Panel B: Timely and Effective Care
Aspirin          Percentage of AMI Patients receiv-    10,282   0.979    0.069    0.990    1.000    1.000
                 ing Aspirin at Discharge
PCI              Percentage of AMI Patients receiv-     6,726   0.936    0.097    0.920    0.960    1.000
                 ing PCI within 90 mins of Arrival
Statin Rx        Percentage of AMI Patients receiv-     7,374   0.968    0.068    0.970    0.990    1.000
                 ing Statin Rx at Discharge
LVS              Percentage of HF Patients receiv-     15,435   0.963    0.113    0.980    1.000    1.000
                 ing LVS
ACE/ARB          Percentage of HF Patients receiv-     12,146   0.952    0.092    0.940    0.980    1.000
                 ing ACE/ARB at Discharge
Antibiotic       Percentage of PN Patients receiv-     15,749   0.941    0.084    0.930    0.960    0.990
                 ing appropriate antibiotic at Dis-
                 charge




                                                       52
(continued)

 Panel C: Readmission and Mortality
 PNReadmNum      Number of PN patients readmitted        24,450 18.953 16.495 6.837 14.156 26.283
 HFReadmNum      Number of HF patients readmitted        23,191 26.100 26.645 7.030 17.559 36.018
 AMIReadmNum     Number of AMI patients readmit-         15,011 13.062 12.609 4.084 9.099 17.467
                 ted
 PNReadmRate     Rate of PN patients readmitted          24,450   0.173   0.014    0.163   0.172   0.181
 HFReadmRate     Rate of HF patients readmitted          23,191   0.225   0.019    0.213   0.223   0.237
 AMIReadmRate    Rate of AMI patients readmitted         15,011   0.174   0.017    0.163   0.172   0.183
 AllReadmRate    Rate of all major-disease patients      19,929   0.155   0.009    0.149   0.154   0.160
                 readmitted
 AllReadmWorst   Flagged as being in the worst           20,583   0.079   0.270    0.000   0.000   0.000
                 group for readmitting patients
 PNMortNum       PN patient mortality number             24,390 14.512    12.997   5.195 10.391    19.685
 PNMortRate      PN patient mortality rate               24,390 0.139      0.025   0.120 0.138     0.157
 PNMortWorst     Flagged as being in the worst           24,891 0.053     0.224    0.000 0.000     0.000
                 group for PN patient mortality
 HFMortNum       HF patient mortality number             22,830 11.226    10.601 3.420     7.935   15.400
 AMIMortNum      AMI patient mortality number            16,574 9.398     8.244 3.308      7.032   12.733

 Panel D: Patient Satisfaction Measures
 Overall         Percentage of patients giving the       25,291   0.705   0.089    0.650   0.710   0.760
                 highest rating for overall care qual-
                 ity
 PainCtrl        Percentage of patients giving the       22,118   0.703   0.055    0.670   0.700   0.730
                 highest rating for pain control
 Recommend       Percentage of patients giving the       25,290   0.711   0.097    0.650   0.720   0.780
                 highest rating for recommendation
                 to others
 Clean           Percentage of patients giving the       25,292   0.728   0.076    0.680   0.720   0.780
                 highest rating for cleanliness
 DocCom          Percentage of patients giving the       25,292   0.809   0.052    0.780   0.810   0.840
                 highest rating for doctor commu-
                 nication
 NurseCom        Percentage of patients giving the       25,292   0.785   0.056    0.750   0.790   0.820
                 highest rating for nurse communi-
                 cation
 Info            Percentage of patients giving the       25,289   0.856   0.046    0.830   0.860   0.890
                 highest rating for recovery infor-
                 mation
 Quiet           Percentage of patients giving the       25,292   0.600   0.100    0.530   0.590   0.660
                 highest rating for quietness




                                               53
                           Table A.2: Hospital Charges and Investments
This table provides regression results for equation (1), focusing on hospital charges and investments.
Cost-Charge is the cost-to-charge ratio of hospital services. F ixed/T A is fixed assets over total assets.
Building/T A is the book value of building construction over total assets. LogEmployees is the logarithm
of one plus total employed physicians, including residents and interns. ST Exposed takes a value of 1 if at
least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced a stress test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 other-
wise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ),
lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ), lagged cash holdings over total assets
(Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and lagged total patient revenue over total
assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital fixed effects are included, as indicated. Standard errors are
clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.


                                       (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)
                                   Cost-Charge      Fixed/TA      Building/TA       LogEmployees

             ST Exposedi,t-1          -0.066          -0.007        -0.028***           -0.007
                                     (-0.963)        (-1.108)       (-2.829)           (-0.911)

             Controls                   Y               Y               Y                  Y
             Year FE                    Y               Y               Y                  Y
             Hospital FE                Y               Y               Y                  Y
             N                        22,721          23,036          21,357             23,148
             Adj R2                    0.22            0.73            0.73               0.99




                                                        54
     Table A.3: Stress Tests including CCAR: Financial and Bed Utilization Variables
This table provides the regression results for our main tests, including exposure to CCAR stress tests in our
treatment. The outcome variables are defined in the same way as before. ST ExposedCCAR takes a value
of 1 if at least one of hospital i's relationship banks experienced either a CCAR or Dodd-Frank Act stress
test in year t - 1 or earlier, and 0 otherwise. Control variables include the lagged logarithm of one plus
total hospital income (LogIncomei,t-1 ), lagged logarithm of one plus available bed days (LogBedDayi,t-1 ),
lagged cash holdings over total assets (Cash/T Ai,t-1 ), lagged debt over total assets (Debt/T Ai,t-1 ), and
lagged total patient revenue over total assets (P atRev/T Ai,t-1 ). Year and hospital fixed effects are included,
as indicated. Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level and t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **,
and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level.

                      (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)               (5)           (6)         (7)
                     Margin    AvgPay     Occupancy   Discharge Rate    AllReadmRate    Antibiotic    Overall

 ST ExposedCCAR
           i,t-1     0.015**   1371.684   0.016***          1.825***      0.002***      -0.005**     -0.007***
                     (2.509)    (1.314)    (3.524)           (3.583)       (2.759)      (-2.272)     (-3.120)

 Controls              Y          Y          Y                 Y              Y             Y           Y
 Year FE               Y          Y          Y                 Y              Y             Y           Y
 Hospital FE           Y          Y          Y                 Y              Y             Y           Y
 System FE             Y          Y          Y                 Y              Y             Y           Y
 N                   23,780     23,248     23,245            23,243         17,678        15,113      21,349
 Adj R2               0.22       0.87       0.94              0.80           0.67          0.58        0.82




                                                       55
