                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE EFFECTS OF DEFAULT CHOICE ON STUDENT LOAN BORROWING:
       EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM A PUBLIC RESEARCH UNIVERSITY

                                      Dennis A. Kramer II
                                       Christina J. Lamb
                                       Lindsay C. Page

                                      Working Paper 28703
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28703


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




The authors would like to acknowledge and thank our partnering institution for allowing us to
conduct this experiment. All the reviewers who reviewed this manuscript provided comments and
suggestions that strengthen this contribution. Additionally, we thank Shaun Dougherty, William
Doyle, Joshua Goodman, Eric Taylor, and Peter Blair for their helpful comments. Finally, we
thank seminar participants at the U.S. States Military Academy, Harvard Graduate School of
Education, Vanderbilt University, and the University of Florida for their thoughtful suggestions
and comments. Any errors remain the responsibility of the authors. Omissions and errors are
solely that of the authors. This RCT was registered in the American Economic Association
Registry for randomized control trials under trial number AEARCTR-0004123. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dennis A. Kramer II, Christina J. Lamb, and Lindsay C. Page. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Default Choice on Student Loan Borrowing: Experimental Evidence from a
Public Research University
Dennis A. Kramer II, Christina J. Lamb, and Lindsay C. Page
NBER Working Paper No. 28703
April 2021
JEL No. I22,I23

                                         ABSTRACT

We explore the role of defaults and choice architecture on student loan decision-making,
experimentally testing the impact pre-populating either decline or accept decisions compared to
an active choice, no pre-population, decision. We demonstrate that the default choice presented
does influence student loan borrowing decisions. Specifically, compared to active choice,
students presented within a pre-populated decline decision were almost five percent less likely to
accept all packaged loans and borrowed between 4.6 and 4.8 percent less in federal educational
loans. The reductions in borrowing appears to be concentrated within unsubsidized loans with
those assigned to the opt-in condition borrowing 8.3 percent less in unsubsidized loans. These
changes in borrowing did not induce substitution towards private or Parent PLUS loans nor did
they negatively impact enrollment, academic performance, or on-campus work outcomes in the
same academic year.

Dennis A. Kramer II                             Lindsay C. Page
Johns Hopkins University                        School of Education
2800 N Charles Street                           University of Pittsburgh
Baltimore, MD 21218                             230 South Bouquet Street
dkramer@jhu.edu                                 Pittsburgh, PA 15260
                                                and NBER
Christina J. Lamb                               lpage@pitt.edu
University of Florida
S-107 Criser Hall
Gainesville, FL 32611-4025
cjlamb@ufl.edu
1     Introduction

Successfully obtaining federal student financial aid is a significant, positive predictor of
student access to and success in college (Deming and Dynarski, 2010). However, the com-
plexities of the federal financial aid system -- and the student loan program specifically --
undermine the goal of increasing access to appropriate levels of financial aid and support-
ing success through college (Castleman et al., 2015; Bettinger et al., 2012; Castleman and
Page, 2015; Dynarski and Scott-Clayton, 2008). Prior research has focused on the ways in
which system complexity may hinder students from accessing any financial aid, for example,
due to the cumbersome nature of the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (Bettinger
et al., 2012). However, complexity in other aspects of the federal financial aid system may
lead to other adverse outcomes, even for students who successfully receive financial aid.
For example, there is a growing concern about student loan debt burden. Elevated student
loan debt levels are associated with a lower likelihood of college persistence and comple-
tion (Kim, 2007; Zhan et al., 2016), lower rates of post-baccalaureate enrollment (Rothstein
and Rouse, 2011), and higher rates of loan default and future financial challenges (Baum
and Steele, 2010; Ratcliffe and McKernan, 2013). Further, underrepresented minorities and
first-generation college students disproportionately carry student loan debt (Hillman, 2014),
making student borrowing an issue relevant to current patterns of socioeconomic inequality.
Given these patterns, policy efforts addressing the student financial aid system should focus
not only on reducing barriers to obtaining aid, but also on supporting students decisions
about how much debt to take on to financing their postsecondary education.
    In response, scholars have turned to behavioral economic principles to address this com-
plexity and to improve college-going outcomes (Castleman and Page, 2015, 2014; Dynarski
and Scott-Clayton, 2008; Hoxby and Turner, 2013). Studies related to financial aid processes
have focused on tasks such as successfully filing (or refiling) the FAFSA (Bettinger et al.,
2012; Bergman et al., 2017; Castleman and Page, 2016; Page et al., 2018) and on the role
of information in student loan borrowing decisions and repayment (Darolia, 2016; Marx and

                                             2
Turner, 2019). Prior work by Darolia (2016) increased the salience of information regarding
the students loan borrowing and repayment processes and found that information alone may
not be enough to change student loan borrowing. Marx and Turner (2019) experimentally
modified the financial aid award level and the presentation of available loans. They found
that students receiving a loan offer on their award level were 40% more likely to borrow than
those who did not receive a loan on their financial aid award letter.1 Finally, Charles et al.
(2019) found providing institutional cost information at the point of loan decision-making
significantly influenced borrowing decisions of the community college students ­ suggest-
ing that capitalizing on the decision-making platform may be a more effective mechanism to
deliver information or other interventions aimed at influencing student loan decision-making.
    Despite a robust literature on the impact of financial aid on college access and success
outcomes (Page and Scott-Clayton, 2016), limited research has focused on the specifics of
the financial aid disbursement process or has not yielded promising results. No study, to
our knowledge, has experimentally examined the influence of institutionally defined default
choice within the financial aid disbursement process. Prior work suggests that when a choice
is complex and the consumer possesses little knowledge or prior experience with the topic,
the default option is typically the most attractive or commonly accepted consumer option
(Agnew and Szykman, 2005; Thaler and Sunstein, 2009). For example, when considering a
multifaceted, employer-sponsored retirement plan ­ a decision employees face infrequently ­
participation in such retirement plans is significantly higher when the default is for employ-
ees to opt in rather than to opt out (Madrian and Shea, 2001). Similar to the retirement
planning process, students and families find the postsecondary financial aid borrowing pro-
cess confusing and intimidating (Johnson, 2012) ­ suggesting default options are likely to
influence student loan borrowing behaviors. Nevertheless, there is little regulation of the de-
fault setting, particularly within student financial-aid processes. Accordingly, postsecondary
   1
     A financial aid award letter is provided annually by postsecondary institutions to students who complete
the FAFSA form. While there is no standard format for these letters, each letter outlines a student's cost
of attendance estimates, calculated expected family contribution, and the total financial assistance (grants
and loans) that will be provided.


                                                     3
institutions have substantial latitude in establishing default choice policies that could impact
the extent of student borrowing.
   Our intervention capitalizes on prior experimental work on student loan borrowing and
advances our understanding of no-cost interventions. Specifically, Marx and Turner (2019)
show that institutions may influence borrowing behaviors through more paternalistic policy
decisions. Building on prior work, we examine the causal impact of default choices, within
the decision-making platform, on student loan borrowing for undergraduates enrolled in a
four-year, public institution. Using an experimental design, we randomly assign students
to one of three conditions experienced at the time of making decisions about their federal
student loans. In the first condition, the loan disbursement interface prompted students to
make an active choice to either accept, reduce, or decline loans (active choice) ­ defacto
business-as-usual condition. In the second condition, students were presented with a pre-
populated decision of "Accept" their loans as awarded. In the third condition, students were
presented with a pre-populated decision of "Decline" their loans as awarded. Consistent with
the default choice literature, the default choice presented significantly influences borrowing
behaviors. Students randomly assigned to an opt-in default choice condition were less likely
to borrow, and they borrowed less, on average, than peers who were assigned either to the
active choice or opt-out default choice condition. The reduction in loan borrowing associated
with the opt-in condition is concentrated on the extensive margin and within unsubsidized
loans ­ signaling a potentially more desired outcome.
   Different from the application of default choice architecture to actions such as saving for
retirement, the question surrounding student loan borrowing is more ambiguous. Current
popular and policy conversations, as those noted above, would suggest that reductions in
borrowing are preferred. On the other hand, reduced borrowing is non-optimal if students re-
place the federal loan resources they turned down with less favorable loans or increased work
hours or if their ability to persist and succeed in higher education is made more precarious
by insufficient resources. Given the ambiguity in the desired behavior around student loans,


                                               4
this study makes a unique contribution in the role of default choice. Unlike the prior work of
Marx and Turner (2019) ­ which tests the availability of student loans on financial aid offer
sheets ­ this study examines not only the effects of an opt-in versus opt-out environment, but
also a non-directional active choice condition. Additionally, this work examines the default
effect at the point of decision-making rather than a change in the financial aid award letter
presentation or supplemental information provided outside of the loan borrowing decision
process. Given the ambiguity in the desired behavior around student loans, we examine
the downstream effects of assignment to the different default conditions on subsequent loan
substitution, college enrollment, academic performance and campus employment. We ob-
serve no effects on these outcomes, suggesting our experimental reductions in borrowing do
not necessarily foretell a decline in students' educational experience. The concentration of
our results within the opt-in condition, and no difference between opt-out and active choice,
suggest that students in this context may be borrowing more than is necessary.



2     Student Loan Borrowing

U.S. Federal Financial Aid Process and Federal Student Loans
    Miller et al. (2019) reports that the United States' federal government, through the U.S.
Department of Education, holds over 92% of all U.S. student loan debt ­ surpassing $ 1.5
trillion in outstanding debt for over 42 million borrowers as of the end of the 2020 fiscal year.
The process for accessing federal financial aid within the U.S. begins with the completion
and submission of the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). The information
included on the FAFSA ­ including parental and family income, assets, dependents in the
home, and the number of the other individuals attending college ­ is used to calculate the
student's individual expected family contribution (EFC). The EFC used to determine the
amount of federal need-based aid and federal loans an individual is eligible for and impacting
the level of state-based and institution-based financial aid a student can be distributed.



                                               5
While presented in a dollar amount, the EFC is not the amount of money an individual or
family will have to pay for college, nor is the amount of federal student aid an individual
will receive.
    The federal financial aid process begins with the FAFSA. After calculating the EFC,
the federal government relies on institutions to administer accepted federal aid. While each
institution retains some uniqueness in the processing and awarding of financial aid, many
of them require students to make an active choice on either accepting or declining fed-
eral subsidized, if eligible, and unsubsidized loans.2          3
                                                                    Postsecondary institutions typically
present students with their awarded financial aid through a financial aid award letter and
then require students to make an active decision, usually through the institution's student
information system, on whether they accept or decline each component of their financial aid
award. Students receiving a financial aid award letter, but not actively accepting or declin-
ing their award, would not be awarded any of their non-grant-based aid ­ most institutions
automatically accept grant-based aid on behalf of students because it does not require them
any future financial commitments.
General Effects of Federal Student Loan Borrowing
    The benefits of a college degree are well documented: A college education is linked to
higher lifetime earnings, economic mobility, family stability, and social returns (Dynarski,
2015; Hout, 2012; Kjelland, 2008; Marcotte et al., 2005; Moretti, 2004). However, the costs
and bureacratic complexities are a barreir for many to access higher education. Although
educational loans are intended to ease the financial barriers students face to accessing higher
education, excessive borrowing can be disadvantageous for students, impacting their chances
of completing a degree and resulting in lifelong economic and social consequences. Students
   2
      Subsidized loans do not accrue interest while borrowers remain actively enrolled in school. Unsubsidized
loans begin to accrue interest from the day they are disbursed to students, even while they are enrolled in
school. The interest rates for subsidized and unsubsidized are fixed over the lifetime of the loan and are
generally lower rates than found in privately borrowed loans.
    3
      Colleges and university have the option to opt-out of offering federal student loans to their enrolled
students. Work by Cochrane and Szabo-Kubitz (2016) suggests that nearly one-million enrolled students do
not have access to federal student loans based on institutions opting out of offering federal student loans.



                                                      6
who carry a high level of debt, particularly in their first year of college, as well as students
whose financial aid packages comprise loans exclusively are less likely to persist and to
graduate (Kim, 2007; John and Starkey, 1995). Student loan indebtedness could hinder
those positioned to benefit most from higher education, as the detrimental effect of excessive
borrowing is greater for low-income students. For example, Kim (2007) estimates that an
additional $1,000 in loans is associated with a 1.6% decreased likelihood of completing a
degree program for low-income students (Kim, 2007).
   Student loan indebtedness has consequences beyond college persistence and degree at-
tainment outcomes. In a regression discontinuity analysis, Rothstein and Rouse (2011) found
that, conditional on family financial circumstances, undergraduate debt is negatively asso-
ciated with students' plans to attend graduate school. Furthermore, debt at graduation
influences students' future career choices, with higher levels of debt reducing the likelihood
that a college graduate will pursue employment in the nonprofit or public sector (Rothstein
and Rouse, 2011). Presumably, educational debt burden drives college graduates to pass
over lower-paying or public-sector jobs in favor of earning a salary sufficient to cover their
loan payments and living expenses.
   Black and Hispanic students disproportionately carry the burden of educational debt
(Addo et al., 2016; Baum and Steele, 2010; Ratcliffe and McKernan, 2013; Scott-Clayton
and Li, 2016). Conditional on enrollment, an estimated 34% of African American students
and 28% of Hispanic students incur student loan debt, as opposed to 16% of their white peers
(Ratcliffe and McKernan, 2013). Recent estimates suggest that Black and Hispanic borrowers
are also 9 to 27% more likely to default than their white peers (Hillman, 2014; Scott-Clayton
and Li, 2016) ­ significantly impacting both their access to future postsecondary federal aid
and other credit impacts.
Methods of Controlling Borrowing Levels
   Scholars and policy makers have attempted to design decision system and disclosure re-
quirements to limit student loan borrowing. The U.S. Department of Education sets both


                                               7
annual and lifetime borrowing limits while providing plain language disclosure and entrance
and exit counseling requirements that are meant to inform borrowers about the obligations
associated with incurring student loan debt ­ with little evidence supporting their effec-
tiveness (Anderson, Collins, Goldrick-Rab, 2016). Darolia (2016) found that providing
students with individually tailored letters about their aggregate indebtedness, anticipated
future monthly payments, and peers' borrowing levels showed no significant effects in reduc-
ing borrowing. Similarly, an intensive month-long text messaging campaign, that included
access to advisers and information about long-term costs of borrowing significantly reduced
community college students borrowing. Specifically, Barr et al. (2016) found that the inter-
vention reduced borrowing by three to four percentage points and reduced overall borrowing
amounts by $359, on average. Effects of this reduction were concentrated in unsubsidized
loans (Barr et al., 2016). Finally, the decision to include a student loan offer on an insti-
tution's financial aid award letter has been found to influence borrowing decisions (Marx
and Turner, 2019). Community college students who received a letter listing their full loan
eligibility were 40% more likely to borrow than those who were not offered a loan.
   Overall, efforts to reduce student loan borrowing have produced mixed results. Providing
generalized information about student loans produced modest changes to borrowing behavior
(Barr et al., 2016), while personalized data on indebtedness has no effect(Darolia, 2016).
Providing information about college costs during the student loan decision-making process
may increase information salience and have a larger effect on borrowing decisions (Charles
et al., 2019). Omitting loans from a financial aid award letter may reduce borrowing, but
this may be considered overly paternalistic, and little is known about potential unintended
consequences, such as students borrowing under less favorable terms. Applying default
options at the point of loan acceptance, rather than aid packaging, might be a comparatively
preferred communication strategy and application of choice architecture. This approach
would ensure that students still enjoy the freedom of all possible choices while benefiting
from the nudge of the default option.


                                             8
3     Default Choice and Complex Decision-Making

"Choice architecture" refers to the design of choices and their presentation to consumers.
Although traditional economic models assume that humans make fully rational decisions
that are consistent with their own self-interest, decision-making can, in reality, be influenced
by factors such as the presentation of information (or lack thereof), the recommended or pre-
selected option, and the cognitive bias of anchoring (Thaler and Sunstein, 2009). For the
decision-maker who has bounded rationality, there is no neutral presentation of choices. The
way in which information is displayed, the order in which alternatives are listed, the presence
of a default option, and even a warning message can all influence consumers' choices. Thus,
the choice architecture can be shaped to "nudge" a consumer toward a desired decision.
    Perhaps one of the most straightforward and influential tools in choice architecture is the
default option. A default option is the setting or choice that a consumer will receive if he/she
does not actively choose otherwise (Brown and Krishna, 2004). A default option does not
preclude the making of an active choice, but its presence does send a powerful signal about
the endorsed optimal choice (Thaler and Sunstein, 2009). Specifically, the default option may
be viewed as an implicit endorsement. Individuals perceive the pre-selected default as the
recommended course of action or the most frequently selected or popular choice (Thaler and
Sunstein, 2009; Dinner et al., 2011). Additionally, accepting the default option requires little
to no additional effort. The decision-maker does not have to evaluate alternatives, expend
mental energy on determining the individual impact of each alternative, or proactively act to
select another option (Balz et al., 2014; Dinner et al., 2011; Johnson and Goldstein, 2003).
    Jachimowicz et al. (2019) discuss three mechanisms by which the default choice archi-
tecture influences decision-making: endorsement, ease, and endowment. The establishment
of a default choice serves as a perceived endorsement of the desired choice (McKenzie et al.,
2006). The influence of this endorsement is directly related to an individual's trust and
belief in the choice architect (in our case, the institution's financial aid office) and alignment
of perceived intentions between the decision-maker and the choice architect (Tannenbaum

                                                9
et al., 2017). Second, the default choice may influence decision making by simply being
the easiest options. Decision-makers may be less likely to evaluate other available options
when a default choice is specified. Jachimowicz et al. (2019) notes that "the harder it is for
decision-makers to switch away from the pre-selected option, the more effective the default is
likely to be" (p. 173). The final mechanism that influences a default choice's effectiveness is
the perception that the selected default choice is the status quo ­ endowment (Jachimowicz
et al., 2019). Kahneman and Tversky (2013) articulate that higher levels of the endowment
with the default choice will lead to increased likelihoods of staying with the default choice
to avoid loss and engagement with reference-dependent encoding.



4       Research Design

4.1 Research Site
    We conducted this experiment at Public U, an anonymous selective public four-year uni-
versity, during the 2017-18 and 2018-19 academic years. Given the structure of the current
financial aid disbursement system at Public U, the experiment pertains only to federal Di-
rect Student Loans (both subsidized and unsubsidized). Disbursement of other student loans
(i.e., ParentPLUS or private loans) is handled through other processes outside of the system
with which we were able to experiment. Additionally, all state, federal, and institutional
grant-based aid was automatically accepted, as is standard practice at Public U.4 Concur-
rent with our experiment, Public U undertook a comprehensive redesign of its financial aid
disbursement software. This change in the public-facing interface for all the students meant
that no student, currently or newly enrolled, had prior experience or knowledge of the dis-
bursement platform prior to our experiment, thus reducing the potential for prior knowledge
bias and increasing the validity of our estimates.
    In Table 1, we report institutional descriptive information comparing Public U and other
    4
     Students wishing to not accept any grant-based financial aid would need to contact Public U's financial
aid office directly.



                                                    10
public four-year institutions across the United States. Public U's tuition is substantially
lower for in-state residents than for out-of-state students. It is larger than the average public
four-year institution and has a larger fraction of its student population pursuing graduate
studies than the average public four-year institution across the US. Its racial and ethnic
composition generally aligns with peer institutions, but Public U enrolls fewer Pell grant
recipients 5 and is more selective. Public U also has higher four- and six-year bachelor's degree
completion rates, suggesting that students at this institution may be more academically
gifted than the average enrolled student at a public four-year institution.
   Of note for this study, students enrolled at Public U are more likely to receive a state or
local grant than are students at other public, four-year institutions (82% compared to 38%).
This trend results from Public U's location within a state that provides a broad-based merit-
aid scholarship. Accordingly, only 25% of students at Public U participate in the federal
student loan borrowing process compared to 48% at the average public four-year institution.
Surprisingly, the median debt levels are similar between Public U and other public four-
year institutions, on average, potentially signaling higher than expected borrowing levels
for students who decide to take out federal student loans. Despite slightly higher median
student loan debt, the three-year cohort loan default rate is lower at Public U (3%) than at
the average public four-year institution (9%).

                                          -- Table 1 Here --

4.2 Experimental and Intervention Design
   The experiment involved individual-level random assignment of undergraduate students
to one of three experimental default choices present during the online student loan decision-
making processes. Each year in May, Public U's financial aid office begins compiling FAFSA
information for all returning and incoming (accepted admissions) students. As part of the
FAFSA process, information about available federal financial aid in provide and combined
   5
     The Pell Grant is a federal grant program that is awarded only to undergraduate students who display
exceptional financial need and have not earned a bachelor's, graduate, or professional degree. The maximum
Pell Grant during our experimental school year was $5,920.

                                                   11
with other state, institutional, or private aid provided to students. The financial aid of-
fice then compiles a comprehensive individual financial award package that includes grants,
scholarships and federal student loans. After completing the initial aid packaging, we worked
directly with the financial aid office randomly assigned each undergraduate student who was
projected to be offered a federal subsidized and/or unsubsidized student loans to one of three
conditions.
    To increase the precision of our estimated effects and ensure balance on key character-
istics, we blocked our randomization on the following baseline characteristics: 1) year of
enrollment and 2) prior borrower status. This approach allowed us to generate balanced
estimates by year enrolled and prior borrowing engagement. After randomization, we pro-
vided the financial aid office with the experimental assignment for each ID number provided.
The financial aid office incorporated the default choice assignment into the new financial aid
system. The presentation of the default choice was assigned to individual students; thus,
individual timing of system access did not influence the default choice that each study par-
ticipant saw. Additionally, students saw the same default choice option regardless of how
many times they logged into the system.6
    As mentioned previously, Public U developed and was implementing a new financial aid
                                                                                              7
disbursement portal, which allowed us to design our default choice intervention.                  Our study'
intervention design was purposeful and built on the business as usual conditions present at
Public U before our study. Prior work by Marx and Turner (2020) suggests the potential for
information overload within the student loan decision-making process and that the design
of our default choice conditions may streamline decision-making. Since the welfare effects
of student loans are unclear, we wanted to test the relative impacts of all possible default
   6
      The sequence in which financial aid is packaged and disbursed is as follows: 1) students are packaged
awards and notified that their financial aid package is available and then 2) students then log-on to the
financial aid portal to take a decision on accepting or declining their packaged federal loans (all grants and
scholarships are automatically accepted). Conditional on accepting any loans greater than zero, students are
presented with a checklist of items to complete to meet the requirements of entrance counseling. Public U
does not require promissory notes or entrance counseling to be completed prior to originating an award.
    7
      The new financial aid disbursement portal also allowed us to include all students in our experimental
sample since no student had any prior interactions making their student loan decisions within the new portal.


                                                     12
choices. Students were assigned to one of the following treatment conditions 8 :

  1. Default: None ("Active Choice"): Participants had to actively choose "accept,"
        "decline," or "reduce" for packaged student loans -- both subsidized and unsubsidized
        -- independently. This condition is the relevant counterfactual condition and is the
        institution's business-as-usual practice.

  2. Default: Decline ("Opt-In"): Participants were assigned a default decision of "de-
        cline" for each of their subsidized and unsubsidized loans. Students wishing to receive
        a student loan were required to actively change the selection from "decline" to either
        "accept" or "reduce." Regardless of whether a change was made, participants then had
        to "submit" their decision. Students who logged into the system but did not submit
        their decision were not disbursed a student loan based on their assignment.

  3. Default: Accept ("Opt-Out"): Participants were assigned a default decision of
        "accept" for each of their unsubsidized and subsidized student loans. As with the
        opt-in condition, participants had to actively submit their decision. Students who
        submitted without changing their default choice were disbursed the full amount of the
        packaged loan(s).

The active choice control condition allows us to uniquely baseline our experimental year
borrowing behaviors with prior borrowing behaviors. The inclusion of both an opt-in and
opt-out default choice condition allows us to extrapolate the range of default choice influences
relative to the active choice condition. Based on our informal review of financial aid systems
across similar institutions, most do not utilize a default choice but rather have students make
an active choice without any institutional endorsement. The active choice group's results
further allow us to generalize to institutions with similar baseline borrowing and academic
outcomes.
4.3 Data and Descriptive Statistics
   8
       See Appendix A for screenshots of our default choice interventions and the student loan decision portal.

                                                       13
    We limited our sample to undergraduates who had active student identification numbers
in the 2018­19 academic year and who submitted a completed FAFSA form (n = 21,407).9
An additional 604 students were not packaged any federal student loans as part of their
annual financial aid award10 , and 612 did not enroll in any fall credits. In total, 20,193
completed the FAFSA, enrolled in fall credits, and were awarded with at least one federal
student loan. Of the 20,193 in our analytical sample, 6,768 were assigned to the active
choice (control) condition, 6,650 to the opt-out default choice condition (decision of accept
pre-populated), and 6,775 to the opt-in default choice condition (decision of decline pre-
populated). Of all students packaged with at least one federal student loan, approximately
58% (11,837 students) logged into the financial aid portal to decide on their federal student
loans ­ our conditional sample. Within our conditional sample, 3,939 were assigned to the
active choice (control) condition, 3,910 to the opt-out default choice condition, and 3,988
to the opt-in default choice condition. The 58% log-in rate to the financial aid portal is
consistent with system usage in prior years. These students who engaged with the online
portal comprise our focal analytic sample; however, we do include those who did not access
the portal in our initial intent to treat analysis.
    A potential concern is that our treatment assignment induced differential access to the
financial aid portal. Because students had no insight into the operations of the experiment
and had no knowledge of the experimental condition to which they were assigned without
accessing the online portal, it is reasonable to assume that log-in behavior is independent of
assignment to any of our three experimental conditions. We further test this assumption in
a formalized way. First, we examine the relationship between group assignment and log-in
behavior. We find that our three treatments had a similar financial aid platform log-in rate
of approximately 58%. This portal log-in rate is consistent with prior borrowing behaviors
   9
      The completion of the FAFSA is not required for eligibility to receive aid through state's merit-aid
financial aid program.
   10
      These students did not have any unmet need after allocating federal and student grant-aid and/or
private scholarships. Public U's institution policy is to not offer or award any financial aid that exceeds a
student's total cost of attendance



                                                     14
at Public U. We formally tested this assumption and estimate the impact of our treatment
condition assignment on the likelihood of making a decision and find a precisely estimated
near-zero effect. Appendix B provides a formal presentation of these results.
   It is important to note that the effect of our treatment assignment is conditional on
accessing the financial aid portal and confirming a decision. Meaning, students assigned to
the opt-out condition who did not access the financial aid portal would not be automatically
distributed student loans. Additionally, a lack of active decision to access the financial aid
portal is due to both purposeful non-action and packaging of students in the spring semester
who did not plan to return for the fall semester ­, but this lack of system engagement was
not systematically different across each of our experimental groups.
   In Table 2, we present descriptive statistics for key covariates for the sample overall
(Column 1) and for each of the three experimental conditions (Columns 2 ­ 4). Our exper-
imental sample is 54% white, 9% Black and 24% Hispanic. Consistent with college-going
patterns nationwide, 60% of our sample is female. Finally, our descriptive data suggests
that federal loan eligibility is more prevalent among students as they progress through the
university. This may be due to comparatively more generous grant-based aid provided to
first- and second-year students or changes in state and institutional financial aid packages
for returning students. Across our experimental conditions, we observe minimal differences
on observable baseline characteristics, suggesting that the sample is well balanced.

                                     -- Table 2 Here --

We formally tested the balance of key observable characteristics using an omnibus equiv-
alency test proposed by Hansen and Bowers (2008). In Table 3, we report p-values from
comparisons between each pair of experimental groups. We found no evidence of systematic
differences across experimental groups on the set of observable baseline characteristics on
which we report in Table 2.

                                     -- Table 3 Here --


                                             15
4.4 Empirical Strategy
   Our primary goal is to estimate the impact of the default choice presentation on student
loan borrowing. Among students who logged into the online platform, compliance with the
treatment assignment was perfect, as students were unable to change the presentation of
their default choice and were always presented the same condition on subsequent exposures
to the platform. We estimated the intent to treat effect of our treatment on student loan
borrowing outcomes using the following model structure for both continuous and binary
outcomes on all students in our sample:


                            yij = j + 1 Outij + 2 Inij + Xij +          ij                         (1)


where yij is the outcome of interest (e.g., loan take-up and borrowing levels) for student i in
blocked random assignment group j, j represents a set of fixed effects for the groups within
which we randomized students, Outij is an indicator for random assignment to the opt-out
condition, and Inij is an indicator for random assignment to the opt-in condition. To reduce
the residual variation, we include Xi , a vector of baseline covariates, including demographic
characteristics and prior loan borrowing.      ij   represents our HC2 corrected standard errors.11
Our primary interest is in the coefficients 1 and 2 . If our estimates of these coefficients
are statistically different from zero, then we will have evidence that the structure of the
default option indeed influences students' loan-taking behavior. We also condition Eq.(1) on
students who accessed the financial aid system.
   We use equation 1 to estimate the direct effects of the default choice on loan borrowing
behavior. If the default choice significantly impacts borrowing levels, the induced change to
the borrowing levels might affect other subsequent outcomes, such as enrollment / persistence
and substituted borrowing behaviors (i.e., private or ParentPlus loans). To explore this
possibility, we employ a two-stage least squares (2SLS) instrumental variables (IV) approach.
  11
     We follow the recommendation of Angrist and Pischke (2009) and apply a HC2 robust variance estima-
tion approach. We further tested these assumptions by running our models with standard robust standard
errors. Our estimates are not sensitive to standard error estimation procedure.


                                                    16
In the first stage model of our IV strategy we use randomized treatment assignment to
predict exogenously produced variation in the key endogenous behavior ­ either a binary
measure for engaging in borrowing or a continuous measure for total amount borrowed. In
the second stage of our model, we relate this exogenously produced variation to variation in
the subsequent outcomes noted above.
    We reason that the necessary IV assumptions hold in this application. Regarding the
exclusion restriction, we can think of no potential paths by which default choice assignment
in the student loan process might influence loan substitution or enrollment behaviors, ex-
cept through changes in subsidized and unsubsidized borrowing. By the very nature of our
experimental design, we can confirm that the values of the variables we use as instruments
(default choices) were randomly assigned and therefore unrelated to other factors that might
impact our outcomes of interest. Across each of our instrumental variable estimates, our
indicators for treatment assignment serve as sufficiently strong instruments with first-stage
F-statistics between 12 and 15.
4.5 Multiple Comparison Adjustment
    Because we are interested in the effects of multiple treatment arms over multiple out-
comes, we include several robustness tests to account for the increased likelihood of Type I
errors.12 Specifically, we apply the Sidak-Holms multiple comparison adjustment (Guo and
Romano, 2007).13
   12
      Multiple comparison adjustments approaches may be implemented as either a p-value correction or an
-value correction. We apply the p-value correction approach as it allows for direct interpretation against
conventional -value and aligns with prior work in the field.
   13
      Our reasons for choosing Sidak­Holms instead of the more traditional Bonferroni method were twofold:
The Sidak­Holms adjustments allowed us to maintain significantly more power in our estimates while main-
taining the same validity under known assumptions and also allowed us to control for the family-wise error
rate (FWER). In adjusting p-values to account for multiple treatment arms and outcomes, we order our
m p-values from smallest to largest, then take the smallest generated p-value that satisfies the condition
         
pk > m+1   -k , where k is the p -value's index value and m is the number of generated p -values from the ini-
tial treatment effects. Any p -values equal to or greater than the value of k would be statistically insignificant,
and all p -values less than k statistically significant, after accounting for the multiple comparison.




                                                        17
5     Results

5.1 Main Effects
    Figure 1 presents overall loan participation rates and average loan borrowing amounts for
both all students including our sample (Panel A) and students who logged onto the financial
aid disbursement portal (Panel B). The error bars represent the unadjusted confidence in-
terval associated with each group mean. Of all FAFSA filers, 35% of control group students
­ those assigned to the active choice condition ­ engaged in any student loan borrowing
(61% of those logging on), while the rate was 36% for those in the opt-out group (63% of
those logging on) and less than 34% for those in our opt-in groups (less than 60% for active
decision makers). A similar pattern emerges with the average amount of total loans taken.
Students assigned to the opt-out group borrowed, on average, more than both active choice
control group and our opt-in treatment group for both students in Panel A and Panel B.
Appendix C provides means and standard deviations for all our outcomes of interests by
experimental group.

                                     -- Figure 1 Here --

    Table 4 presents the corresponding model-based estimates of changing default options on
students' borrowing behavior. In Panel A, we estimate our intent-to-treat (ITT) estimate
on all packaged borrowers. In Panel B, we limit our estimates on those who actively logged
onto the financial aid disbursement and either made and active or passive decision ­ our
treatment-on-treated (ToT) estimates for those who actually consider borrowing. While our
ITT estimates may represent a more policy relevant point estimate, our ToT estimates are
preferred in practice.
    Across both our panels of students, our results point strongly to the conclusion that being
presented an opt-in default choice reduces student borrowing, particularly regarding unsub-
sidized student loans. More specifically, students randomly assigned to the opt-in condition
were 1.9 percentage points (or 3%) less likely to engage in any student loan borrowing (Panel


                                              18
B: Column 1). Both our ITT and ToT estimates suggest that students were approximately
5% less likely to accept all loans offered (Panel A and Panel B: Column2) when to the opt-in
condition compared to our control active choice group. This reduction in the likelihood of
engaging in borrowing and borrowing all loans offered amounted to a significant reduction
in borrowing, for borrowers, of $189.45 (Panel B: Column 3). Compared to the active choice
control condition, those interested in borrowing and assigned to the opt-in condition bor-
rowed 4.9% less. In contrast, student loan borrowing behavior did not differ between those
assigned to the active choice control and the opt-out conditions across both our samples.
   The impact of the default options differs by loan type (e.g. subsidized vs. unsubsidized).
Student borrowing of subsidized loans does not differ across the experimental conditions
(Columns 5 and 6) ­ with suggestive evidence of slightly elevated likelihood of borrowing
for our conditional (Panel 2) sample on subsidized loans. In contrast, the default conditions
have a stronger influence on decisions related to unsubsidized loans (i.e., loans with imme-
diate interest accrual) (Columns 7 and 8). Students in our conditional sample (Panel B)
randomly assigned to the opt-in condition were 2.5 percentage points less likely to borrow
an unsubsidized loan and borrowed $191.50 less, on average, a relative decrease of 8.3%
compared to the active choice control group.
   Post-hoc comparisons, for our conditional sample, between the opt-in and opt-out condi-
tions reveal significant differences across all outcomes with students assigned to the opt-out
condition engaging in higher levels of borrowing than those assigned to the opt-in condition
(Table 4, Row 3). These results are generally robust to adjusting for multiple comparisons
(see Appendix D). Given the consistency of our results across our unconditional and con-
ditional sample, we focus the remaining results on the treatment effects on our conditional
sample ­ those actively logging onto the financial aid disbursement portal.

                                     -- Table 4 Here --

   In Appendix E, we estimate our intervention's effects by several subgroups of students ­
dependent vs. independent students and Pell Grant and non-Pell Grant recipients, along with

                                             19
the state residency and state aid receipt status. In summary, our heterogeneous results mirror
the direction and magnitude of our main effects, with some notable exceptions. Dependent
students assigned to the opt-out conditions were significantly more likely to borrow a student
loan and borrowed more than dependents students in the active choice control group. Finally,
out-of-state and in-state aid recipients were influenced more by the opt-in condition.
5.2 Effect on the Intensive Margin
   For our group of students making an active decision on their student loans, we observe
that our default treatment groups, the opt-in default in particular, reduced borrowing and
the amount borrowed. This reduction in amount borrowed could be driven by a reduction
in loan acceptance (i.e., by some students opting to borrow $0), a reduction in loan amount
(i.e., some students reducing their loans to below the maximum allowable), or by the combi-
nation of the two. In Table 5, we examine evidence of effects on the extensive and intensive
margins of borrowing. To do so, we estimate treatment effects for two additional outcomes:
1) an indicator for borrowing the maximum amount of loans offered and 2) an indicator
for borrowing an amount less than the maximum offered but more than zero. The combi-
nation of these two effects will equal the total change in borrowing associated with either
treatment. We examine these effects separately for subsidized and unsubsidized loans, given
heterogeneity in loan packaging and the differential effects by loan type observed in Table 4.
   In Table 5, we find evidence that changes in the likelihood of borrowing and the amount
borrowed are driven primarily by students turning down loans offered entirely rather than
borrowing less than the maximum loan offered. For students assigned to the opt-out con-
dition, we find evidence that the opt-out conditions significantly increased the likelihood of
accepting the max subsidized loan by 2.8 percentage points. We fail to find any evidence
that assignment to the opt-out condition either influenced the likelihood of borrowing less
than the max offered subsidized loan or any change in unsubsidized loan borrowing decisions.
We also find evidence that assignment to the opt-in significantly reduces the likelihood of
borrowing the full amount of unsubsidized loan offered by 2.1 percentage points. We fail to


                                             20
find any evidence that assignment to the opt-in condition influenced the likelihood of bor-
rowing less than the full amount of the unsubsidized loan offered or any effect of subsidized
loan borrowing. Thus, the default choice setting induces changes in the overall decision to
take out a loan that is offered, rather than encouraging "fine-tuning" in students' thinking
about how much they need to borrow. Further, the default choice may induce students to
think that the financial aid administrators have done the calculation for them in terms of
how much they should borrow and, thus, should follow the implicit recommended course of
action.
   The results in Table 5 provide important context to the effect of the default choice on
student loan borrowing. Prior, in Table 4, we documented an average treatment effect of
nearly $200 for those assigned to the opt-in condition. However, Table 5 demonstrates that
the impact of the presented default choice on those influenced to change their borrowing
decisions is much larger. Specifically, for those assigned to the opt-out condition, students
induced into borrowing the max experienced an increase of $ 4,187 in the total amount bor-
rowed. Students assigned to the opt-in condition who were influenced to decline their offered
unsubsidized loan would have experienced an average reduction in their loans borrowed of
approximately $4,310. The federal student loan interest rates for undergraduate borrowing
loans in our experimental year was approximately 5%. If we assume a standard student loan
repayment plan, students assigned to the opt-in default condition and who changed their
borrowing decision would have a lifetime reduction in student loan liabilities of $5,173 or
$50 per month based on our single intervention year.

                                    -- Table 5 Here --

5.3 Multiple Loans and Actions
   Given the structure of the financial aid decision interface, the system requires students
to make decisions on each of their subsidized and unsubsidized student loans separately.
Based on financial need, some students are packaged with both subsidized and unsubsidized



                                             21
loans, while others are packaged with only an unsubsidized loan.14                 15
                                                                                        Since nearly 90%
of our sample was packaged with an unsubsidized loan, we examined the impact of default
conditions on repeated decisions. Table 6 presents results for the effects of the default
treatment conditions by the number of loans packaged. Students assigned to opt-in condition
and packaged only an unsubsidized loan significantly reduced their borrowing of unsubsidized
loans by 4.4 percentage points and their total unsubsidized loan amount borrowed by more
than 10% ­ compared to our control condition. Effects of the opt-in condition are in the same
direction for those with loan packages including both subsidized and unsubsidized loans, but
they are smaller in magnitude and not significant. For students assigned to the opt-out
condition, we find no effects for those packaged with only an unsubsidized loan and slightly
higher likelihood of borrowing (2.7 percentage points) and 5% increase in total borrowing
for student packaged loan types.
    In sum, much of the reduction in borrowing associated with the opt-in condition is
concentrated among students who are only packaged an unsubsidized loan (e.g., those with
comparatively less financial need). This further suggests that switching to an opt-in default
may reduce borrowing levels for students who need them less.

                                           -- Table 6 Here --

5.4 Downstream Effects
    As previously mentioned, in the context of student loan borrowing, there is ambiguity in
optimal borrowing direction that might be preferred by individual students. On one hand, a
change in default may help to prevent students from over-borrowing by reducing borrowing
likelihoods. On the other hand, it may prevent students from accessing the financing that
they need to succeed or lead students to seek other, less-preferred channels for borrowing.
Here, we explore the impact of changes in federal loan borrowing on students' borrowing
  14
      To be eligible for a subsidized loan, a student must demonstrate financial need, calculated as cost of
attendance minus expected family contribution.
   15
      Within our sample, 10.4% (n=1,245) were only packaged a subsidized loan due to their level of financial
need being met by other grants, scholarships, and state-based financial aid.


                                                     22
of other types of available federal student loans, their employment activities, enrollment
intensity, and academic performance. We provide the control group means of these outcomes
in Table 7 (Panel A).
    We consider two different approaches to estimating the downstream effects of our treat-
ment assignment. First, we estimate the reduced form, or direct, effect of treatment assign-
ment on downstream outcomes (Panel B). Second, we estimate the impact of the induced
changes in borrowing due to assignment to the opt-in condition using three instrumental
variables (IV) specifications with a single instrument.16           17
                                                                         Borrowing from similar experi-
mental work of Marx and Turner (2019), we specify three different instrumented outcomes
­ 1) likelihood of borrowing any loans (Panel C); 2) likelihood of borrowing all loans of-
fered (Panel D), and 3) treatment induced change in the amount amount of student loans
borrowed in in $100 increments (Panel E).
    Substitution Effects. One concern with influencing the federal borrowing behaviors of
undergraduates is that they will seek other, less favorable student loan options to cover
the cost of college. Our administrative data allows us to examine private and ParentPLUS
loan borrowing, both of which were not subject to the same default choice randomization
process. Table 7 reports reduced form and IV estimates of the effect of assignment to the
opt-in condition on private and ParentPLUS loan borrowing. We find no evidence of any
changes in the likelihood of borrowing a private or ParentPLUS loan as a result of our
randomly assigned default choice. Additionally, we fail to find any evidence of changes in
Federal Work Study earnings. It should be noted that only a small fraction of our control
group borrowed a private loan (2%) or ParentPLUS loan (7%), while their average Federal
Work Study earnings was $115 per semester.18 Nevertheless, the estimated null results signal
  16
      Note in our IV analyses we pool the active choice and opt-out conditions, given the preponderance of
evidence discussed above that borrowing behavior tends to be similar for students assigned to these two
experimental groups. Therefore, we employ a binary indicator of treatment that is equal to 1 for students
who are randomly assigned to the opt-in condition and is zero otherwise.
   17
      We ran our IV specifications restricting our sample to only opt-in vs. opt-out assigned students as well
as opt-in vs. active choice assigned students. The results from our IV estimates are similar.
   18
      Students and families wishing to borrow private or ParentPLUS loans would need to access a separate
borrowing system and application process. Our institutional partner does not allow ParentPLUS loans to


                                                     23
that the reductions in federal student loan borrowing induced by the opt-in default choice
assignment does not lead to significant substitution with less favorable student loan options.
We are, however, unable to observe the extent to which students turn to even less favorable
financial options, such as credit cards, to finance educational expenses ­ which is a limitation
that merits further study.

                                           -- Table 7 Here --

    Indirect Impact on Short-Term Enrollment. Scholars have linked student loan borrowing
to enrollment intensity (Barr et al., 2016; Charles et al., 2019; Marx and Turner, 2019),
engagement in work study and other campus employment (Broton et al., 2016), and academic
GPA (Barr et al., 2016; Marx and Turner, 2019). We test the impact of shifts in federal loan
borrowing on a set of enrollment and academic performance outcomes (Table 8). Similar to
results in Table 7, we find no evidence that default choice induced changes in federal student
loan borrowing influenced academic year enrollment intensity or academic performance. This
finding suggests to us that the opt-in default choice may reduce the long-term costs of
higher education while not significantly impacting bachelor's degree pursuit or academic
performance.

                                           -- Table 8 Here --



6     Conclusion

We experimentally tested the effect of various default choice options on student loan borrow-
ing decisions at a selective public four-year university. Randomly assigning students to either
an opt-in or opt-out condition, compared to the business-as-usual active choice condition,
we found consistent evidence that assignment to the opt-in condition reduced borrowing
between 4.6% and 4.8%. We found inconsistent evidence that assignment to the opt-out
condition increased the likelihood to borrow or the total amount borrowed as we would have
be offered a default choice for student borrowers.

                                                     24
expected based on prior default choice literature. We did fine that for more than half of the
student subgroups we considered, the opt-out condition significantly increased borrowing by
approximately 3% to 6% when compared to the active choice control group. Loan take-
up differences between the opt-in and opt-out assigned students were largest for non-Pell,
dependent, and out-of-state students at 10.5%, 8.4%, and 7% respectively. Despite these
effects on federal loan borrowing, we find no evidence of downstream effects on other less
favorable student loan borrowing options, subsequent enrollment, academic performance, or
federal work study participation.
   Prior work by Barr et. al. (2017) and Marx and Turner (2019) found that information-
based interventions and changes to the structure of loan eligibility notification that led to
changes in student loan borrowing behaviors significantly influenced subsequent enrollment
and academic performance. We consider two reasons why our results may diverge from
these prior studies. First, these studies demonstrate larger reduced form effects on borrow-
ing and thus would have the potential to induce larger effects on downstream outcomes.
Second, these studies all focus on students enrolled in community colleges rather than in
a four-year college, as was the case for our sample. Community college students are often
more institutionally transient (Calcagno et al., 2007), have a higher likelihood of enrollment
interruptions (Calcagno et al., 2007), and borrow a higher proportion of their lifetime loan
limits to cover the educational expenses of their first two years than students initially en-
rolling at a four-year institution (McKinney and Burridge, 2015). In sum, community college
students' ability to enroll and continue in college may be more sensitive to their borrowing
opportunities and choices. Our findings that potential shift towards an opt-in default choice
decision environment reduces federal student loan borrowing levels without the potential of
shifting towards less favorable ParentPLUS or privately-held commercial loans ­ at least in
the context of selective public four-year institutions.
   Our results add to the postsecondary student loan literature and add to our understanding
of the influence of default choice architecture. Unlike more binding and paternalistic default


                                              25
choice policies ­ requiring no active decision to actualize the default choice ­ our default
choice presentation was non-binding. Specifically, the default choice presented here required
students to first log-in to the financial aid portal and then actively confirm a student loan
decision. Of the three mechanisms discussed by Jachimowicz et al. (2019), our default
choice intervention acts as an institutionally endorsed decision. Despite requiring students
to actively confirm the default decision, presenting students with an opt-in choice architecture
still significantly impacted the decision to borrow a federal student loan or not.
   We have several theories as to why the size of default choice effects is relatively small
compared to prior default choice studies (Madrian and Shea, 2001). First, we speculate that
requiring students to confirm the default decision, combined with the dropdown decision-
making platform's design, increases the ease with which potential borrowers could change
the decision (Jachimowicz et al., 2019). Second, the growing necessity of student loans as
a financing avenue for higher education (Perna, 2006) may create a misalignment between
initial individual beliefs and the populated default choice (Tannenbaum et al., 2017). Stu-
dents may enter the financial portal expecting to borrow all available loans ­ potentially
explaining the lack of difference between our opt-out and active choice conditions. Finally,
our default choice's smaller effects may be related to our conscious decision to reduce the
paternalistic nature of binding default choice ­ overcoming a critique of the default choice
literature (Thaler and Sunstein, 2009).
   Our findings are relevant to policymakers, postsecondary institution leaders, financial aid
administrators, and future research into default choice architecture changes in an educational
setting. Given that postsecondary institutions have significant discretion on the platform
for accepting and distributing federally packaged student loans, applying small changes to
the default choice presentation within the financial aid disbursement process may have a
significant effect on borrowing. With the understanding that students enrolled at our research
site may be comparatively more affluent and higher achieving than the average student
enrolled in a higher education, our findings suggest that moving toward an opt-in default


                                              26
choice presentation may reduce the long-term costs of attending higher education, while not
negatively impacting short-term academic pursuits.
   As discussed earlier, our intervention design balances both the document influence of de-
fault choice architecture with active confirmation retention. Given the ethical considerations
around default choice and student loan borrowing, preserving some level of individual active
conformation is preferred. We suggest that the design of a pre-populated default choice com-
bined with active confirmation and a relatively easy platform to change the default choice is
an optimal policy balance between presenting an institutionally supported endorsed choice
with enough freedom for individuals to optimize their borrowing behaviors. While the av-
erage effects of our intervention are relatively small, the borrowing effects on those whose
decision is changed by the presence of pre-populated choice is significantly larger. To this
end, policymakers and institutional leaders need to balance their assumption of optimal
borrowing behaviors with individual student preferences. While providing information only
has largely been ineffective in changing borrowing behaviors, evidence from our study and
Marx and Turner (2019) suggest that larger structural changes may influence student loan
borrowing decisions.
   The student financial aid disbursement process is complex. Although several scholars
have focused on behavioral approaches to increasing FAFSA completion, research that con-
siders other aspects of the financial aid process is less robust. Recent work by Marx and
Turner (2019) and Darolia (2016) reveal that small changes to the presentation of a finan-
cial aid award may influence student borrowing and enrollment. Our study adds to this
growing body of literature and provides an additional no-cost mechanism through which to
assist students as they make decisions about student loans. Future research should examine
the long-term and temporal effects of default choice within the student loan disbursement
process.




                                             27
References

Addo, F. R., Houle, J. N., and Simon, D. (2016). Young, black, and (still) in the red:
  Parental wealth, race, and student loan debt. Race and Social Problems, 8(1):64­76.

Agnew, J. R. and Szykman, L. R. (2005). Asset allocation and information overload: The
  influence of information display, asset choice, and investor experience. The Journal of
  Behavioral Finance, 6(2):57­70.

Balz, J., Sunstein, C., and Thaler, R. (2014). Choice architecture. E. Shafir, The behavioral
  foundations of public policy, pages 428­439.

Barr, A., Bird, K., and Castleman, B. L. (2016). Prompting active choice among high-
  risk borrowers: Evidence from a student loan counseling experiment. Charlottesville, VA:
  EdPolicyWorks Working Paper.

Baum, S. and Steele, P. (2010). Who borrows most? bachelor's degree recipients with high
  levels of student debt. New York: College Board.

Bergman, P., Denning, J. T., and Manoli, D. (2017). Broken tax breaks? evidence from a
  tax credit information experiment with 1,000,000 students.

Bettinger, E. P., Long, B. T., Oreopoulos, P., and Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of
  application assistance and information in college decisions: Results from the h&r block
  fafsa experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1205­1242.

Broton, K. M., Goldrick-Rab, S., and Benson, J. (2016). Working for college: The causal
  impacts of financial grants on undergraduate employment. Educational Evaluation and
  Policy Analysis, 38(3):477­494.

Brown, C. L. and Krishna, A. (2004). The skeptical shopper: A metacognitive account for
  the effects of default options on choice. Journal of consumer research, 31(3):529­539.



                                             28
Calcagno, J. C., Crosta, P., Bailey, T., and Jenkins, D. (2007). Stepping stones to a de-
  gree: The impact of enrollment pathways and milestones on community college student
  outcomes. Research in Higher Education, 48(7):775­801.

Castleman, B. L. and Page, L. C. (2014). A trickle or a torrent? understanding the extent of
  summer "melt" among college-intending high school graduates. Social Science Quarterly,
  95(1):202­220.

Castleman, B. L. and Page, L. C. (2015). Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages
  and peer mentor outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates?
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 115:144­160.

Castleman, B. L. and Page, L. C. (2016). Freshman year financial aid nudges: An experiment
  to increase fafsa renewal and college persistence. Journal of Human Resources, 51(2):389­
  415.

Castleman, B. L., Schwartz, S., and Baum, S. (2015). Decision making for student success:
  Behavioral insights to improve college access and persistence. Routledge.

Charles, K. B., Kramer II, D. A., and Ortagus, J. C. (2019). The role of cost information
  on student loan borrowing: Experimental evidence from a community college. Education
  Policy Research Center (EPRC) Working Paper 201905.

Cochrane, D. and Szabo-Kubitz, L. (2016). States of denial: Where community college
  students lack access to federal student loans. Institute for College Access & Success.

Darolia, R. (2016). An experiment on information use in college student loan decisions.

Deming, D. and Dynarski, S. (2010). College aid. In Targeting investments in children:
  Fighting poverty when resources are limited, pages 283­302. University of Chicago Press.

Dinner, I., Johnson, E. J., Goldstein, D. G., and Liu, K. (2011). Partitioning default effects:
  why people choose not to choose. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17(4):332.

                                              29
Dynarski, S. M. (2015). An economist's perspective on student loans in the united states.

Dynarski, S. M. and Scott-Clayton, J. E. (2008). 4 complexity and targeting in federal
  student aid: A quantitative analysis. Tax policy and the economy, 22(1):109­150.

Guo, W. and Romano, J. (2007). A generalized sidak-holm procedure and control of gener-
  alized error rates under independence. Statistical applications in genetics and molecular
  biology, 6(1).

Hillman, N. W. (2014). College on credit: A multilevel analysis of student loan default. The
  Review of Higher Education, 37(2):169­195.

Hout, M. (2012). Social and economic returns to college education in the united states.
  Annual review of sociology, 38:379­400.

Hoxby, C. M. and Turner, S. (2013). Informing students about their college options: A pro-
  posal for broadening the expanding college opportunities project. The Hamilton Project,
  Discussion Paper, 3.

Jachimowicz, J. M., Duncan, S., Weber, E. U., and Johnson, E. J. (2019). When and why
  defaults influence decisions: A meta-analysis of default effects. Behavioural Public Policy,
  3(2):159­186.

John, S. and Starkey, J. B. (1995). An alternative to net price: Assessing the influence
  of prices and subsidies on within-year persistence. The Journal of Higher Education,
  66(2):156­186.

Johnson, E. J. and Goldstein, D. (2003). Do defaults save lives?

Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (2013). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under
  risk. In Handbook of the fundamentals of financial decision making: Part I, pages 99­127.
  World Scientific.



                                             30
Kim, D. (2007). The effect of loans on students' degree attainment: Differences by student
  and institutional characteristics. Harvard educational review, 77(1):64­100.

Kjelland, J. (2008). Economic returns to higher education: Signaling v. human capital
  theory; an analysis of competing theories. The Park Place Economist, 16(1):70­77.

Madrian, B. C. and Shea, D. F. (2001). The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401 (k) partici-
  pation and savings behavior. The Quarterly journal of economics, 116(4):1149­1187.

Marcotte, D. E., Bailey, T., Borkoski, C., and Kienzl, G. S. (2005). The returns of a
  community college education: Evidence from the national education longitudinal survey.
  Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 27(2):157­175.

Marx, B. M. and Turner, L. J. (2019). Student loan nudges: Experimental evidence on
  borrowing and educational attainment. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  11(2):108­41.

Marx, B. M. and Turner, L. J. (2020). Paralysis by analysis? effects of information on
  student loan take-up. Economics of Education Review, 77:102010.

McKenzie, C. R., Liersch, M. J., and Finkelstein, S. R. (2006). Recommendations implicit
  in policy defaults. Psychological Science, 17(5):414­420.

McKinney, L. and Burridge, A. B. (2015). Helping or hindering? the effects of loans on
  community college student persistence. Research in Higher Education, 56(4):299­324.

Miller, B., Campbell, C., Cohen, B. J., and Hancock, C. (2019). Addressing the $1.5 trillion
  in federal student loan debt.

Moretti, E. (2004). Estimating the social return to higher education: evidence from longi-
  tudinal and repeated cross-sectional data. Journal of econometrics, 121(1-2):175­212.

Page, L. C., Castleman, B., and Meyer, K. (2018). Customized nudging to improve fafsa
  completion and income verification. Available at SSRN 2854345.

                                             31
Page, L. C. and Scott-Clayton, J. (2016). Improving college access in the united states:
  Barriers and policy responses. Economics of Education Review, 51:4­22.

Perna, L. W. (2006). Understanding the relationship between information about college
  prices and financial aid and students' college-related behaviors. American Behavioral
  Scientist, 49(12):1620­1635.

Ratcliffe, C. and McKernan, S.-M. (2013). Forever in your debt: Who has student loan debt,
  and who's worried. Washington, DC: Urban Institute.

Rothstein, J. and Rouse, C. E. (2011). Constrained after college: Student loans and early-
  career occupational choices. Journal of Public Economics, 95(1-2):149­163.

Scott-Clayton, J. and Li, J. (2016). Black-white disparity in student loan debt more than
  triples after graduation. Economic Studies, Volume 2 No. 3.

Tannenbaum, D., Fox, C. R., and Rogers, T. (2017). On the misplaced politics of behavioural
  policy interventions. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(7):1­7.

Thaler, R. H. and Sunstein, C. R. (2009). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth,
  and happiness. Penguin.

Zhan, M., Xiang, X., and Elliott III, W. (2016). Education loans and wealth building among
  young adults. Children and Youth Services Review, 66:67­75.




                                            32
Tables

Table 1: Research Site Characteristics and National Averages
                                                     Public U       All Public Four-Years

Price #
In-State Published Tuition and Fees ($)^                 6,381               8,199
Out-of-State Published Tuition and Fees ($)^            28,659              18,338
Cost of Attendance: In-State -On Campus ($)^            21,131              23,661
Cost of Attendance: Out-of-State -On Campus ($)^        43,409              34,620

Student Body Characteristics +
12-Month Headcount Undergraduate (#)^                   37,851              23,574
Undergraduate Proportion (%)^                             64                  84
Race: White (%)^                                          55                  52
Race: Black (%)^                                           7                  11
Race: Hispanic (%)^                                       21                  18
Race: Other (%)^                                          17                  19
Pell Grant Recipients (%)^                                25                  44
Admission Selectivity (%)^                                46                  69

Completion +
4-Year BA Graduation Rate (%)^                            67                  27
6-Year BA Graduation Rate (%)^                            87                  48

Financial Aid Engagement+
Undergraduates Awarded State or Local Grant (%)^          82                  38
Undergraduates Awarded Institutional Grant (%)^           29                  45
Undergraduate Federal Loan Borrowers (%)^                 25                  48
Median Student Loan Debt ($)*                           15,000              13,283
3-Year Cohort Loan Default Rate (%)*                       3                   9

Note: All data is the most recently available through the Integrated Postsecondary Educa-
                                                       ^
tion Data System (IPEDS) or the College Scorecard. denotes     data extracted from IPEDS
and * denotes data extracted from the College Scorecard. # indicates data is from the
2017-18 academic year and + indicates data is from the 2016-17 academic year.




                                          33
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics of Key Sample Covariates
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)        (4)
                                    Total Sample Active Choice     Opt-Out     Opt-In
Covariates
         Race: White                    0.55           0.55          0.55        0.55
                                       (0.50)         (0.50)        (0.50)      (0.50)

Race: African American / Black         0.08            0.08          0.08        0.08
                                      (0.27)          (0.27)        (0.26)      (0.27)
        Race: Hispanic                 0.24            0.24          0.23        0.24
                                      (0.42)          (0.43)        (0.42)      (0.42)
          Race: Other                  0.13            0.13          0.13        0.13
                                      (0.34)          (0.34)        (0.34)      (0.33)
            1st Year                   0.13            0.14          0.13        0.13
                                      (0.34)          (0.34)        (0.33)      (0.34)
           2nd Year                    0.23            0.23          0.24        0.23
                                      (0.42)          (0.42)        (0.43)      (0.42)
            3rd Year                   0.25            0.25          0.24        0.26
                                      (0.43)          (0.43)        (0.43)      (0.44)
          4th + Year                   0.39            0.38          0.39        0.38
                                      (0.49)          (0.49)        (0.49)      (0.49)
        Gender: Female                 0.59            0.59          0.60        0.59
                                      (0.49)          (0.49)        (0.49)      (0.49)

         EFC ($1,000)                  28.68           29.71         28.32      28.51
                                      (63.22)         (67.54)       (61.40)    (60.44)

     Dependent Status (%)              0.90            0.90          0.90        0.90
                                      (0.30)          (0.30)        (0.29)      (0.30)

   Pell Grant Recipient (%)            0.40            0.40          0.41        0.40
                                      (0.49)          (0.49)        (0.49)      (0.49)

  Non-Resident Student (%)             0.20            0.21          0.21        0.20
                                      (0.40)          (0.40)        (0.41)      (0.40)

Prior Loan Borrowing ($1,000)          4.30            4.30          4.30        4.31
                                      (8.27)          (8.34)        (8.24)      (8.24)

     Cumulative GPA (#)                3.41            3.41          3.40        3.41
                                      (0.49)          (0.49)        (0.49)      (0.48)
       Analytical Sample              20,193           6,768        6,650       6,775

     % Making a Decision               0.58             0.58          0.58       0.59
                                     (0.49)           (0.49)        (0.49)      (0.49)
Notes: Sample includes all undergraduates who completed a FAFSA and have a financial
aid award package that includes a federal student loan. Sample is further limited to
undergraduates who enrolled in atleast one34course for the fall semester. Table displays
means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for the entire analytical sample and by
experimental group at baseline and prior to the packaging of any student aid.
Table 3: P-values from Omnibus Tests of Baseline Covariate Equiva-
lence
                                                  p-value
Active Choice vs. Opt-In                           0.291
Active Choice vs. Opt-Out                          0.215
Opt-In vs. Opt-Out                                 0.486
Notes: Cells report p-values based on Hansen and Bowers' (2008) om-
nibus test for assessing baseline equivalence.




                                         35
     Table 4: Impact of Default Choice on Borrowing
                                        (1)              (2)        (3)            (4)       (5)           (6)         (7)
                                    Any Loans              All Loans              Subsidized Loans        Unsubsidized Loans
                                         %               %           $              %         $            %            $

     Panel A: Unconditional
        Treatment 1: Opt-Out             -0.001         0.001        -20.440      0.002       20.907      -0.000        -38.371
                                        (0.007)        (0.007)      (43.697)     (0.009)     (42.173)    (0.007)       (35.255)

         Treatment 2: Opt-In             -0.009        -0.014*      -101.911*     -0.006      -29.657    -0.012+       -85.761*
                                        (0.007)        (0.007)       (43.323)    (0.009)     (42.653)    (0.007)       (35.171)

     Opt-In = Opt-Out (F test)           1.43           5.12*        3.51+         0.68        1.43       3.18+             1.84

     Active Choice (Control) Mean        0.357          0.303       2,197.99      0.411      1,747.39     0.283        1,226.62

                   n                    20,193                  20,193                    12,184                   18,888
36




     Panel B: Conditional
        Treatment 1: Opt-Out             0.011          0.011        72.640       0.018       85.823      0.008         33.987
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)      (64.773)     (0.012)     (54.987)    (0.010)       (50.580)

         Treatment 2: Opt-In            -0.019*       -0.028**     -189.451**     -0.003      -4.939     -0.027*      -191.499***
                                        (0.010)        (0.010)      (64.191)     (0.012)     (54.730)    (0.010)        (50.987)

     Opt-In = Opt-Out (F test)          9.71**        15.77***      16.62***      4.21*       2.78+     16.73***       19.84***

     Active Choice (Control) Mean        0.626          0.529       3,903.94      0.642      2,725.95     0.517        2,297.21

                     n                   11,836               11,836                    8,065                     10,729
     Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; Panel 1 is our ITT sample with all students packaged with a student loan(s)
     in their financial aid package; Panel 2 is our ToT sample with students accessing the financial aid portal. reference group
     = active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all
     regressions include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income and financial situation; 3)
     year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the
     sample size are due to students not being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need.
     Table 5: Impact of Default Choice on Intensive Margin
                                        (1)            (2)        (3)                (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                  Subsidized                                      Unsubsidized
                                    Borrowed       Borrowed  Borrowed             Borrowed       Borrowed  Borrowed
                                                   Max       Less Than                           Max       Less Than
                                                             Max                                           Max
        Treatment 1: Opt-Out          0.018          0.028*     -0.010              0.008          0.015         -0.007
                                     (0.012)        (0.012)    (0.009)             (0.010)        (0.011)       (0.006)

         Treatment 2: Opt-In            -0.003         -0.006        0.003         -0.027**       -0.021*            -0.006
                                       (0.012)        (0.012)       (0.009)         (0.010)       (0.010)           (0.006)

     Active Choice (Control) Mean       0.642          0.485         0.157          0.517          0.425             0.091

          Covariates Included            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
          Block Fixed-Effects            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes               Yes
37




                    n                     8,065        8,065        8,065          10,729         10,729            10,729
                    R                     0.195        0.148        0.078           0.232          0.162             0.124
     Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; sample is conditional on accessing the financial aid portal; reference group =
     active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all regressions
     include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income and financial situation; 3) year enrolled;
     4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are
     due to students not being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need.
Table 6: Impact of Default Choice on Unsubsidized Loan Borrowing by Loans Available
                                   (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)
                                      One Loan                  Two Loans
                                   %          $            %             $
   Treatment 1: Opt-Out          -0.000    -32.594      0.027*        79.378+
                                (0.017)   (111.788)     (0.013)       (45.426)

    Treatment 2: Opt-In          -0.044**   -367.234***      -0.012          -74.925
                                  (0.017)    (109.808)      (0.013)         (46.534)

Active Choice (Control) Mean      0.548      3,617.18        0.499          1,559.67

     Covariates Includes           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes
     Block Fixed-Effects           Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes

               n                          3,907                          6,822
               R                    0.254       0.386        0.238            0.455
Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; sample is conditional on accessing the fi-
nancial aid portal; reference group = active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in
parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all regressions include
baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income and financial
situation; 3) year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors;
and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are due to students not
being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need.




                                            38
     Table 7: Impact of Default Choice Option on Loan Substitution and Employment
                                                    (1)                 (2)                            (3)
                                                       External Borrowing                         Employment
                                               Private          Parent PLUS                 Work Study
                                               Loans (Y/N)      (Y/N)                       Earnings ($)
     Panel A: Control Group Mean
                  Active Choice                    0.021               0.074                         115.485
                                                  (0.143)             (0.262)                       (641.944)

     Panel B: Reduced-Form Estimates (OLS)
                   Opt-In                  0.000                          0.003                       -2.178
                                          (0.003)                        (0.005)                     (12.127)

     Panel C: IV Estimates
               Accept Any Loans                      -0.021               -0.119                     114.137
                                                    (0.130)              (0.239)                    (637.992)

     Panel D: IV Estimates
39




               Accept All Loans                      -0.014               -0.081                     78.790
                                                    (0.088)              (0.160)                    (439.692)

     Panel E: IV Estimates
            Amount Borrowed ($100)                   -0.002               -0.012                      11.787
                                                    (0.013)              (0.024)                     (65.762)

                    Observations                      11,836                11,836                     11,836
     Notes: See Table 2 for sample description for our conditional sample. Panel A is the control group mean and
     standard deviations in a parentheses. Panel B contains reduced-form (OLS) estimates of assignment to the opt-
     in treatment condition; control condition is a pooled set of students assigned to either active choice or opt-out
     conditions. Panels C, D, and E contain IV estimates of accepted any loans (Panel C); accepting all loans (Panel
     D), and the amount borrowed in $100 increments (Panel E). Assignment to the opt-in default condition serves
     the excluded instrument. all regressions include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent
     income and financial situation; 3) year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and
     5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are due to students not being packaged a subsidized or
     unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need. HC2 standard errors in parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05,
     ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
Table 8: Impact of Default Choice Option on Academic Performance
                                     (1)               (2)             (3)
                                                 Academic Year
                               Credits            Credits        GPA
                               Attempted          Passed
Panel A: Control Group Mean
        Active Choice              25.787            22.521           3.019
                                   (5.046)           (8.828)         (1.108)

Panel B: Reduced-Form Estimates (OLS)
         Opt-In               -0.010                      0.042               0.005
                             (0.088)                     (0.153)             (0.012)

Panel C: IV Estimates
    Accept Any Loans                  0.517               -1.919              -0.334
                                     (4.597)             (7.012)             (0.886)

Panel D: IV Estimates
     Accept All Loans                 0.357               -1.302              -0.227
                                     (3.174)             (4.731)             (0.596)

Panel E: IV Estimates
 Amount Borrowed ($100)               0.053               -0.196              -0.034
                                     (0.474)             (0.713)             (0.090)

Observations                          11,836              11,836              11,836
Notes: See Table 2 for sample description for our conditional sample. Panel A is the
control group mean and standard deviations in a parentheses. Panel B contains reduced-
form (OLS) estimates of assignment to the opt-in treatment condition; control condition
is a pooled set of students assigned to either active choice or opt-out conditions. Panels
C, D, and E contain IV estimates of accepted any loans (Panel C); accepting all loans
(Panel D), and the amount borrowed in $100 increments (Panel E). Assignment to the
opt-in default condition serves the excluded instrument. all regressions include baseline
controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income and financial situation;
3) year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked
fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are due to students not being packaged a
subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need. HC2 standard errors in
parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.




                                           40
     Figures
41




      Figure 1: Mean borrowing by treatment condition
     Appendices
     Appendix A
42
Appendix B

             Table B: Impact of Default Choice on Portal Access
                                              (1)           (2)

                Treatment 1: Opt-Out           -0.009        -0.012
                                              (0.009)       (0.008)

                 Treatment 2: Opt-In           0.006         0.006
                                              (0.008)       (0.008)

             Active Choice (Control) Mean      0.582         0.582

                           n                  20,193         20,193

                    Baseline Controls             No           Yes
             Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; reference group
             = active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in parentheses;
             + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; base-
             line controls includes in (2) are : 1) student demographics;
             2) student/parent income and financial situation; 3) year
             enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing be-
             haviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects.




                                         43
     Appendix C


     Table C: Mean Outcomes by Treatment Group
                                          Unconditional Sample                                   Conditional Sample
                              Total Sample Active    Opt-Out   Opt-In               Total Sample Active    Opt-Out          Opt-In
                                           Choice                                                Choice
     Total Loans
        Accepted Any Loans        0.36         0.36      0.36     0.35                   0.61         0.61         0.63        0.59
                                 (0.48)       (0.48)    (0.48)   (0.48)                 (0.49)       (0.49)       (0.48)      (0.49)

        Accepted All Loans           0.30         0.30        0.31         0.29          0.52         0.52         0.54        0.49
                                    (0.46)       (0.46)      (0.46)       (0.45)        (0.50)       (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.50)

        Total Loan Amount          2,169.49     2,197.99     2,205.02    2,106.13      3,732.53     3,775.70     3,848.66     3,578.90
                                  (3241.48)    (3281.51)    (3254.65)   (3187.40)     (3499.20)    (3541.82)    (3487.58)    (3463.14)

     Subsidized Loans
44




        Offered Subsidized           0.60         0.60        0.61         0.60          0.68         0.68         0.68        0.67
                                    (0.49)       (0.49)      (0.49)       (0.49)        (0.47)       (0.47)       (0.47)      (0.48)

        Accepted Subsidized          0.41         0.41        0.41         0.41          0.64         0.63         0.65        0.63
                                    (0.49)       (0.49)      (0.49)       (0.49)        (0.48)       (0.48)       (0.48)      (0.48)

      Subsidized Loan Amount       1,754.44     1,747.39     1,780.70    1,734.93      2,717.52     2,674.53     2,804.73     2,674.86
                                  (2281.41)    (2272.22)    (2297.88)   (2274.25)     (2333.53)    (2329.04)    (2333.38)    (2336.73)

     Unsubsidized Loans
       Offered Unsubsidized          0.94         0.93        0.93         0.94          0.89         0.89         0.89        0.89
                                    (0.25)       (0.25)      (0.25)       (0.24)        (0.31)       (0.31)       (0.31)      (0.30)

       Accepted Unsubsidized         0.28         0.28        0.29         0.27          0.51         0.51         0.52        0.48
                                    (0.45)       (0.45)      (0.45)       (0.45)        (0.50)       (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.50)

     Unsubsidized Loan Amount      1,187.47    1,226.62      1,191.23     1,144.96      2137.51      2,209.04     2,182.46    2,025.48
                                  (2312.50)   (2376.93)     (2284.04)    (2274.63)     (2756.01)    (2829.35)    (2719.39)   (2714.78)
     Notes: Table displays means and standard deviations (in parentheses) for both our conditional and unconditional samples and by
     experimental group.
     Appendix D

      Table D: Multiple Comparison Robustness Check (Conditional Sample)
                                 Any Loans             All Loans         Subsidized Loans                        Unsubsidized Loan
                                       %             %          $           %       $                          %              $
      Opt-Out vs. Active Choice      0.011         0.011      72.640      0.022   85.823                     0.017          33.987
                                    (0.009)       (0.010)    (64.289)    (0.012) (51.762)                   (0.010)        (50.580)

       Opt-In vs. Active Choice        -0.019+         -0.028+    -189.451**       -0.002     -4.939        -0.025*         -191.499***
                                        (0.009)         (0.009)    (64.289)       (0.012)    (51.762)       (0.010)           (50.987)

         Opt-In vs. Opt-Out           -0.030**        -0.040***   -262.09***       -0.002     -90.761      -0.042***        -225.486***
                                       (0.009)         (0.009)     (64.289)       (0.012)    (51.762)       (0.010)           (50.628)

          Covariates Included              Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes            Yes                Yes
          Block Fixed-Effects              Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes       Yes            Yes                Yes
45




      Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; Sidak-Holm adjusted; HC2 robust standard errors in parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05,
      ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all regressions include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income and
      financial situation; 3) year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations
      in in the sample size are due to students not being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financail need.
Appendix E. Heterogeneous Effects
    We further explored the impact of our treatment conditions on a variety of subgroups.19
First, we investigated differences between independent and dependent students.20 Avery and
Turner (2012) suggest that independent and dependent students engage with the student loan
process differently, while Charles et al. (2019) found that dependent students are more likely
to respond to informational nudges within the student borrowing process. Table E1 provides
our treatment effect estimates by dependency status. Both dependent and independent
student borrowers who were assigned the opt-in condition were less likely to borrow all
packaged loans (2.4 and 5.8 percentage points less likely respectively) and borrowed less
($146.47 and $514.49, respectively) than their peers assigned the active choice control group.
The opt-in reduction in borrowing for dependent students equates to a 4.2% decrease relative
to the active choice control group, while for independent students the opt-in conditions
reduces borrowing by 7.9%.
    Opt-out assignment appears to affect the borrowing behaviors of dependent students only,
although we have less power to detect effects for independent students, given the relatively
small share of independent student borrowers in our sample. Opt-out assigned dependent
students were 1.6 percentage points more likely to engage in borrowing, were 1.5 percentage
point more likely to accept all their packaged loans, and borrowed $135.72 ­ or 3.9%­ more
than dependent students assigned to the active choice control condition.
    Table E2 presents treatment estimates according to whether students have a Pell Grant
included in their financial aid package. Both non-Pell and Pell students were significantly
less likely to accept all packaged loans (3.1 percentage points) and borrowed significantly
less ($237.76 and $157.35 or 6.0% and 4.1%, respectively) when they were assigned to the
opt-in condition. Non-Pell students assigned to the opt-out condition borrowed more than
those in the active choice condition ­ on average borrowing $155.23 or 3.9% more ­ and were
2.5 percentage points more likely to engage in borrowing.
    We further test the role of the other financial aid and postsecondary costs by examining
treatment effects across residency (in-state versus out-of-state) status and state financial
aid program participation in Table E3.21 We find consistent effects by which the opt-in
   19
      We do not originally block on these subgroups; however, our balance test indicate no statistical difference
for the assignment of these groups across our three conditions.
   20
      An independent is defined as a student who is at least 24 years of age, married, a graduate or professional
student, a member or veteran of the armed forces, an orphan, a ward of the court, someone with legal
dependents other than a spouse, an emancipated minor or someone who is homeless or at risk of becoming
homeless. Dependent students are defined as those who do not meet the definition of an independent student.
   21
      The state merit-aid scholarship located within the state of our institutional partner is comprehensive
in nature but is restricted to in-state students who qualify based on their secondary and postsecondary
academic performance. Recipients of the state's merit-aid scholarship covers between 75% and 100% of
tuition and applicable fees for cohorts of students included in our analysis.


                                                       46
default choice significantly reduces the likelihood of borrowing and the amount borrowed for
all groups. Out-of-state students were influenced by the opt-in conditions as they were 5.5
percentage points less likely to engage in student loan borrowing, were 6.1 percentage points
less likely to accept all loans offered, and borrowed $426.39 dollars (or 7.6%) less than out-
of-state students assigned to the active choice default condition. In-state students were also
significantly impacted by an opt-in default. On average, in-state students presented with
an opt-in choice borrowed 4.8% less ($181.39) in total loans, were 2.8 percentage points less
likely to accept their entire loan package, and were 1.9 percentage points less likely to borrow
a student loan than in-state students assigned to make an active choice on their loans. In
sum, for out-of-state students, we observe some evidence that the opt-out condition also led
to some reduction in borrowing.
    Within our sample 57% of in-state students received a large merit-based state financial aid
subsidy that covered the majority of, if not all, tuition and fees. We tested for any differential
treatment effects by those receiving and not receiving the merit-aid subsidies ­ Columns (3)
and (4)-- and again found statistically significant and generally consistent evidence that both
recipients and non-recipients of the merit-aid subsidies reduced their borrowing behaviors
when assigned to the opt-in condition. In-state merit-aid recipients borrowed 7.3% less,
while in-state non-merit-aid recipients in the opt-in condition reduced their borrowing by
3.2% ­ both relative to peers assigned to the active choice control condition.




                                               47
     Table E1: Default Choice Difference by Dependency Status
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)                (4)            (5)              (6)
                                               Dependent                                         Independent
                                     Any Loans         All Loans              Any Loans                  All Loans
                                         %           %          $                 %              %                 $
        Treatment 1: Opt-Out           0.016       0.015    135.718*            -0.025         -0.013          -281.379
                                      (0.010)     (0.011) (62.963)             (0.024)        (0.025)         (233.907)

         Treatment 2: Opt-In            -0.024*       -0.027*   -146.474*        -0.013       -0.058*           -514.489*
                                        (0.010)       (0.011)    (62.395)       (0.024)       (0.026)           (235.104)

     Active Choice (Control) Mean        0.607         0.519    3,462.87         0.737         0.585            6,489.30

          Covariates Included             Yes           Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes
          Block Fixed-Effects             Yes           Yes        Yes            Yes           Yes                Yes
48




                    n                     10,127            10,127              1,709                       1,709
                    R                     0.252       0.234       0.324         0.209         0.258              0.357
     Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; sample is conditional on accessing the financial aid portal; reference group =
     active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all regressions
     include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income and financial situation; 3) year enrolled;
     4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are
     due to students not being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financail need.
     Table E2: Default Choice Difference by Pell Status
                                        (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)           (5)        (6)
                                                 Non-Pell                                      Pell
                                     Any Loans            All Loans            Any Loans            All Loans
                                         %             %            $              %              %          $
        Treatment 1: Opt-Out          0.025+         0.018     155.225+          -0.008         0.002     -31.798
                                      (0.013)       (0.014)     (85.117)        (0.014)        (0.014) (97.388)

         Treatment 2: Opt-In            -0.024+       -0.031*   -237.760**        -0.018       -0.031*   -157.350+
                                        (0.013)       (0.013)    (84.567)        (0.014)       (0.014)    (96.720)

     Active Choice (Control) Mean        0.631         0.575     3,948.80         0.620         0.475     3,851.61

          Covariates Included             Yes           Yes        Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes
          Block Fixed-Effects             Yes           Yes        Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes
49




                   n                    6,439                6,439                5,397                5,397
                   R                    0.232          0.200      0.347           0.236         0.248       0.377
     Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; sample is conditional on accessing the financial aid portal;
     reference group = active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05,
     ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all regressions include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2)
     student/parent income and financial situation; 3) year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan
     borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are due to students not
     being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need.
     Table E3: Default Choice Difference by Residency and State Aid Status
                                         (1)       (2)     (3)      (4)         (5)       (6)     (7)     (8)         (9)         (10)      (11)     (12)
                                                 Any Loans                              All Loans                            Total Loan Amount
                                   Out-of-State          In-State          Out-of-State         In-State         Out-of-State            In-State
                                                   All    Merit Non-Merit                 All    Merit Non-Merit                   All     Merit Non-Merit
        Treatment 1: Opt-Out          -0.045+     0.015 0.009     0.015      -0.054+     0.016   0.017   0.012    -302.189+     106.666   49.179 128.756+
                                       (0.026)   (0.010) (0.015) (0.013)      (0.029)   (0.010) (0.016) (0.013)    (179.790)    (67.615) (119.490) (75.534)

         Treatment 2: Opt-In           -0.055*     -0.019+ -0.003     -0.029*     -0.061*     -0.028** -0.031+   -0.027*      -426.392*   -181.385** -204.229+ -168.919*
                                       (0.025)      (0.010) (0.015)   (0.012)     (0.029)      (0.010) (0.017)   (0.012)      (182.047)    (66.932) (122.229) (73.319)

     Active Choice (Control) Mean       0.866       0.603   0.511     0.756        0.807       0.502    0.428     0.624       5,605.05     3,738.60   2,798.97   5,296.11

          Covariates Included            Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
          Block Fixed-Effects            Yes         Yes     Yes       Yes          Yes         Yes      Yes       Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes

                    n                    1,103       10,733 4,112     6,621         1,103      10,733 4,112         6,621        1,103        10,733     4,112     6,621
                    R                    0.145       0.230 0.179      0.285         0.131       0.229    0.229      0.274        0.352        0.362      0.331     0.346
     Notes: See Table 2 for sample description; sample is conditional on accessing the financial aid portal; reference group = active choice; HC2 robust standard errors in
     parentheses; + p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001; all regressions include baseline controls for: 1) student demographics; 2) student/parent income
     and financial situation; 3) year enrolled; 4) dependency status; 5) prior loan borrowing behaviors; and 5) blocked fixed-effects. Variations in in the sample size are
     due to students not being packaged a subsidized or unsubsidized loan based on EFC and financial need. Merit-aid scholarship is restricted to in-state students who
     qualify based on their secondary and postsecondary academic performance. Merit scholarship covers between 75% and 100% of tuition and applicable fees.
50
