                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               COMPUTERIZATION, OBSOLESCENCE, AND THE LENGTH
                             OF WORKING LIFE

                                         Péter Hudomiet
                                         Robert J. Willis

                                       Working Paper 28701
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28701


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




Research for this paper was supported by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation Grant G-2016-7259. An
earlier version of this paper was presented at a "Working Longer" Conference at the Stanford
Institute for Economic Policy Analysis. We thank Nicole Maestas and other participants for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed additional relationships of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w28701.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Péter Hudomiet and Robert J. Willis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Computerization, Obsolescence, and the Length of Working Life
Péter Hudomiet and Robert J. Willis
NBER Working Paper No. 28701
April 2021
JEL No. J14,J24,J26,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes how computerization affected the labor market outcomes of older workers
between 1984 and 2017. Using the computerization supplements of the Current Population
Survey (CPS) we show that different occupations were computerized at different times, older
workers tended to start using computers with a delay compared to younger workers, but computer
use within occupations converged to the same levels across age groups eventually. That is, there
was a temporary knowledge gap between younger and older workers in most occupations. We
estimate how this knowledge gap affected older workers' labor market outcomes using data from
the CPS and the Health and Retirement Study. Our models control for occupation and time fixed
effects and in some models; we also control for full occupation-time interactions and use middle
aged (age 40-49) workers as the control group. We find strong and robust negative effects of the
knowledge gap on wages, and a large, temporary increase in transitions from work to non-
participation, consistent with a model of creative destruction in which the computerization of jobs
made older workers' skills obsolete in birth cohorts that experienced computerization relatively
late in their careers. We find larger effects on females and on middle-skilled workers.


Péter Hudomiet
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
hudomiet@rand.org

Robert J. Willis
Professor of Economics, Emeritus
University of Michigan
1001 Laurel St.
 Apt. 323
San Carlos, CA 94070
and NBER
rjwillis@isr.umich.edu




A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28701
A supplementary data on knowlege gap, mapping of O*NET to occupations is available at https://
sites.google.com/site/phudomiet/research
1. Introduction

        Technological progress in the past few centuries has had an enormous impact on the labor

market, shifting workers between occupations and sectors and changing the types of tasks

workers are required to do. Even though it has been frequently argued that machines may

eliminate human jobs altogether "rendering the population redundant" 1, the labor force has been

able to adapt to all these new technologies and employment-to-population ratios did not change

much in the past. In fact, technological progress overall benefitted the society by increasing

workers' productivity and wages and requiring workers to do less repetitive and strenuous work.

The transitions, however, may not always have been easy for workers with specialized skills that

suddenly became obsolete or not competitive with new machines or other workers. The

transitions were likely most difficult for older workers, who had accumulated more specialized

skills compared to their younger peers and who expected to spend a shorter time on the labor

market to benefit from adopting the new technologies. When an older worker experiences the

obsolescence of her skills, she may decide to retire earlier than she originally planned.


        In this paper we focus on a particular innovation: computerization, arguably the most

important technological change of our era, and we estimate how it affected the labor market

outcomes of older workers during the last 35 years from a longitudinal perspective that

emphasizes the potential mismatch between the computer-related skills possessed by workers

and the skills needed to carry out the tasks demanded by employers of workers in those

occupations. Our main research question is: "How has the advance of computer technology and

the introduction of personal computers (PCs) and the Internet since the 1980s affected the


1
 This expert opinion about the "the substitution of machinery for human labour" was rendered at the beginning of
the 19th century (The Economist,June 25-July 1, 2016).



                                                        1
decisions of older workers about retirement and the length of working life in those occupations

that use computers most intensively relative to workers in less computer intensive jobs and

why?" We define the state of computer technology broadly to include the current capabilities of

existing types of hardware (e.g., mainframes, PCs, mobile phones); software including word

processors, spreadsheets, statistical programs, graphics programs; storage including floppy disks,

hard drives, cloud; internet bandwidth; connectivity and communication through the internet, etc.


       Over time the astounding increases in CPU speed, storage capacity and communication

speeds has enabled a proliferation of ways of producing new and existing products and services

which, in turn, has had major effects on the distribution of employment and wages across

occupations. Autor, et al. (2003) argue that these changes stem from the fact that worker

productivity depends on the set of tasks required by their job and that the productivity of

computers and software depends on the tasks that computer routines can be programmed to carry

out. The impact of computerization on the distribution of employment and wages depends on

both supply-side effects on worker productivity and demand-side factors that influence own- and

cross-elasticities of demand for labor of each type.


       Computerization affected birth cohorts at different part of their life cycles. We define

"Retiree Cohorts" as those birth cohorts who were first affected by computerization on the labor

market, after they finished their formal education. By 2017 people who had reached age 65 and

thus were eligible for both Social Security and Medicare benefits were born in 1952. These

people reached high school graduation at age 18 in 1970 at a time when mainframe computers

were just beginning to be used for scientific and accounting work in large organizations. This

implies that nearly all Americans born before 1952 who were observed to retire before 2017--

that is, nearly all Americans who have ever retired--finished their high school degree before



                                                 2
computerization became a significant influence in the job market. In addition, as we show in this

paper, the introduction of the IBM PC in 1982 and shortly after by the Internet was associated

with an acceleration of computer use at work and home. This cohort perspective implies that the

human capital developed by these Retiree Cohorts during their education and early careers may

have been poorly suited for jobs that required the use of computers. Facing competition from

younger cohorts, we show that members of the Retiree Cohorts who did not learn to use

computers in occupations in which computer use was prevalent suffered wage decreases which

reduced their incomes and the marginal value of work. In effect, computerization was a form of

creative destruction that imposed a loss of the value of human capital on members of the Retiree

Cohorts, likely lowering the capital value of the lifetime earnings of the Retiree Cohorts through

obsolescence of their human capital, while creating new opportunities for younger cohorts.


         To our knowledge, the literature on the growing inequality of wages and the polarization

of the job market has not addressed the implications of computerization for the labor market and

retirement behavior of older workers. 2 However, the analysis in this paper is related to a wide

range of theoretical and empirical literature in labor economics on inequality and polarization of

occupations, education and wage.


         In the empirical part of this paper, we first track the fraction of workers who used

computers and the Internet at work and at home between 1984 and 2017 in detailed occupation

and age groups, using the computerization supplements of the Current Population Survey (CPS).

We measure the size of the computerization shock by the gap between the fraction of younger


    2
      Prior literature has investigated the effects of computerization on wage-inequalities and employment
patterns in different age groups (Burstein et al., 2019, Belbase and Chen, 2019). A few articles studied the effect of
PC use at work on labor supply, but the results were mixed (Biagi et al., 2013; Friedberg, 2003; Schleife, 2006).
Another line of research investigated the effect of IT investments by firms on employment and wages, and
generally found strong associations (Aubert et al., 2006; Gaggle and Wright, 2017; Freeman, 2018).



                                                          3
and older workers in a given year and occupation who used computers at work. We show that

this "knowledge gap" tended to be larger in highly skilled occupations that were computerized

earlier, but importantly it was temporary, and it largely disappeared by 2017, as computer use

among older workers and younger workers converged. We made this knowledge gap measure

available online and it can be merged to other datasets. 3

          We hypothesize that the knowledge gap signaled a pressure on older workers at the time

to either adopt the new technology or to leave these jobs or the labor market altogether. Then we

test how the knowledge gap affected the labor market outcomes of older workers at the time

when it affected their own occupation and birth cohort using millions of observations from the

CPS, and additional data from the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). Our empirical models

use time-series variation in computerization for identification. A growing recent literature has

used occupation measures, based on the O*NET or the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT),

to study how workers' job characteristics affected their labor market outcomes. These measures,

however, only provide cross-sectional variations based on the workers' occupations. We, instead,

directly control for skill and time fixed effects in our models. These specifications hold workers'

skills constant and compare birth cohorts that were affected by computerization at different times

in their careers, while controlling for general economic conditions with year fixed effects.


          We find strong evidence that computerization (i.e. the knowledge gap) temporarily

shortened the working lives of older workers and it decreased their wages. The main results of

the paper are robust to many methodological assumptions, such as the definition of "skills," the

type of control groups, or the use of control variables. We also look at other outcomes, such as

transitions into less skilled occupations, and into part-time jobs; or being depressed. Finally, we


   3
       The datafiles and instructions are available at https://sites.google.com/site/phudomiet/research.



                                                          4
also carry out detailed subgroup analysis, to understand if the effect of computerization varied by

demographics (such as gender) or job types. Our paper starts in Section 2 with a brief overview

of the history of computerization and the relevant economic theory about how it may affect

retirement. Section 3 introduces the CPS and the HRS datasets that we use in this project.

Section 4 presents our main empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.


2. Background

2.1. A brief history of computerization

        In this paper, we use CPS and HRS data to study how the use of computers by individual

workers affected workers who were born between 1915 and 1968. In Table 1, we see that

members of the earliest cohorts in our data (born around 1920) were still at the beginning of their

careers when digital computers were invented in the 1950s and were already more than 15-20

years into their working careers by the time mainframe computers were commercially available

in the 1960s. While mainframes were very useful in scientific research and engineering work and

allowed large businesses to automate many payroll and accounting functions, the spread of

business and scientific applications accelerated with the introduction of minicomputers during

the 1970s. The introduction of the IBM personal computer in 1982 produced a rapid spread in

the application of computers and software to existing tasks such as word processing, payrolls and

accounting beyond large organizations to small businesses and households. The scale and scope

of computerization was vastly enhanced by the parallel development of the Internet beginning in

1974.

        The strong complementarity between innovations in hardware, software and networking

led to an unprecedented spread of new services, products, smart phones, motion pictures, retail




                                                 5
sales and so on that reduced the demands for the traditional skills required in many occupations

while increasing the demands for other kinds of skills.

       Members of the 1920 cohort reached retirement age about the time that the personal

computer was introduced. The first cohort of the HRS, born in 1931-41, were already between 40

and 50 years of age when the PC was introduced. Many male members of this cohort needed to

learn to type before they could attempt to exploit the potential of the computer. More generally,

the computer revolution was well underway before 1982 when older cohorts were first exposed

to the PC and the myriad applications it spawned. Indeed, we show that virtually all workers who

have retired since the invention of the digital computer learned to use computers on the job if

they learned at all. Conversely, beginning with cohorts that graduated from high school after

1982, many high school students were aware of business and scientific applications of computers

and began having access to PCs both at school and home creating expectations that influenced

choices about high school curricula, college majors and occupations. As time has gone on, the

most recent cohorts are first exposed to computerized devices as toddlers. In addition, the use of

computers and the Internet for games, communication, shopping, hobbies, etc. has fostered

ubiquitous use of computers and the Internet outside the workplace.


       The diffusion of computer and Internet use at work and at home over the working life

cycle by successive cohorts after the introduction of the PC is illustrated in the four panels of

Figure 1. The figure shows estimates based on data from the CPS computerization supplements

that will be explained in detail in the results section of the paper. Despite very large initial cohort

differences in the fraction of individuals who use computers or the Internet, we see dramatic

convergence to virtually constant fractions of use of computers and the Internet by successive

cohorts of about 60-70 percent at work and 85-90 percent at home. Clearly, use at home grew




                                                   6
much more rapidly than in the workplace as the price of PCs fell over time. Since, at least in its

early phase, use of the Internet required use of computers it is not surprising that the growth

curves in Panels C and D of Figure 1 are almost identical. We can also see that use of computers

at home and of the Internet at both work and home was strongly related to the introduction of the

PC. For example, in Panel D computer use at home that was about 30 percent for workers with

10 years of experience in 1980-89 jumped to 70 percent during the next 10 years and was also at

about 70 percent in those years for the next younger cohort in 1990-99. Figure B1 in the

appendix shows that computer use at work was strongly related to schooling: workers with

higher levels of education started using computers earlier, and computer use converged to higher

levels compared to workers with lower levels of education.


2.2. Technological change and the labor market

       Variations in the rewards to work during the past century in the United States have been

explained as the outcome of the "The Race between Education and Technology" by Goldin and

Katz (2008). Skill-biased technological change has continually raised the relative demands for

more skilled workers which, in turn, has increased the derived demand for human capital

investments via increased levels of formal education and on-the-job training. Economists have

long argued that a major reason that technological change is skill biased lies in complementarity

between new forms of physical capital (such as computers) and the skills needed for workers to

learn to utilize capital effectively. (See Berman, Bound, and Griliches,1994, for early

contributions.)


       More recent literature, surveyed by Acemoglu and Autor (2011), suggests the need for a

more nuanced view of the relationship between the cognitive abilities and skills of workers and

the tasks they perform in order to understand how new technologies affect their productivity and



                                                 7
employment. This literature documents a growing polarization of the occupational skill

distribution created by a relative decline in the number of people in middle-skilled--and middle

class--occupations relative both to people in highest skilled occupations and those in the lowest

skilled occupations (Autor et al., 2006). Autor, et al. (2003) famously argued that

computerization lead to a "hollowing out" of middle skill occupations because the primary tasks

carried out many such jobs were "routine" in the sense that computer code could be written to

perform these tasks more cheaply and rapidly than humans. In contrast, advances in

computerization tended to complement the productivity of workers in many high skill

"knowledge jobs" while it had little relevance to most tasks required of workers in low skill

manual and service jobs. As a result, the distributions of employment and of wages became

increasingly polarized. 4


        Computerization has created ongoing dramatic changes in the organization of work; the

division of labor within and between firms; the creation of new products and new ways of

producing and delivering old goods and services. As Leiner, et al. (1997) presciently stated: "The

Internet is at once a world-wide broadcasting capability, a mechanism for information dissemination,

and a medium for collaboration and interaction between individuals and their computers without regard

for geographic location." These features of computerization provided enormous advantages to

knowledge workers that largely account for the rapid growth of wages and employment of highly

educated workers in occupations such as finance, management, at STEM jobs in which


4
  If demand is sufficiently elastic and computerization significantly lowers the cost of production, employment will
tend to grow and often new products or new methods of production of old products will emerge. The elimination of
routine tasks creates the opportunity for different, more complex human skills to be used in production. For
example, employing artists who drew thousands of slightly different pictures, it took three years to produce Snow
White in 1937. Computerization allowed artists using programs to generate apparent motion in highly complex
ways nearly instantaneously. The new technology changed the ways to produce animated movies, led to new
products such as computer games and increased the premium on artistic imagination relative to draftsmen's skills
and opened up opportunities for high monetary rewards for successful artists.



                                                         8
collaboration and communication are important components of productivity. The decoupling of

geographic location and highspeed interactive communication among workers within a firm;

between employees of different firms; and between sellers and buyers has profoundly

transformed the organization of production and consumption at scales ranging from the

relationship between a boss and a secretary or salesclerk and customer to the outsourcing of

specialized functions previously done in house and offshoring of manufacturing. These changes

have drastically reduced the demand in many specific occupations such as travel agents,

department store clerks, or workers in a wide variety of manufacturing jobs that are largely

unrelated to the computer skills of the displaced workers. Over time, some of these workers used

their existing computer skills or acquired new skills to take jobs created by computerization

while others took jobs that did not require the use of computers.


       Complementarity between knowledge work and computerization had important

downstream effects on the workers who provide services for knowledge workers. For example,

as we illustrate later, the use of computers by managers and secretaries followed identical growth

curves that accelerated with the introduction of PCs, word processors and spreadsheets in the

early 1980s. Bosses learned to type their own letters and reports while secretaries learned to

finish up the final electronic products, send them to their destination and organize electronic

archives in place of filing cabinets. As office hardware and software continued to become easier

to use purely secretarial tasks became more efficient so that one secretary could service more

managers. However, integrated office software also continually increased the range of things

that bosses might like to do and, therefore, the range of tasks former secretaries who became

office assistants and managers whose responsibilities and required software skills that ranged

widely depending on whether the boss was a doctor, lawyer, professor, CEO, salesman and on




                                                 9
and on. Similar changes have occurred in a myriad of other occupations ranging from architects

to zoologists and they will surely continue in both predictable and disruptive ways into the

indefinite future.

2.3. Computerization and obsolescence

        Computerization must have come as a surprise to cohorts of workers who made

educational and occupational choices without, most likely, much foreknowledge of the vast

implications for the skills they would need to have in the workplace of the future. As Autor et al.

(2003) argue, those with skills to perform what turned out to be "routine tasks" that could be

performed by a computer program (e.g., bookkeepers) suffered a loss of productivity in their

chosen occupation and there was often a decrease in demand for workers in such occupations

which led to hollowing out of both the wage and occupational distributions. From a cohort

perspective, this was a classic case of "creative destruction" in which the bundle of skills

possessed by the "pre-computer" cohorts whose jobs involve routine tasks suffered a capital loss

while workers who possessed skills in "cognitive jobs" whose productivity was enhanced by

computers saw their earnings growth accelerate.


        It is clear that advances in computer technology--hardware, software, generality and

specificity of application, etc.--provide opportunities for workers in many different occupations

to improve their productivity, and for firms to either increase or decrease the number of workers

they require depending on the elasticities of substitution in production and final outputs 5. It is




    5
      For example, Hamermesh (2013) finds that papers in top economics journals by older economists nearly
quadrupled over two decades while the fraction of papers in pure theory fell significantly. Complementarity
between advances in statistical and econometric theory and computer programs; data collection and
dissemination; training in using these methods and sharing analysis and writing within teams doubtlessly played an
important role in lengthening the academic careers of economists and changing the comparative advantage of the
best and the brightest between pure theory and empirical analysis.



                                                       10
also clear that obsolescence is an especially serious threat to experienced workers in computer-

intensive jobs. These workers are in competition with younger workers who have learned cutting

edge skills in their formal education or during their first years in the labor market when

investments in on-the-job training and learning-by-doing are at their highest levels. This was

especially true for workers who finished their education and began their careers before

computerization began. These workers either needed to learn the new technology from scratch or

find a different job that could make use of the skills they already possessed. As the worker ages,

costs to the worker and firm of investments to offset obsolescence may well increase because of

the increasing time separating the worker's computer-related skill and the skills possessed by

younger workers. In addition, the benefits of continued investment in a worker's human capital

diminish as retirement approaches and the time to capture these benefits diminishes. Both factors

suggest that, other things equal, workers in relatively computer-intensive occupations will tend to

retire earlier. A possible exception to this prediction occurs if the advance of computer

technology is sufficiently complementary to the worker's skills to raise her productivity. An

example is an older economics professor collaborating with a young economist with cutting edge

skills. In this case, the professor may capture more of the gains from investments in keeping her

knowledge of her field current by delaying retirement.


       Recently, Ahituv and Zeira (2010) and Deming and Noray (2018) have focused attention

on the effect of technological change on the careers of STEM workers. They extend Rosen's

(1975) pioneering model of equalizing differences due to obsolescence in several ways and use

new data to show how the tasks conducted by STEM graduates change over the working life

cycle as a consequence of technological change. Like Rosen (1975) and most other subsequent

related literature, they build a formal theoretical model in which there is a constant rate of




                                                 11
technological change and derive steady state patterns of life cycle changes in a competitive labor

market in which workers sort according to ability and other characteristics, and wages and

occupational choices provide equal present values of life time earnings net of the direct and

opportunity costs of investment. While Ahituv and Zeira, (2010) and Deming and Noray (2018)

provide rich theoretical and empirical frameworks for studying many of the same issues that

concern us, they assume that workers have perfect foresight about the benefits and costs of

investing in skills and knowledge to compensate for obsolescence due to technological change.

In contrast, we focus on implications for the wages, labor supply and retirement in the Retiree

Cohorts who suffered a mismatch between the skills and knowledge embodied their human

capital relative to that embodied in the human capital of younger cohorts that was caused by their

lack of foreknowledge of computerization when they were making educational and occupational

choices earlier their careers.


3. Data

3.1. The basic monthly Current Population Survey

           The CPS is a large monthly survey that represents the non-institutionalized adult US

population. It collects information about demographics, labor market activities, and education,

among other things. The main advantage of the CPS is its large size, roughly 60,000 households

each month.


           The CPS uses a rotating panel survey design, 6 which allows researchers to estimate

monthly or yearly transition probabilities between labor market states, such as employment 

out of the labor force transition probabilities. These so-called semi-panels (or short panels) have



6
    See https://cps.ipums.org/cps/sample_designs.shtml for details about the sampling design.



                                                           12
been used by many researchers in the past to analyze patterns in worker turnover (see e.g.

Blanchard and Diamond, 1990; Drew et al., 2014; Shimer, 2012). Following the methodology

discussed in Shimer (2012) we built such a panel dataset by linking all CPS monthly surveys

from January 1984 to January 2018.


       Each person is in the sample a maximum of eight times. If the first interview was in

month 1, then the person is interviewed in months 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 14, 15, 16. These eight months

are sometimes called rotation groups indexed from 1 to 8. We estimate yearly transition

probabilities by tracking changes in labor market status between months 113, 214, 315,

and 416. More than two thirds of the sample can be successfully linked by this methodology.

For example, of the 10,617,199 individuals, who were age 25-68 between 1985 and 2017,

worked for pay, and were in rotation groups 1-4, we could link and detect a valid labor force

status for 7,325,859 (69%) individuals. The rest of the sample either moved (the CPS does not

follow those who move) or were lost to follow-up for other reasons. Because job-losers are more

likely to move than non-movers, the estimated job-loss probabilities may be downward biased in

the linked data. We expect this bias to be relatively small in the 50-69-year old sample, however.

Additionally, our econometric model identifies the effect of computerization from longitudinal

variation, and we are not aware of any reason why changes in the moving-related bias, if any,

would correlate with changes in computerization.


       The CPS asks about individuals' detailed occupations using the 3-digit census occupation

classifications. Most recently it covered more than 500 different occupations. There was one

major change in the classifications in 2003, and there were two minor changes in 1991 and 2011.

Occupational crosswalks between these alternative definitions are available, such as the one by




                                                13
IPUMS 7 and the one developed and used by us in prior research 8 (Carr et al., 2020; Hudomiet,

2015; Sonnega et al., 2018). The IPUMS crosswalk is more detailed, but it is not balanced as

many occupations are only available in certain years. The categories developed in our earlier

research has fewer categories (191), but it is balanced and more consistent over time. We use

these 191 categories in this project.


3.2. CPS Annual Social and Economic Supplement

           The basic monthly CPS does not collect information about wages and income. The CPS-

ASEC, collected every March asks individuals about wages and income received in the previous

calendar year. We use the version of CPS-ASEC downloaded from the IPUMS website.


           We restrict the sample to those who worked in the prior calendar year, and we use the

occupations based on their longest jobs in that year. For the wage models we use individuals'

annual wage and salary income, and we sometimes restrict the sample to full-year workers,

defined as working 50-52 weeks a year.


3.3. CPS Computerization Supplement

           The CPS also includes other supplementary modules that are less frequently asked. One

includes questions about computer and Internet use either at home, at work, or at other places.

These questions have been asked for a total of 14 times between 1984 and 2017. In this project

we use four variables that were more-or-less consistently measured over time:


            1. The person uses a computer at work

            2. The person uses the Internet at work



7
    See https://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/occ_ind.shtml for details.
8
    Available at https://sites.google.com/site/phudomiet/research.



                                                           14
         3. The person uses a computer at home

         4. The person uses the Internet at home

        The primary focus of this paper is whether workers use computers or the Internet at work.


        Computer use at work is available in six supplements: 1984, 1989, 1993, 1997, 2001, and

2003. Computer use at home is available in the same waves, as well as in 2015, and 2017.

Internet use at work is also available in more recent years: first in 1997, then in 1998, 2000,

2001, 2003, 2011, 2013, 2015, and 2017. Finally, Internet use at home is available in the same

waves as Internet use at work, and, in addition, in 2010 and in 2012.


        There were slight changes in the wording of the questions. After investigating we decided

to drop the 1998 and 2000 waves from the analysis, because the CPS used a different skip

patterns in those years that disrupted the time-series. 9 The rest of the measures and waves were

kept in our analysis sample.


        The CPS computerization supplements asked additional information about computer and

Internet use at home, at work and at other places, but those measures have poor comparability

over time, and they were not used in this project.


3.4. The Health and Retirement Study

The HRS is a popular dataset for studying the retirement process as it has a large sample of the

relevant 50 and older age range, and it has very detailed panel information on individuals. It

collects detailed information about individuals' demographic characteristics, SES, wages,

income, labor force outcomes, health, and other variables. Moreover, the HRS also elicits the



9
 In 1998 and 2000 the CPS first asked if individuals used the Internet outside their homes. Those who answered yes
were asked whether they used it at work. In other years, the CPS asked about Internet use at work directly.



                                                       15
retirement expectations of workers by asking "What do you think the chances are that you will

be working full-time after you reach age 62?" A similar question asks about age 65. As Hurd

(2009) argues, these probabilistic expectations data tend to predict actual future realizations well

in most cases. Importantly, expectations data are available in even younger birth cohorts, such as

the Early Baby Boomers (born between 1948 and 1953) and Mid Baby Boomers (born between

1954 and 1959).


           The HRS provides information on workers' occupations at the three-digit-census level.

The classification changed in 2006 from the 1980 to the 2000 census classifications, but the same

cross-walk described in 3.1. is used to make the data consistent. The publicly available version of

HRS only has a rudimentary one-digit occupation categorization. The detailed occupation of

workers is considered restricted data, but researchers can obtain access through a procedure

described on the MiCDA website. 10


           The rest of the measures we used will be discussed in the results section before we

present our findings.


3.5. O*NET occupational characteristics

           The O*NET (the Occupational Information Network 11) was developed under the

sponsorship of the U.S. Department of Labor to replace the DOT which was the public standard

description of occupations prior to 2000. The O*NET collects information about hundreds of

occupational characteristics in detailed three-digit occupations that can be linked to the CPS and

the HRS. The occupational characteristics include measures of skills and abilities required to

perform well on the job, as well as detailed description about work activities. The main


10
     http://micda.psc.isr.umich.edu/enclave.
11
     https://www.onetcenter.org/about.html.



                                                   16
advantage of the O*NET is its large size and great precision. However, the data cannot be used

to identify changes in occupational characteristics, as most of the data was collected in the mid-

2000s.


         The O*NET has a direct measure of computerization, which asks if workers need to

"Interact with computers" at work. We use this measure in our computerization model as a high-

quality predictor variable of computer use at work in the CPS. Our coding procedure follows

other papers in the literature such as Autor et al. (2003), Firpo et al. (2011) and Carr et al. (2020).

For each occupation, the O*NET provides information on the "importance" and "level" of

required work activity. We assign a Cobb-Douglas weight of two thirds to "importance" and one

third to "level" to create single measures of computer usage in occupations. These measures are

then averaged for the somewhat less detailed census occupation level. Finally, in order to

collapse the information to our 191-category occupations, a weighted average of the measure is

taken, where the weights are the relative frequencies of the occupations in the 2000 census

within the 191-category occupations.


3.6. Descriptive Statistics

         Table B1 in the appendix shows descriptive statistics of the four datasets used in this

project. The first three columns represent 25-69-year old workers in the basic monthly CPS, the

computerization supplements, and in the CPS-ASEC respectively. The last column represents

55-59-year old workers in the HRS. Each sample is restricted to workers with a valid occupation,

and the basic monthly CPS is further restricted to individuals who were successfully matched to

themselves in the 12-month follow-up survey.




                                                  17
       The basic monthly CPS has more than seven million person-year observations. The

average age of the workers is 44.8, a little less than half of the sample is female, less than 10%

are high school dropouts, while the rest of the sample is evenly split between high school

graduates, individuals with some college education but without a degree, and college graduates.

About 19% of the sample belongs to a racial or ethnic minority group, 70% are married, the

same fraction work in a private firm, and there is a reasonable distribution of workers in different

aggregate occupations.


       The computerization supplements and the CPS-ASEC are also large datasets, but they are

noticeably smaller compared to the basic monthly CPS with about 625 thousand and 2.6 million

observations respectively. The distributions of the basic variables are very similar to the basic

monthly CPS.


       The HRS sample is considerably smaller with about 12 thousand individuals. This sample

is older by design. The HRS oversamples racial minorities which explains the relatively smaller

fraction of non-Hispanic whites, and a lower mean education level compared to the CPS. The

distributions of the other variables, including the aggregate occupations, however, are very

similar to the CPS samples.


4. Results

4.1. Trends in computerization by age and skill

       We start by documenting the penetration of computers into different skill and age groups

from the mid-1980s until today using the CPS computerization supplements. We are primarily

interested in documenting differences in computer use between older and younger workers

within the same skill groups (education, occupations), which we interpret as a knowledge gap




                                                 18
between the age groups. We are also interested in the time-series patterns in knowledge gap, and

how they vary by skill.


       The eight panels of Figure 2 show trends in the fraction of computer and Internet users at

work by age and education. Very few high school dropouts use computers or the Internet at

work, even though their fraction steadily increased over time. Moreover, we do not see strong

age differences among high school dropouts, the fraction of computer and Internet users

remained low in all age groups. At the other end of the skill spectrum, the fraction of college

graduates who used computer or the Internet at work was non-negligible even in the `80s (20-

50% depending on age), and it continued to increase over time. Most recently about 80% of

college graduates use the Internet at work. Similar to earlier literature, we also see significant

differences in computer and Internet use by age (Borghans and ter Weel. 2002, Friedberg, 2003).

The gap appeared to be the largest in the `80s and early `90s, then it gradually shrank and

completely disappeared by the mid-2010s. The patterns are similar, but less strong among

workers with some college education. The fraction of computer and Internet users is somewhat

below that of college graduates, but the gap between younger and older workers also peaked at

earlier times among workers with some college education. The fraction of high school graduates

who use computers or the Internet at work is in between high school dropouts and workers with

some college education. The knowledge gap between younger and older workers was not as

great in the `80s since very few high school graduates used computers at that time, but the gap

increased, peaked in the `90s, and then started shrinking again.


       The eight panels of Figure B2 in the appendix show the fraction of computer and Internet

users at home. The patterns among the two higher-educated groups are similar to those in Figure

2: there was a large gap in computer and Internet use by age in the earlier periods, but the gap



                                                 19
gradually shrank and completely disappeared by the mid-2010s. The patterns, however, are

different among high school dropouts and high school graduates. Even though many of these

workers do not use computers and the Internet at work, the fraction who used the Internet at

home rapidly increased in the 2000s, especially among younger workers. More recently there is

still a noticeable gap in computer use at home between younger and older workers.


       Figures B3-B4 in the appendix show similar results in four selected occupations (instead

of education). Overall, the patterns are similar. In the highest skill professional occupations,

computer use was moderately high even in the `80s, and the age-gap was high. As computer and

Internet use continued to increase, the age-gap continued to shrink, and it completely

disappeared in the mid-2010s. In the least skilled food and cleaning service occupations, very

few people use computers or the Internet at work, and the gap seems to be small. At the same

time, computer use at home still shows a quite noticeable gap between younger and older food

and cleaning service workers. Office workers are similar to professionals, and production

workers are similar to high school graduates.


       To summarize:


       1. More skilled workers were more likely to use computers and the Internet both at home

          and at work as compared to less skilled workers throughout the entire time period.

       2. Computer and Internet use at work is still negligible among the least skilled workers,

          though many of them use computers/Internet at home at this juncture.

       3. The age-gap in computer use at work was the largest in higher skilled occupations at

          earlier times: in the `80s and early `90s.




                                                 20
       4. The age-gap among less skilled workers peaked a bit later, but it never was as large as

             among higher skilled workers.

       5. The knowledge gap between age groups was temporary, most outcome variables

             (computer and internet use at home and at work) converged to the same levels across

             age groups within the same occupation.

        Overall, we found interesting heterogeneity in computer use and knowledge gap by time

and skill.


4.2. Estimating knowledge gap in computerization

4.2.1. Model setup


        In this section we provide an overview of the model we used to estimate a knowledge gap

measure that enters our retirement models in the next sections. Appendix A discusses further

technical details.


        In the data we observe computer and internet use at work and at home by detailed skill

groups. We fit a set of probit models on these data and recover a measure of "knowledge gap",

which, under some assumptions, can be interpreted as the estimated probability that an older

worker (age 50-69) does not use computers at his/her job even though the computers would be

useful. A knowledge gap, then would potentially indicate a mismatch of the older worker with

his/her job. The usefulness of computers is identified from computer use among middle-aged

individuals (age 40-49) in the same skill group.


        Let's introduce the following notation:


                 ·      Event GC: Computers are useful at the person's job

                 ·      Event KC: The worker knows how to use computers


                                                   21
               ·       Event WC: The worker uses computers at work

               ·       A: Age

               ·       X: Skill of worker


       The knowledge gap is the estimated joint probability that a worker does not know how to

use computers, even though they are useful at his/her job. Formally it is the probability:


                               Pr (=                      (
                                   G C , K C ) Pr ( G C ) 1 - Pr ( K C | G C )   )                  (1)


       Our basic model only uses one of the four outcome variables: whether the person uses

computers at work, WC. The knowledge gap is the product of two terms, the probability that

computers are useful at the person's job, Pr ( G C ) , and the conditional probability of knowing

how to use computers if they are useful, Pr ( K C | G C ) . The single outcome variable does not

identify these two equations and the knowledge gap. We use the following three identifying

assumptions for estimation:


   1. Pr (W C ) = Pr(G C , K C ) : Workers use computers at work if and only if they know how to

       use them and they are useful at their jobs.

   2. Pr( K C | G C , A < 50) =
                              1 : Workers younger than age 50 always use computers when it is

       useful in their jobs. That is, workers below 50 always learn how to use computers if it is

       useful at their jobs.

   3. Pr(G C | X , 40 =A < 50) Pr(G C | X , A  50) : Conditional on skill, the usefulness of

       computers is the same among middle age (age 40-49) and older (age 50-69) workers.




                                                     22
         Assumption 3 establishes that middle-aged workers form a valid control group for older

workers, and it is motivated by the observation in the previous section that computer and internet

use at work converged to the same levels across age groups in most skill groups. Assumption 2

normalizes the knowledge gap at zero in younger groups, which is likely a strong assumption in

reality. If assumption 2 does not hold true, our derived knowledge gap measure can only be

interpreted as the difference in computer use between middle-aged and older workers within the

same skill group. This paper does not intend to recover any deep structural parameters, and for

our main purposes, this alternative interpretation is also fine.


         After functional form assumptions, these three identifying assumptions allow us to

estimate the knowledge gap. The usefulness of computers at work, Pr ( G C ) , is assumed to be a

flexible probit model including detailed occupations, education, race, age groups, a cubic

function of time, a cubic function of time interacted with the O*NET computerization measure 12,

and a linear time trend interacted with education, race, age groups, and a cubic function of the

O*NET computerization measures. The probability of knowing how to use computers if they are

useful, Pr ( K C | G C ) , is also a flexible probit with education, race, age groups, O*NET

computerization, a linear time trend interacted by all the measures from above, and a quadratic

term in the O*NET computerization measure.


         This model can be estimated from observations on WC, and then we can use (1) to

estimate the gap. To increase precision, we developed an extended version of the model by




    12
       The detailed occupation dummies, thus, appear as a baseline predictor, but they are not interacted with the
time trends. When we tried to interact the occupations dummies with time, the probit model usually did not
converge. In our preferred specification we used the O*NET computerization measure interacted with time in
order to reduce the complexity of the estimation model.



                                                       23
incorporating Internet use at work, as well as computer and Internet use at home. The extended

model further assumes that Internet users all use computers as well. Computer and Internet use

are specified using probit models with flexible functions of skill, age, and interview years.

Appendix A discusses details.


4.2.2. Results


       Figures 6-13 in Appendix B shows model fit: predicted and observed patterns in

computer and Internet use at work and at home by age and years, in selected education, and

occupation groups. The predicted probabilities are smoother and less noisy than the observed

probabilities, but the fit of the model is very good for all four outcome variables.


       Figure 3 shows the estimated knowledge gap by age and years by education. Figure B5

shows the gap by major occupation groups. The gap clearly increases with age, because the

oldest workers are the least likely to use computers when their younger peers do. We also found

that the knowledge gap was the largest among the higher skilled workers in the late `80s and

early `90s, while the gap was smaller and peaked a bit later among lower skilled workers. These

results aligned with our findings in Section 4.1 when we looked at the raw data. We also looked

at the knowledge gap in even finer occupation categories, and we found additional nuances.

First, some highly skilled occupations, such as computer programmers, never experienced a

knowledge gap, since they all used computers, even in the 1980s. Second, older workers in other

moderately skilled occupations, such as managers of properties and real estate, various sales

jobs, and supervisors of mechanics or foremen, experienced sizable knowledge gap even in the

late 2000s and early 2010s.




                                                 24
4.3. The effect of knowledge gap on yearly transition probabilities

4.3.1. Methods

       We use two econometric models to estimate the effect of the knowledge gap on yearly

labor market transition probabilities observed in the monthly CPS. The first one uses age, skill

and time fixed effects:


                               yiast =  0 + 1Gapast +  a +  s +  t +  ist ,                        (2)

where i indexes individuals, s indexes skill groups, and t indexes time. yiast is an outcome

variable, such as an employment  out of the labor force transition probability, the Gapast is the

knowledge gap measure, which varies by skill, age, and time, and the model has single-year age,

skill, and time fixed effects. The skill dummies are full interactions between detailed

occupations, education, race and ethnicity, and 5-year age groups.


       The model is estimated using the sample of 50-69-year-old workers. Because we control

for skill and time fixed effects, the effect of computerization is identified from within skill group

patterns in the knowledge gap. That is, we test if we see above average transitions into

retirement, for example, in years when the knowledge gap was higher than average in a

particular occupation. For simplicity, we will sometimes refer to this model as a DD (difference-

in-differences) model, because of the similarity in the control structure to a DD model. A

standard DD model would use a binary knowledge gap variable. Our empirical model, however,

uses a continuous rather than binary treatment variable (the gap). The main, non-testable,

identification assumption is that the gap does not correlate with the error term in (2). This would

be violated if there were differential trends in the outcomes across skill groups, and these trends

correlated with the trends in the knowledge gap. This would be the case, for example, if some

outside factor induced workers in some occupations to start using computers and to change their


                                                   25
retirement behaviors at the same time. We are not aware of any economic arguments that would

justify this concern, but nevertheless it is a possibility.


        To check the robustness of our findings, we replicate the DD model within various

population subgroups, such as by education or occupations. The identification assumptions are

more likely to hold within these subgroups, because the "treated" and "control" workers are

more similar within such groups.


        Our second model relaxes some of the identification assumptions in the DD model:


                              yiast =  0 + 1Gapast +  a +  s +  t +  s ×  t +  ist ,                            (3)

        The extra term is the full interaction between the skill and the time dummies (  s ×  t ).

These extra interaction terms leave no variation in the knowledge gap measure in the 50-69-year-

old sample, and therefore it cannot be estimated in that sample. Instead, we estimate the model

on the 40-69 or the 25-69-year-old samples, and these younger groups serve as the controls 13.

The model identifies the effect of the gap by tracking the difference between younger and older

workers' outcomes within the same skill groups and same year. That is, the model tests if older

workers are more likely to transition out of work compared to younger workers when the

knowledge gap is high, while we control for a full interaction between skill groups and time. For

simplicity we will sometimes refer to this model as a DDD (triple difference-in-differences)

model, because of the similarity of the control structure to a triple diff-in-diffs model in which

the 40-49-year old groups (or the 25-49-year-olds) form the third "diff". Again, the main




13
   The skill dummies include 5-year age dummies from age 50-54, to 65-69. Workers younger than age 50 were
randomly assigned to one of these four age groups when we created the skill dummies,  s . The age fixed effects,  a
, however, are based on workers' own age.



                                                        26
difference between a regular DDD and our model is that our treatment variable is continuous

rather than binary.


       Table B2 in the appendix illustrates the DD and DDD models by estimating models of

computer use at work as a function of the knowledge gap and the various control variables. The

coefficient on knowledge gap is expected to be negative when we control for time and skill fixed

effects. We use two data sources: the CPS computerization supplement, and the HRS. The latter

asks workers how often they are required to use computers at work, and we coded their answers

to 1 (vs. 0) if they reported "most of the time" or "all the time" (vs. "some of the time" or

"never"). As expected, all models predict a strong negative effect of the gap on computer use,

though the magnitude of the coefficients varies by the sample and estimation method. We want

to note that in column [3], the estimated coefficient is precisely -1, which was expected, because

the knowledge gap was basically an estimate of the difference between 40-49-year-old and older

workers' computer use, and the DDD model uses the same variation for identification. When we

control for age fixed effects, the coefficient on the knowledge gap shrinks, but remains strongly

negative and statistically significant. We include age fixed effects in all models below.


4.3.2. Main results

       Table 2 shows DD and DDD estimates of the yearly employment  out of the labor

force, and employment  unemployment transition probabilities. We found strong, statistically

significant, and robust negative effect on leaving the labor force. Older workers were more likely

to leave the labor force when their jobs were computerized, and they did not know how to use

computers. For a knowledge gap of 0.1 (or 10%, which was not uncommon in higher skilled

occupations in the late `80s and early `90s), the coefficient would imply an increase in the




                                                 27
transition probability of 1-1.4 percentage point, while the mean of the outcome variable is 8

percentage points. This is a quite large effect.


       We found a small and non-robust negative effect on the employment  unemployment

transition probability. The negative effect would mean that workers who experience a knowledge

gap were less likely to search for a new job, and they, instead, left the labor force altogether. Our

preferred estimate, however, is zero, because the more reliable DDD models show quite precise

zero effects.


       In Table 3 we restricted the sample to those who worked in both years and estimated

transition models between job types. We found robust evidence that workers with a knowledge

gap were more likely to switch from a full-time job to a part-time job, which may mean that their

skills were less valuable for their employers and they were forced to downgrade. We also looked

at transitions into less skilled occupations, or "occupational downgrading". It is possible that

workers who experienced a gap had to switch jobs and move into less skilled occupations. First,

we estimated occupational wages, by taking the occupational means of log annual wage and

salary income of full-year workers in the CPS-ASEC. A transition into a lower paid occupation

was defined as a transition into an occupation with at least 10% lower wages on average. We

also looked at transitions into less computerized occupations, which were defined as moving into

an occupation which had at least 0.1 lower value of the O*NET computerization measure

compared to the original job. The 0.1 change is about a half standard deviation in the measure.

These transition probabilities have surprisingly high means, above 10 ppts, which is likely due to

noise: before 1994, the CPS coded occupations independent of their previous values, which led

to many spurious occupation changes in the linked data. Overall, we found mixed results. The

DD models predicted no changes in occupational skills, while the DDD models predicted that the



                                                   28
gap decreased the propensity to downgrade. The negative DDD estimates are somewhat counter-

intuitive, but it may be explained if older workers who experienced a knowledge gap were less

likely to search for any jobs, including less skilled jobs.


4.3.3. Sensitivity analysis

       We estimated a number of alternative specifications of the main empirical models to test

the robustness of our findings to certain assumptions. The preferred specification defined skill

groups as the full interaction between 191 occupations, four education, four race, two gender,

and four age groups, totaling 191×4×4×2×4=24,448 groups. The knowledge gap measure was

estimated for each of these groups; we entered this many fixed effects terms into our DD models;

and even more to the DDD models (because of the year interactions). Table B3 in the appendix

shows estimates of the employment  non-participation transition probabilities using far simpler

skill group definitions. In the simplest case we only used four education and four age groups,

totaling only 16 groups. We also considered two other models with 10 occupations and four age

groups (=40 groups). In each case we re-estimated the "knowledge gap" using these more

aggregate skill groups, and then we re-estimated the DD and DDD models. The table shows that

the main results are qualitatively the same, and quantitatively very similar. For example, when

we only use four education groups the DD model yields a coefficient of 0.086 vs. 0.103 of the

preferred specification. Both coefficients are significant at any conventional levels. The DDD

models are also similar: 0.146 vs. 0.122. Overall, the main results are robust to the definition of

the skill groups.


       We also tested if the results are robust to controlling for the sizes of the occupational

labor force. Autor and others found that middle-skilled occupations have shrunk in recent

decades partly due to computerization. It is possible that our results are related to this change,



                                                  29
and perhaps they are driven by it. Table B4 in the appendix shows models of the yearly

employment  non-participation and employment  unemployment transition probabilities

when we control for the size of the occupational work force. More precisely we estimated the

ratio of the number of workers in a given occupation in a given year (using each monthly CPS

surveys in that year) to the number of workers in that occupations in 2002 (before 2002) and

2003 (after 2003). This ratio was, by design, equal to one in 2002 and 2003, and the variable

showed trends in the number of workers in the 191 occupations. 14 Table B4 shows that the DD

models are virtually identical to the inclusion of these occupational share variables. The DDD

estimates are not shown, but they were found to be perfectly identical to our preferred

specifications, because the occupational shares do not vary by age (i.e. they are the same for the

40-49 and the 50-69-year old groups), and the DDD models identify from those differences.

4.3.4. Subgroup analysis

         Table 4 shows subgroup analysis of the main results in Tables 2-3. Each model is re-

estimated on the given subsample; that is, they are not just interactions between the gap measure

and the group identifiers. The subgroup estimates scatter around the estimate for the total sample,

which strengthens the validity of the identification assumption in the total sample (because the

subgroup models' validity is more likely guaranteed). We found larger effects on females,

workers with some college education, workers aged 60-64, and workers in office jobs. Females

may have been more affected by computerization because they were less likely to learn to use

computers than men. Office workers may have been more strongly affected than workers in other

occupations, because computerization wiped out some of those middle-skilled jobs (Autor et al,



14
  We verified that, similarly to the literature, the constructed measure showed a decline in the share of workers in
middle skilled occupations, such as office and administration, and it showed increasing shares in high skilled
production and managerial, as well as low skilled personal care jobs.



                                                          30
2003). Moreover, workers in office jobs may have had less freedom in choosing whether they

want to work with computers, compared to workers in more skilled professional jobs, for

example. We also found that the effects were strongest among 60-64-year old workers. The

oldest 65-69-year-old workers may have experienced a larger knowledge gap than 60-64-year

old workers, but the fact that they continued working to an older age may reveal that they are not

average workers.


4.4. The effect of knowledge gap on wages

        We use the same DD and DDD type models to estimate the effect of the knowledge gap

on log annual wage and salary income of older workers in the CPS-ASEC. Table 5 shows the

results. The first three columns do not restrict the sample by the number of weeks workers

worked, and therefore they mix wage and labor supply effects. The second three columns restrict

the sample to full-year workers.


        The first three columns (no weeks restriction) show very large and quite robust effects on

wages. A 0.1 increase in knowledge gap, for example, is estimated to decrease annual wage and

salary income by 6-7 percent. When we restrict the sample to full-year workers, the DD estimate

does not change, but the more reliable DDD estimates shrink to about 0.25. This implies that a

0.1 increase in the knowledge gap decreases wages by about 2.5 percent. This is a relatively

small effect, but nevertheless, is highly statistically significant.


        In Table 6 we report subgroup estimates, in which we re-estimated the models within

each of the population subgroups. Similar to the transition probabilities, we found larger effects

on females, workers with some college education, and office workers. We found that 65-69-year-

old workers suffered the largest negative wage effects. The model also predicted a counter-




                                                   31
intuitive positive wage effect on the self-employed as well as on operators and laborers, but the

standard errors on these coefficients were quite large.


4.5. The effect of knowledge gap on workers' beliefs, mental health, and retirement

        We finally present results based on the HRS that contain additional information about

individuals' mental health, retirement expectations and job characteristics. All estimates are

based on the DD methodology, since the HRS only includes workers above age 50.


        Table 7 is based on 55-59-year-old workers between 1992 and 2014, and for some

outcomes we follow these individuals to older ages in the panel. The first four columns of the

table investigate outcome variables at the baseline age window of 55-59. P62 and P65 mean

workers' own subjective reports of the probability that they would work after age 62 or 65

measured at baseline. As expected, the knowledge gap had a strong negative effect on these

probabilities, implying that these workers expected to retire earlier. Then we looked at wages,

and similar to the CPS-ASEC model, we found a strong negative effect on wages. Finally, in

columns 3-4 we looked at job satisfaction and mental health, but we found no statistically

significant effects.


        Next, we make use of the panel structure of the HRS more directly. We took workers at

age 55-59 from the 1992-2004 waves, and then followed them until they turned age 65. Columns

5-7 of Table 7 show how the gap at baseline (at age 55-59) predicted various outcomes at age 65.

We found that workers were significantly less likely to work in a full-time job at age 65. The

effect on any work, including part-time jobs, was also negative, but not statistically significant.

We also found that workers with a knowledge gap worked significantly fewer years between the




                                                 32
baseline year and age 65. Overall, we robustly found that workers with a knowledge gap retired

earlier.


5. Discussion and conclusion

           This paper explored the implications of the cognitive demands posed by computerization

for the length of working life of older workers. While technological change may reduce the

physical demands of work, allowing workers to retire later; rapid advances in technology may

increase the cognitive demands of work, making it harder for some older workers to continue

working until the age they planned to. The development of computers and the ubiquitous spread

of computerization throughout the economy largely occurred in the 1980s and 1990s, after

members of older birth cohorts had completed their formal education and, in many cases, after

they had chosen an occupation during their early labor market careers. Economic theory implies

that rapid technological change will lead to obsolescence of a worker's skills unless the worker

(and the employer) makes investments in human capital to keep up with and adapt to the new

technology. For older workers who are close to the end of their working lives, however, it may

not be optimal to make such investments, and they may be forced into early retirement.


           We first used data from Current Population Survey supplements to track the fraction of

workers who used computers and the Internet at work and at home between 1984 and 2017 in

different skill and age groups. Skill groups were defined by the detailed 3-digit occupations of

the workers as well as their gender, education, and race. We showed that workers in different

skill groups started using computers at different times; older workers tended to start using

computers with a delay compared to younger workers; but the difference largely disappearedby

the early 2010s. We hypothesized that this knowledge gap between younger and older workers

placed pressure on older workers to adopt the new technology.


                                                  33
       In the second part of the paper, we tested how the estimated knowledge gap in

computerization between younger and older workers affected the labor market outcomes of older

workers. To do so, we used millions of observations from the basic monthly CPS, the CPS

Annual Social and Economic Supplement, and the Health and Retirement Study. Importantly,

our empirical models used time-series variation in computerization for identification. A growing

recent literature has used occupation measures, such as based on the O*NET or the DOT, to

study how workers' job characteristics affected their labor market outcomes. These measures

only provide cross-sectional variations based on the workers' occupations. Our empirical

specifications, however, directly controlled for skills (i.e. 3-digit occupations, education, etc.)

and time fixed effects. These models hold workers' skills constant and compare birth cohorts that

were affected by computerization at different times in their careers, while controlling for general

economic conditions with year fixed effects. We also developed an even more general empirical

framework, in which we directly controlled for skill-year interactions, and we used younger (40-

49 or 25-49-year-old) individuals in the same skill group and year as the "control group". .

Essentially these models tracked the differences in the outcome variables between younger and

older workers (such as the wage gap between them) as a function of the knowledge gap and

controlling for a full interaction between the skill and time fixed effects.


       We found robust evidence that the knowledge gap shortened the working lives of older

workers, it pushed many full-time workers into part-time jobs, and it lowered their wages. For

example, a knowledge gap of 0.1 (or 10%, which was not uncommon in higher skilled

occupations in the late `80s and early `90s), increased yearly employment  not-in-labor-force

transition probabilities by about 1-1.4 percentage points among 50-69-year-old workers. This is




                                                  34
quite a large effect, because the sample mean of this transition probability is only 8 percentage

points.


          We ran detailed subgroup analysis in which the same empirical models were estimated on

narrower population subgroups, such as on workers with the same level of education, or workers

in the same 1-digit occupations. The primary reason to estimate these models were to probe

heterogeneity in the estimated effects. The secondary reason was to test the robustness of our

findings because the identification assumptions of the statistical models were more likely

satisfied in narrower, more homogeneous population subgroups. We found that the subgroup

effects scattered around the total effect, and that the effects were larger on females, on middle-

skilled workers (such as workers with some college education and office workers), and workers

in the 55-64 age range. Middle-skilled and office workers may have been more strongly affected

by computerization than workers in other occupations, because computerization wiped out more

jobs in these occupations as discussed by Autor et al (2003) and many follow-up works. It is also

possible that these workers had less freedom to choose whether they want to work with

computers, compared to workers in more skilled professional jobs, which led to a larger effect in

these groups.


          We estimated models on other outcomes, but we found small, and inconsistent effects on

occupational downgrading, such as transitions into lower paid occupations, and on the mental

health of workers measured in the HRS. We ran a number of alternative specifications of the

empirical models, such as defining skill groups in narrower or broader ways (to derive the

knowledge gap measure and to control for skill fixed effects), or controlling for different sets of

control variables, and we found the main results of the paper to be robust to these assumptions.




                                                 35
       Computer technology improved the productivity of many workers over the past decades.

Our results, however, indicate that many older workers retired earlier than "normal" when

computerization first penetrated their occupations. This finding is consistent with a model of

obsolescence in which older workers are in competition with younger workers who have learned

cutting edge skills in their formal education or during the earlier years in their careers.


       Even though our empirical models were guided by economic theory, a limitation of our

study is that we did not estimate an equilibrium model of skill-formation, occupation choice, and

retirement. Estimating such a model is beyond the scope of this paper, but it would be an

interesting extension of our work. For example, it would be interesting to study why

observationally equivalent older workers decided to learn or not learn how to use computers.


       Nevertheless, a major empirical finding of the paper is that computerization did, on

average, have a significant effect on inducing earlier retirement. The negative effects of

computerization due to knowledge gap for cohorts that have already retired are unlikely to have a

major effect on future cohorts because the gaps have largely disappeared during the past decade.

Obsolescence due to continuing rapid progress (AI, robots, etc.) will continue to challenge older

workers. However continued reductions in the physical demands of work resulting from

computerization may offset some of the pressure for early retirement on workers in the post-

Retiree cohorts who will enter their 60s with computer knowledge and skills required by their

occupations and less competition from relatively smaller younger cohorts.


   We believe that by studying the effect of computerization, arguably the most important

technological advancement of our times, we gain a better understanding of the broader question

of how technological change, which is a continuous and ongoing process, helps or discourages




                                                  36
the elderly to keep up with technology by investing in their human capital, and ability to work

longer. An open question that we did not address in this paper is the extent to which the effect of

computerization on the increase of inequality in the wage distribution by education and

occupation since the late 1970s will be reduced for future cohorts. These cohorts have been

introduced to computer use as toddlers. They may grow up to regard computers as just another

tool to use in combination with their uniquely human capabilities as they pursue careers in the

economy of the future. Or, alternatively, will the prediction of the redundancy of labor finally

come to pass?




                                                37
References

Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D. H. (2011). Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for

       Employment and Earnings. In Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 4, Orley

       Ashenfelter and David E. Card (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier: 1043­1171.

Aubert, P., Caroli, E, Roger, M. (2006). New Technologies, Organisation and Age: FirmLevel

       Evidence. The Economic Journal, 116(509): F73­F93.

Autor, D. H., Levy, F., Murnane, R. J. (2003). The Skill Content of Recent Technological

       Change: An Empirical Exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4): 1279­1333.

Autor, D. H., Katz, L. F., Kearney, M. S. (2006). The Polarization of the US Labor Market.

       American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 96(2): 189­194.

Autor, D. H. (2014). Skills, Education and the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the "Other 99

       Percent." Science, 344(6186): 843­851.

Ahituv, A. and Zeira, J. (2010). Technical Progress and Early Retirement. The Economic

       Journal, 121 (March), 171­193.

Belbase, A. and Chen, A. (2019). How Did Computerization Since the 1980s Affect Older

       Workers? Issues in Brief, ib2019-19, Center for Retirement Research.

Berman, E., J. Bound, and Z. Griliches (1994). Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within

       U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers. Quarterly

       Journal of Economics, 109(2): 367­397.

Biagi, F., Cavapozzi, D., and Miniaci, R. (2013). Employment Transitions and Computer Use of

       Older Workers. Applied Economics, 45(6): 687­696.

Blanchard, O. J. and P. Diamond (1990). The Cyclical Behavior of the Gross Flows of U.S.

       Workers. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 21(2): 85­156.




                                                38
Borghans, L. and ter Weel, B. (2002). Do Older Workers Have More Trouble Using a Computer

       than Younger Workers? In de Grip, A., van Loo, J. and Mayhew, K. (Ed.) The

       Economics of Skills Obsolescence, Research in Labor Economics, Emerald Group

       Publishing Limited, Bingley, (21): 139­173. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0147-

       9121(02)21009-2

Burstein, A., Morales, E., and Vogel, J. (2019). Changes in Between-Group Inequality:

       Computers, Occupations, and International Trade. American Economic Journal:

       Macroeconomics, 11(2): 348­400.

Carr, D. C., Castora-Binkley, M., Kail, B. K., Willis, R. J., and Carstensen L. (2020). Alternative

       Retirement Paths and Cognitive Performance: Exploring the Role of Preretirement Job

       Complexity. The Gerontologist, 60(3): 460­471.

Deming, D. J. and Noray, K. L. (2018). STEM Careers and the Changing Skill Requirements of

       Work. NBER Working Paper No. 25065.

Drew, J. A., Flood, S., & Warren, J. R. (2014). Making Full Use of the Longitudinal Design of

       the Current Population Survey: Methods for Linking Records Across 16 Months. Journal

       of economic and social measurement, 39(3): 121­144. doi:10.3233/JEM-140388.

Firpo, S., Fortin, N. M., and Lemieux, T. (2011). Occupational Tasks and Changes in the Wage

       Structure. Working paper.

Freeman, R. (2018). Has AI/Robotics Contributed to the Shift in Labor Market to Older

       Workers? Working paper presented at the 2018 Working Longer and Retirement

       Conference, SIEPR.




                                                39
Friedberg, L. (2003). The Impact of Technological Change on Older Workers: Evidence from

       Data on Computer Use. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56(3): 511­529.

       doi:10.2307/3590922

Gaggl, P. and Wright, G. C. (2017). A Short-Run View of What Computers Do: Evidence from a

       UK Tax Incentive. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9 (3): 262­94.

Goldin, C. and Katz, L. F. (2008). The Race Between Education and Technology. Cambridge,

       MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. (2013). Six Decades of Top Economics Publishing: Who and How?

       Journal of Economic Literature, 51(1): 162­72.

Hudomiet, P. (2015). The role of occupation specific adaptation costs in explaining the

       educational gap in unemployment. Working paper.

Hurd, M. D. (2009). Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys. Annual Review of

       Economics, 1. 543­562.

Leiner, B, M., Cerf, V. G., Clark, D. D., Kahn, R. E., Kleinrock, L., Lynch, D. C., et al. (1997)

       "A Brief History of the Internet." Internet Society, downloaded from

       https://www.internetsociety.org/internet/history-internet/brief-history-internet/.

Rosen, S. (1975). Measuring the Obsolescence of Knowledge, Education, Income, and Human

       Behavior. NBER, 199­232.

Schleife, K. (2006). Computer Use and Employment Status of Older Workers -- An Analysis

       Based on Individual Data. Labour, 20(2): 325­348.

Shimer, R. (2012). Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment. Review of Economic

       Dynamics, 15(2): 127­148.




                                                40
Sonnega, A., Helppie-McFall, B., Hudomiet, P., Willis, R. J., & Fisher, G. G. (2018). A

       Comparison of Subjective and Objective Job Demands and Fit with Personal Resources

       as Predictors of Retirement Timing in a National U.S. Sample. Work, aging and

       retirement, 4(1), 37­51. doi:10.1093/workar/wax016.

Weinberg, B. (2002). New Technologies, Skills Obsolescence, and Skill Complementarity. In de

       Grip, A., van Loo, J. and Mayhew, K. (Ed.) The Economics of Skills Obsolescence,

       Research in Labor Economics, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingley, (21): 101­

       118. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0147-9121(02)21007-9




                                               41
Figures and Tables


Figure 1. Estimated computer and Internet use by the year of labor market entry and labor
market experience, CPS 1984-2017
                          A: Computer use at work                                                    B: Internet use at work
              1.00                                                                       1.00
              0.90                                                                       0.90
              0.80                                                                       0.80
              0.70                                                                       0.70
              0.60                                                                       0.60
   Fraction




                                                                              Fraction
              0.50                                                                       0.50
              0.40                                                                       0.40
              0.30                                                                       0.30
              0.20                                                                       0.20
              0.10                                                                       0.10
              0.00                                                                       0.00
                     10          20                     30          40                          10          20                     30          40
                                  Labor market experience                                                    Labor market experience

                                 1950-1959              1960-1969                                           1950-1959              1960-1969
                                 1970-1979              1980-1989                                           1970-1979              1980-1989
                                 1990-1999              2000-2009                                           1990-1999              2000-2009



                          C: Computer use at home                                                    D: Internet use at home
              1.00                                                                       1.00
              0.90                                                                       0.90
              0.80                                                                       0.80
              0.70                                                                       0.70
              0.60                                                                       0.60
   Fraction




                                                                              Fraction




              0.50                                                                       0.50
              0.40                                                                       0.40
              0.30                                                                       0.30
              0.20                                                                       0.20
              0.10                                                                       0.10
              0.00                                                                       0.00
                     10          20                     30          40                          10          20                     30          40
                                  Labor market experience                                                    Labor market experience

                                 1950-1959              1960-1969                                           1950-1959              1960-1969
                                 1970-1979              1980-1989                                           1970-1979              1980-1989
                                 1990-1999              2000-2009                                           1990-1999              2000-2009


*Model estimates based on data from the CPS Computerization supplements, 1984-2017. The x-axis represents Mincerian labor
market experience defined as age minus years of education minus 6. The six lines correspond to cohorts that entered the labor
market in consecutive decades.




                                                                         42
Figure 2. Computer and Internet use at work by education and age, CPS 1984-2017
          A: Computer use at work, HS dropouts                        B: Computer use at work, High school
  1.000                                                       1.000
  0.800                                                       0.800
  0.600                                                       0.600
  0.400                                                       0.400
  0.200                                                       0.200
  0.000                                                       0.000
            1984   1989   1993    1997   2001     2003                 1984   1989    1993    1997   2001     2003

       Age 30-39   Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69            Age 30-39    Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69


          C: Computer use at work, Some college                        D: Computer use at work, College
  1.000                                                       1.000
  0.800                                                       0.800
  0.600                                                       0.600
  0.400                                                       0.400
  0.200                                                       0.200
  0.000                                                       0.000
            1984   1989   1993    1997   2001     2003                 1984   1989    1993    1997   2001     2003

       Age 30-39   Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69            Age 30-39    Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69


           E: Internet use at work, HS dropouts                        F: Internet use at work, High school
  1.000                                                       1.000
  0.800                                                       0.800
  0.600                                                       0.600
  0.400                                                       0.400
  0.200                                                       0.200
  0.000                                                       0.000
           1997 2001 2003 2011 2013 2015 2017                         1997 2001 2003 2011 2013 2015 2017

       Age 30-39   Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69            Age 30-39    Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69


          G: Internet use at work, Some college                         H: Internet use at work, College
  1.000                                                       1.000
  0.800                                                       0.800
  0.600                                                       0.600
  0.400                                                       0.400
  0.200                                                       0.200
  0.000                                                       0.000
           1997 2001 2003 2011 2013 2015 2017                         1997 2001 2003 2011 2013 2015 2017

       Age 30-39   Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69            Age 30-39    Age 40-49     Age 50-59   Age 60-69

 *Data: CPS Computerization supplements, 1984-2017




                                                         43
Figure 3. Estimated knowledge gap in computer use by education and age, CPS 1984-2017
                        A: Age 50-54                                                          B: Age 55-59
        0.50                                                                  0.50
        0.45                                                                  0.45
        0.40                                                                  0.40
        0.35                                                                  0.35
        0.30                                                                  0.30
  Gap




                                                                        Gap
        0.25                                                                  0.25
        0.20                                                                  0.20
        0.15                                                                  0.15
        0.10                                                                  0.10
        0.05                                                                  0.05
        0.00                                                                  0.00
               1980   1990             2000     2010        2020                     1980   1990             2000     2010        2020
                                       year                                                                  year

                             HS dropout       High school                                          HS dropout       High school
                             Some college     College                                              Some college     College



                        C: Age 60-64                                                          D: Age 65-69
        0.50                                                                  0.50
        0.45                                                                  0.45
        0.40                                                                  0.40
        0.35                                                                  0.35
        0.30                                                                  0.30
  Gap




                                                                        Gap


        0.25                                                                  0.25
        0.20                                                                  0.20
        0.15                                                                  0.15
        0.10                                                                  0.10
        0.05                                                                  0.05
        0.00                                                                  0.00
               1980   1990             2000     2010        2020                     1980   1990             2000     2010        2020
                                       year                                                                  year

                             HS dropout       High school                                          HS dropout       High school
                             Some college     College                                              Some college     College




                                                                   44
  Table 1. Computer Innovations by Life Cycle Stage of Workers
                                                        Years when workers...
                                                               ... gained 10        ... gained 20
                     ... graduated        ... graduated            years of             years of
    Birth year              HS                college         experience**          experience          ... turned 65
    1920                  1938                 1942                 1952                 1962                1985
    1930                  1948                 1952                 1962                 1972                1995
    1940                  1958                 1962                 1972                 1982                2005
    1950                  1968                 1972                 1982                 1992                2015
    1960                  1978                 1982                 1992                 2002                2025
    1970                  1988                 1992                 2002                 2012                2035
    1980                  1998                 2002                 2012                 2022                2045
   *Innovations in computer technology
                     Digital computer invented                                       World wide web launched
                     Mainframe introduced                                            Growth of internet
                     Mini-computer introduced                                        Smart phones, apps
                     Personal computer introduced
  ** The table shows potential labor market experience of a college graduate worker.




  Table 2. Linear probability models of yearly transition probabilities between labor market
  states
                                    Employment  Nonparticipation                               Employment  Unemployment
                                  Age 50-69 Age 40-69   Age 25-69                           Age 50-69 Age 40-69  Age 25-69
                                  DD model DDD model DDD model                              DD model DDD model DDD model
                                     [1]       [2]          [3]                                [4]        [5]       [6]
Knowledge gap                       0.103     0.122       0.140                              -0.012     -0.004     0.001
                                   [0.010]***        [0.009]***        [0.008]***            [0.003]***         [0.003]          [0.003]
Skill, year, month, age FE           Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes            Yes
Skill X year FE                       -                Yes                Yes                   -                 Yes            Yes
R-squared                           0.075             0.182              0.143                0.025              0.132          0.104
N                                 2,635,562         4,782,190          7,380,573            2,635,562          4,782,190      7,380,573
Mean outcome                        0.080             0.059              0.054                0.018              0.019          0.021
  * Basic monthly CPS, 1984-2018. Skill fixed effects include full interactions between gender, education, race & ethnicity,
  occupations (191 categories), and five-year age categories from age 50-54 to 65-69. In the DDD models individuals younger
  than age 50 are randomly assigned to one of the four age categories. Age fixed effects include single age dummies, without
  rewriting the ages of individuals below age 50. Skill X year fixed effects include full interactions between the skill fixed effects
  and years.




                                                                    45
    Table 3. Linear probability models of yearly transition probabilities between job types among
    those who remain employed
                                   Full-time  Part-time                  Employment  Lower                  Employment  Less
                                                                           paid occupation                   computerized occ.
                                 Age 50-69       Age 40-69              Age 50-69      Age 40-69         Age 50-69       Age 40-69
                                 DD model        DDD model              DD model       DDD model         DD model        DDD model
                                    [1]             [2]                    [3]             [4]              [5]              [6]
Knowledge gap                      0.057           0.061                  0.001          -0.046           -0.003           -0.029
                                  [0.009]***       [0.008]***             [0.010]       [0.010]***          [0.009]       [0.009]***
Skill, year, month, age FE          Yes              Yes                   Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes
Skill X year FE                      -               Yes                    -              Yes                -              Yes
R-squared                          0.060            0.164                 0.150           0.249             0.126           0.232
N                                2,026,269         3832080              2,375,686       4,407,937         2,375,686       4,407,937
Mean outcome                       0.053            0.046                 0.157           0.159             0.112           0.113
    * Basic monthly CPS, 1984-2018. See Table 2 for definitions of the control variables.




    Table 4. Linear probability models of yearly transition probabilities in various population
    subgroups, coefficients on knowledge gap
                                          Emp  OLF                         Emp  Unemp                   Full  part-time
            Subgroups                  coef       s.e.                    coef       s.e.              coef        s.e.
     Total sample                     0.122   [0.009]***                -0.004     [0.003]            0.061    [0.008]***
     Males                            0.073   [0.010]***                -0.001     [0.004]            0.041    [0.009]***
     Females                          0.178   [0.016]***                -0.010   [0.005]**            0.091    [0.016]***
     High school                      0.132   [0.019]***                 0.027  [0.007]***            0.082    [0.019]***
     Some college                     0.188   [0.020]***                -0.005     [0.007]            0.120    [0.018]***
     College                          0.106   [0.011]***                -0.019  [0.004]***            0.036    [0.010]***
     Age 50-54                        0.053   [0.017]***                -0.014     [0.013]            0.022      [0.017]
     Age 55-59                        0.142   [0.015]***                -0.015    [0.009]*            0.031     [0.013]**
     Age 60-64                        0.169   [0.014]***                -0.005     [0.005]            0.042    [0.011]***
     Age 65-69                        0.099   [0.014]***                 0.000     [0.004]            0.089    [0.014]***
     Private sector                   0.145   [0.011]***                -0.008    [0.004]*            0.089    [0.010]***
     Public sector                    0.148   [0.021]***                -0.002     [0.005]            0.009      [0.016]
     Self-employed                    0.028     [0.018]                 -0.001     [0.005]            0.019      [0.021]
     Management                       0.170   [0.015]***                -0.034  [0.006]***            0.071    [0.012]***
     Professionals                    0.129   [0.017]***                -0.005     [0.005]            0.016      [0.015]
     Sales                            0.130   [0.021]***                -0.021   [0.009]**            0.130    [0.022]***
     Office/Administration            0.237   [0.023]***                -0.011     [0.008]            0.154    [0.023]***
     Precision production             0.097    [0.043]**                 0.045   [0.019]**           -0.138    [0.031]***
     Operators/laborers               0.025     [0.064]                  0.102  [0.030]***           -0.135    [0.052]***
    * Basic monthly CPS, 1984-2018. Each coefficient corresponds to a different estimation model. The specification is the DDD
    model including skill, age, year, month, and skill X year fixed effects, and including 40-69-year old workers. Each model was
    estimated on the population subgroups represented by the rows of the table, except for the age subgroups that always include
    the 40-49-year old control group. See Table 2 for definitions of the control variables.




                                                                   46
Table 5. Models of log annual earnings

                                             All workers                                    Full-year workers
                             Age 50-69       Age 40-69        Age 25-69            Age 50-69 Age 40-69 Age 25-69
                             DD model            DDD            DDD                DD model        DDD         DDD
                                                model          model                              model       model
                                 [1]              [3]            [4]                  [1]           [3]         [4]
 Knowledge gap                 -0.646           -0.744         -0.730               -0.611        -0.259      -0.243
                              [0.043]***      [0.044]***       [0.038]***           [0.036]***      [0.037]***       [0.032]***
 Skill, year, age FE             Yes             Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes              Yes
 Skill X year FE                  -              Yes              Yes                   -             Yes              Yes
 Constant                       9.907           10.107           9.770               10.258          10.322           10.052
                              [0.010]***      [0.004]***       [0.004]***           [0.009]***      [0.003]***       [0.003]***
 R-squared                     0.358            0.492           0.451                0.409            0.537           0.497
 N                            674,794         1,361,999       2,429,273             539,748         1,110,225       1,938,382
* CPS-ASEC, 1984-2018. Full-year workers are defined as working for at least 50 weeks a year. Occupations correspond to
individual's longest jobs during the previous calendar year. See Table 2 for definitions of the control variables.




Table 6. Models of log annual earnings in various population subgroups
                                          All workers                       Full-year workers
        Subgroups                     coef            s.e.                 coef           s.e.
 Total sample                       -0.744       [0.044]***              -0.235       [0.038]***
 Males                              -0.256       [0.055]***               0.032         [0.047]
 Females                            -1.278       [0.076]***              -0.586       [0.064]***
 High school                        -0.897       [0.091]***              -0.268       [0.078]***
 Some college                       -1.169       [0.096]***              -0.662       [0.084]***
 College                            -0.553       [0.062]***              -0.058         [0.051]
 Age 50-54                          -0.255         [0.152]*              -0.275        [0.132]**
 Age 55-59                          -0.605       [0.105]***              -0.136         [0.089]
 Age 60-64                          -0.446       [0.074]***               0.013         [0.063]
 Age 65-69                          -0.990       [0.072]***              -0.421       [0.064]***
 Private sector                     -0.781       [0.052]***              -0.325       [0.044]***
 Public sector                      -1.028       [0.118]***              -0.257       [0.075]***
 Self-employed                       0.430        [0.203]**               0.475        [0.205]**
 Management                         -0.610       [0.078]***              -0.170       [0.065]***
 Professionals                      -0.666       [0.089]***              -0.194       [0.069]***
 Sales                              -0.286        [0.129]**               0.310       [0.119]***
 Office/Administration              -1.404       [0.113]***              -0.636       [0.096]***
 Precision production                0.046          [0.176]              -0.175         [0.148]
 Operators/laborers                  1.082       [0.297]***               0.671        [0.288]**
* CPS-ASEC, 1984-2018. The specification is the DDD model including skill, age, year, and skill X year fixed effects, and including
40-69-year old workers. Each model was estimated on the population subgroups represented by the rows of the table, except
for the age subgroups that always include the 40-49-year old control group. Full-year workers are defined as working for at
least 50 weeks a year. Occupations correspond to individual's longest jobs during the previous calendar year. See Table 2 for
definitions of the control variables.




                                                                47
       Table 7. Models of additional outcomes from the HRS

                         Outcomes measured at baseline age 55-59                                   Outcomes measured at age 65
                                log hourly     Enjoys        CESD                                                             Years
                       P65         wage         work      depression                             Works        Works FT      worked
                        [1]         [2]          [3]          [4]                                  [5]           [6]           [7]
Knowledge gap         -0.661      -0.955       0.050        -0.141                               -0.677        -1.157        -7.844
                     [0.214]***       [0.412]**         [0.325]           [1.648]                [0.571]             [0.492]**       [3.367]**
R-squared             0.251            0.515            0.272             0.300                   0.293               0.288              0.305
N                     11,761           11,041           9,366             9,597                   6,162               6,162              6,162
Mean outcome          0.311            2.673            0.877             1.192                   0.457               0.242              7.299
       * HRS, 1992-2014, age 55-59. The models include skill, year, month, and age fixed effects. The skill fixed effects include full
       interactions between gender, education, race & ethnicity, occupations (191 categories), and five-year age categories from age
       50-54 to 65-69. Baseline outcomes are measured at the first HRS wave when the person is observed in the 55-59 range. Age 65
       outcomes are measured at the first time the individual is observed after the age of 65. P65 measures individuals' subjective
       expectations about the probability of working after age 65. Works FT refers to working full-time. Years worked is measured as
       the number of years worked between age 65 and the baseline wave.




                                                                     48
49
