                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         INNOVATION AND HUMAN CAPITAL POLICY

                                           John Van Reenen

                                         Working Paper 28713
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w28713


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2021




This builds on work with many co-authors, in particular Nick Bloom and Heidi Williams. I am
grateful for comments by Ben Jones, Austan Goolsbee and an anonymous referee. This research
was supported in part by the Sloan Foundation; Schmitt Sciences, the Smith Richardson
Foundation and the Economic and Social Research Council. The content is solely the
responsibility of the author and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NBER.
For acknowledgments, sources of research support, and disclosure of the author's material
financial relationships, if any, please see
https://www.nber.org/books-and-chapters/innovation-and-public-policy/innovation-and-human-
capital-policy.

The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by John Van Reenen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Innovation and Human Capital Policy
John Van Reenen
NBER Working Paper No. 28713
April 2021
JEL No. O31,O32

                                           ABSTRACT

If innovation is to be subsidized, a natural place to start is to increase the quantity and quality of
human capital. Innovation, after all, begins with people. Simply stimulating the "demand side"
through R&D subsidies and tax breaks may only drive up the price, rather than the volume of
research activity. By contrast, increasing the supply of potential inventors can both directly
increase innovation and reduce its cost. This paper examines the evidence on human capital
policies for stimulating innovation such as expanding the home-grown workforce, fostering
immigration, boosting universities and reducing barriers to entry into inventor careers, especially
for under-represented groups. The evidence suggests targeting high ability but disadvantaged
potential inventors at an early age is likely to have the largest long-run effects on growth.


John Van Reenen
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
j.vanreenen@lse.ac.uk
1 Introduction
       Since the 1970s, US productivity growth has slowed--reflected in falling total GDP
growth from 4 percent in the postwar years, to under 3 percent from the mid-1970s, and to under
2 percent since 2000. Moreover, slow productivity growth has been accompanied by
disappointing real wage growth for most US workers, as well as rising wage inequality. At the
time of writing, the COVID pandemic has damaged productivity more than any other shock in
living memory.
       Innovation is the only way for the most developed countries to secure sustainable long-
run productivity growth. For nations further from the technological frontier, catch-up growth is a
viable option, but there are limits to such a strategy for leading-edge economies such as the
United States. Certainly, even in the United States, many firms are well behind the technological
frontier, and helping these firms catch up--for example, by improving management practices--
would be valuable (e.g., Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007). Nonetheless, innovation policy design is
a key part of any solution for revitalizing America, and it will lead to large long-run increases in
welfare.
       The attraction of human capital policies for innovation is that they act directly on the
supply side, to increase the number of potential and actual innovators. Romer (2001) emphasized
the advantage of supply side policies. Demand side policies such as tax credits and direct
government R&D grants can be effective in increasing firms' incentives to do more R&D--and
there is an impressive body of microeconomic research on this (Akcigit and Stantcheva 2020;
Bloom, Williams, and Van Reenen 2019). However, if the supply of R&D workers is very
inelastic then the risk is that the increase in demand merely drives up the equilibrium cost of
R&D without increasing its volume. In other words, the incidence of the subsidy is on innovation
prices rather than innovation quantities. This is what Goolsbee (1998) found in aggregate US
data--scientists' wages rose substantially with increased federal R&D spending. Microeconomic
analysis might miss this, as the wage increase is a general equilibrium effect, absorbed away by
the time dummies typically included in standard evaluations. Furthermore, since R&D workers
are above median-pay employees, this type of demand side policy could increase inequality as
well as providing little in the way of aggregate innovation.
       In reality, the elasticity of supply of R&D workers is unlikely to be completely fixed,
especially when we consider immigration into the United States (see below). However, in the

                                                  2
short run, supply could be relatively inelastic, so these concerns are real.
         A supply side increase in the quantity and quality of R&D workers carries fewer of these
risks. Unless the new workers are dramatically less productive than the existing stock, we would
expect a direct increase in innovation. Furthermore, the increase in supply should reduce the
equilibrium cost of R&D--meaning that a successful supply side policy provides a further
indirect boost to the amount of innovation as firms face lower R&D costs. The work in this paper
focuses on such human capital supply side policies.
         The structure of the paper is as follows. I provide some background R&D and workforce
statistics in section 2; in section 3, I discuss the rationale for innovation subsidies; in section 4, I
discuss the evidence for four types of human capital supply policies. Section 5 offers some
concluding comments.


2 Background: R&D and the Scientific Workforce2
         In 2015, spending on R&D performed in the United States was just under half a trillion
dollars. Figure 1 shows R&D spending as a fraction of GDP for major industrialized countries.
The United States spends more on R&D than any other, accounting for roughly 28 percent of
global R&D spending--see National Science Board (2018).




2 Unless otherwise noted, all data and facts in this section--and later in the paper--are drawn from National Science
    Board (2018).

                                                         3
Figure 1: R&D as a Proportion of GDP in Selected Countries, 1981-2017




Source: OECD (2019).



       Over time, however, the picture is less rosy. The United States has maintained an R&D-
to-GDP ratio of 2.5≠2.7 percent since 1981. By contrast, other countries, particularly in Asia
(Japan, South Korea, and most recently and spectacularly, China), have been devoting increasing
amounts of national income to R&D. Furthermore, although US R&D intensity has been stable
since the mid-1960s, the composition of R&D spending has changed dramatically, as
government funding has declined and private-sector funding has increased to fill the void (see
figure 2). In 2015, businesses spent more than twice as much as the federal government on R&D.
R&D spending as a share of GDP grew from around 1.3 percent in 1953 to around 2.7 percent in
2015. Government tends to fund higher-risk basic research that private investors are often
reluctant to take on. Therefore, public R&D investment tends to produce higher-value, high-
spillover (see below) inventions over a longer period of time. Despite the decline in government
R&D funding, the private sector has also invested less in basic research over time (e.g., Arora,
Belenzon, and Patacconi 2018). The decline in basic research in both public- and private-sector
R&D spending may be a reason why the productivity of American R&D appears to have fallen
over time, as documented by Bloom et al. (2020).


                                                 4
Figure 2: US R&D, by source of funds




Source: National Science Board 2018.
Note: R&D spending is categorized by funder rather than performer. Other non-federal funders
include, but are not limited to higher education, non-federal government, and other non-profit
organizations.


       In recent years, around 13 percent of US R&D is performed at colleges and universities
(accounting for just under half of all basic research). Additionally, just over half of R&D
expenditures at US colleges and universities is federally funded. The vast bulk of that funding
goes to the life sciences, with smaller amounts going to engineering, the physical sciences, and
other fields. Reflecting that distribution of federal funds across fields, the top agencies
supporting federally funded academic R&D are the Department of Health and Human Services,
the Department of Defense, and the National Science Foundation.
       These statistics focus on R&D spending, but of course, another set of metrics of
innovative activity focus on the scientific workforce. Table 1 shows that the fraction of all US
workers who are researchers has grown consistently since 1981, just like the R&D-to-GDP ratio.
There were about 5.3 researchers per thousand workers in 1981, 7.3 in 2001, and 9.23 in 2017.
However, the growth rate was faster in other advanced economies. France, Germany, and Japan
all had lower numbers in 1981, but have overtaken the United States in the most recent years.
The most dramatic change over that period has been in South Korea, where the ratio of


                                                  5
researchers per thousand employees rose from 6.3 in 2001 to 15.3 today. China's fraction of
researchers looks less impressive than its R&D spending in figure 1, but it has still more than
doubled the researcher proportion since 2001 from 1 to 2.4.


Table 1: Number of researchers per 1,000 employees, Selected Countries

             United       China       France         Germany    Korea       Japan         United
             States                                                                       Kingdom

 1981        5.28                     3.78           4.65                   5.23          5.25

 2001        7.29         1.02        6.83           6.63       6.32        9.87          6.57

 2018        9.23         2.41        10.9           9.67       15.33       9.88          9.43

Source: OECD MSTI https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=MSTI_PUB# downloaded
11.21.20; Note: US figure is for 2017.



        Another metric relevant to the size of the scientific workforce in the US is the number of
temporary work visas issued in categories that cover high-skill workers: J-1 (exchange visitors),
H-1B, and L-1 (intracompany transferee) visas. Between 1991 and 2015, the primary increase in
these categories was in J-1 visas (exchange visitors), which increased from around 150,000 to
over 330,000. The number of H-1B visas increased from around 52,000 in 1991 to nearly
175,000 in 2015; note that the H-1B cap of 65,000 was in place over that entire period, implying
that the growth was driven by H-1Bs to universities, nonprofit research facilities, and
government research facilities, all of which are exempt from the H-1B annual quotas.


3 The Case for Government Promotion of Innovation
        Governments often want to increase innovation in an attempt to encourage economic
growth; indeed, countries that have higher levels of R&D spending are typically richer (e.g.,
Jones 2015). However, standard economic theory also suggests that, in the absence of market
failures, it would be better for the government to leave investment decisions in the hands of


                                                 6
private firms. There are many oft-cited government failures (e.g., the Anglo-French supersonic
jet, Concorde; see Lerner 2005 for one discussion). On the other hand, there are also many
examples of impressive inventions built on government-sponsored R&D, such as jet engines,
radar, nuclear power, GPS, and the internet (Janeway 2012; Mazzucato 2013).
        The central market failure that economists have focused on in justifying government
intervention is knowledge spillovers. If one firm creates something truly innovative, this
knowledge may spill over to other firms through copying or by learning from the original
research--without having to pay the full R&D costs. Ideas are promiscuous; even with a well-
designed intellectual property system, the benefits of new ideas are difficult to monetize in full.
There is a long academic literature documenting the existence of these positive spillovers from
innovations.
        That said, economic theory also suggests that R&D expenditures in a market economy
can be either too low or too high, depending on the net size of knowledge spillovers and
business-stealing effects. The key idea behind business stealing is that product market rivalry can
lead to overinvestment in R&D because innovators take market share from other firms without
necessarily generating much social benefit. An oft-cited example is the case of "me-too"
pharmaceuticals, where one firm may spend billions of dollars to develop a drug that is only
incrementally better than a drug produced by a rival firm. However, the small improvement in
therapeutic value may allow the second firm to capture nearly the entire market. In cases where
me too drugs are therapeutically indistinguishable from the products they replace (and setting
aside the possibility that me too drugs may generate the benefit of price-cutting competition),
this dynamic potentially generates a massive private benefit for shareholders of pharmaceutical
firms, with little gain for patients.
        Broadly stated, three methods have been used to estimate spillovers: case studies, a
production function approach, and research based on patent citations.
        Perhaps the most famous example of a case study approach is Griliches (1958), who
estimated the social rate of return realized by public and private investments in hybrid corn. He
estimates an annual return of 700 percent, as of 1955, on the average dollar invested in hybrid
corn research. Seed or corn producers appropriated almost none of these returns; they were
instead passed to consumers in the form of lower prices and higher output. Although this study is
widely cited, Griliches himself discusses the challenges inherent in calculating the rate of return

                                                  7
on something akin to a successful "oil well." Whereas we observe an estimate that captures the
cost of drilling and developing a successful well, we would ideally prefer to generate an estimate
that includes the cost of all of the "dry holes" drilled before oil was struck.
       The second ("production function") approach abandons the details of specific
technologies and instead relates productivity growth (or other measures of innovative output) to
lagged measures of R&D investment. The key challenge is that R&D is determined by many
factors that also independently affect productivity. Recent papers applying this approach have
used policy experiments such as tax changes that influence research and development
investments to identify the arrow of causality (for example, Bloom, Schankerman, and Van
Reenen 2013).
       The key idea in using patent citations to measure spillovers is that each patent cites other
patents, in addition to associated publications, all of which form the basis of "prior art"--existing
innovations that enabled that particular patent. Trajtenberg (1990) and Jaffe, Trajtenberg, and
Henderson (1993) pioneered this approach. Although some evidence shows that citations can be
strategic (and that some citations are added by patent examiners during the course of the patent
examination process), the existence of patent citations provides a measurable indication of
knowledge spillovers (e.g., Griffith, Lee, and Van Reenen 2011).
       One challenge arising with the production function approach is how to find ways of
identifying the relevant channels of influence so that "one can detect the path of spillovers in the
sands of the data" (Griliches 1992, 31). Herein lies an advantage of using patent citations, which
provide a direct way of inferring which firms receive spillover benefits. More generally, the trick
in the search for spillovers has been to focus on defining a dimension (or dimensions) over which
knowledge spillovers are mediated. Firms less distant from each other in this dimension will be
more affected by the R&D efforts of their peers--for example, technological distance as revealed
from past patenting classes (Jaffe 1986), geographical distance between corporate R&D labs, or
product market distance (the industries in which firms operate).
       As a whole, this literature on spillovers has consistently estimated that social returns to
R&D are much higher than private returns, which provides a justification for government-
supported innovation policy (see Jones and Summers 2020). In the United States, for example,
recent estimates in Lucking, Bloom, and Van Reenen (2020) used three decades of firm-level
data and a production function≠based approach to document evidence of substantial positive net

                                                   8
knowledge spillovers. The authors estimate that social returns are about 60 percent, compared to
private returns of around 15 percent, suggesting the need for a substantial increase in public
research subsidies.
       Given this evidence on knowledge spillovers, one obvious solution is to provide strong
intellectual property rights such as patents to inventors as a means of increasing the private
return to inventing. A patent is a temporary right to exclude others from selling the protected
invention. Patents entail some efficiency loss because they usually enable sellers to charge a
higher price markup over production costs. However, this downside could be outweighed by the
gains in dynamic efficiency that arise from patents providing stronger incentives to do more
R&D because potential innovators expect to be able to appropriate more of the benefits.
However, in practice, as we will discuss in more detail below, the patent system is highly
imperfect. For one thing, other firms can frequently invent around a patent--after all, the
empirical evidence on knowledge spillovers summarized above is drawn from the United States,
which has a strong system of intellectual property rights by international standards.
       There are other potential justifications for R&D subsidies in addition to knowledge
spillovers, related to failures in other markets. For example, financial constraints may limit the
amount of innovation that firms can carry out. Because innovation is intangible, it may be hard
for firms to raise funding when they have no collateral to pledge to banks in return for debt
funding (Arrow 1962). This insight suggests that equity might be a better source of funding for
innovation, but equity faces a different challenge: an asymmetry of information. Before
innovations are patented or demonstrated in the market, the requisite secrecy about technology
makes fundraising difficult. A pitch of "trust me, I have a great idea so please fund me" is rarely
effective, whereas a pitch of "let me describe my not-yet-patented idea in detail" opens up the
possibility of potential investors stealing an idea from the entrepreneur.
       Evidence suggests that financial constraints do often hold back innovation (for a survey,
see Hall and Lerner 2010). However, the presence of financial constraints around research and
development funding is not necessarily a reason for government subsidies: governments often
have worse information about project quality than either firms or investors, so designing
appropriate policy interventions is difficult. Hence, effective government policies to address
financial constraints involve not just financial support for firms but also a mechanism to
accurately identify and select higher-quality investments, which is typically difficult.

                                                 9
4 Human Capital Innovation Policies
       We now turn to consider explicit human capital policies.


4.1 Undergraduates and Postgraduates
       The most commonly discussed policy here is to increase the number of individuals with
training in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, commonly known as STEM. The
direct way would be to subsidize PhDs and postdocs in these subjects, increasing the generosity
of support for training in these fields. Indirectly, training and subsequent careers in these fields
could be made more attractive through more grants and support, especially in labs.
       More generally, one can imagine support for raising educational attainment at an even
younger age (undergraduates and even K through12). There is a huge literature documenting the
complementarity between human capital and new technologies ("skill-biased technical change"),
so increasing human capital could have a positive effect on technical change (e.g., Autor, Goldin,
and Katz 2020; Van Reenen 2011). However, this literature is usually focused on the diffusion of
technologies (e.g., adoption of information and communications technology) rather than on
pushing forward the technological frontier. For innovation to the economy (rather than to a firm),
it is likely that postgraduate qualifications are much more important.
       Much macroeconomic analysis has been conducted of the impact of human capital on
growth (see, e.g., Sianesi and Van Reenen 2003 for a survey). However, the literature is rather
inconclusive because of the difficulty of finding credible instruments at the macro (or industry)
level. The large number of other confounders at the macroeconomic level makes it hard to infer
causality. There is a vast literature looking at the impact of schooling on wages, but there is
rather a paucity of work looking at more specific interventions on the STEM workforce.


4.2 University Expansion
       Many papers examine the role of universities in economic prosperity in general and in
innovation in particular. A major idea in these papers is that university founding and expansion
increases the supply of workers with STEM qualifications and that these STEM workers increase
innovation. There certainly appears to be a correlation between areas with strong science-based
universities and private-sector innovation (for example, Silicon Valley in California, Route 128
in Massachusetts, Research Triangle in North Carolina, and others).

                                                  10
        Valero and Van Reenen (2019), looking at 50 years of subnational data across more than
100 countries, find that the founding of a university increases local GDP per-capita growth in
subsequent years (which also spills over nationally). The Jaffe (1989) paper was a pioneer in this
area by documenting that state-level spending on university research in certain industries seems
to generate higher local corporate patenting. Acs, Audretsch, and Feldman (1992) use innovation
counts instead of patent data and find even stronger effects for spillovers from university
research. Related findings of the positive effects of university location on patenting has been
found in more recent datasets by Belenzon and Schankerman (2013), Hausman (2018), and
Andrews (2020). Furman and MacGarvie (2007) studied how universities with stronger
academic research profiles increased the growth of local industrial pharmaceutical labs from
1927 to 1946. They used land grant college funds under the Morrill Acts to generate some
exogenous variation in the location of universities to argue that the correlation is causal. In the
biotech industry, Zucker, Brewer, and Darby (1998) show that firms tend to locate near
universities to take advantage of star scientists.
        However, universities may also have other effects on innovation over and above the
supply of graduates. Firstly, research and innovation by university faculty, possibly collaborating
with private-sector firms, could also directly increase innovation. The vast literature on
clustering has this as one of the mechanisms. Secondly, universities may influence local
democratic participation and institutions, which may also have an effect on innovation. If
universities have an effect on innovation (or growth) over and above the impact on human
capital, then they are not valid instruments for human capital, as this violates the exclusion
restriction. For example, Valero and Van Reenen (2019) found that university expansion was
associated with more graduates, more innovation, and stronger institutions. Of course, the
reduced form effect of universities on innovation is still an interesting effect if it is causal, but
the mechanism through which universities raise innovation may not be solely (or even at all)
through the human capital channel.


4.2.1 Graduate Supply
        To make progress in isolating why universities may have an impact on innovation as key
suppliers of STEM workers, Toivanen and V‰‰n‰nen (2016) document that individuals growing
up around a technical university (such institutions rapidly expanded in the 1960s and 1970s in
Finland and offered postgraduate engineering) were more likely to become engineers. They

                                                     11
showed that this led to significantly greater patent activity. Establishing three technical
universities caused on average a 20 percent increase in US Patent and Trademark Office patents
by Finnish inventors. In a similar vein, Carneiro, Liu, and Salvanes (2018) compare
municipalities in Norway where there was an upsurge in government college start-ups in the
1970s to synthetic cohorts of areas where the expansion did not take place. They document
evidence for more R&D and a speed up in the rate and direction of technological progress about
a decade after the colleges' founding (if they were STEM focused).
       Bianchi and Giorcelli (2019) present the most direct test of the role of universities in
increasing STEM supply. They exploit a change in the enrollment requirements for Italian STEM
majors, which has a significant effect of expanding the number of graduates. They document that
this exogenous increase in STEM majors led to more innovation in general, with effects
concentrated in fields related to chemistry, medicine, and information technology. They also
document a general "leakage" problem that may accompany efforts to simply increase the STEM
pipeline: many STEM-trained graduates may choose to work in sectors that are not especially
focused on R&D or innovation, such as finance.


4.2.2 Research Grants to Academics (and Beyond)
       One variety of government program seeking to encourage innovation is the direct
provision of grant funding (e.g., through the National Institutes of Health, or NIH), either to
academic researchers or more widely. Spending public R&D subsidies on universities makes
economic sense as knowledge spillovers from basic academic research are likely to be much
larger than those from near-market applied research in corporations.
       Evaluating the effectiveness of grant funding for research and development is
challenging. Public research grants usually (and understandably) attempt to target the most
promising researchers, the most promising projects, or the most socially important problems. As
a result, it is difficult to construct a valid counterfactual for what would otherwise have happened
to the researchers, firms, or projects that receive public R&D funds. If $1 of public R&D simply
crowds out $1 of private R&D that would otherwise have been invested in the same project, then
public R&D could have no real effect on overall R&D allocations (much less on productivity,
growth, or other outcomes). However, it is also possible that public R&D grants add to private
R&D spending, or even that public R&D "crowds in" and attracts additional private R&D
spending.

                                                 12
       Jacob and Lefgren (2011) use administrative data on US grant applications to the NIH
and effectively compare academic applicants that just received and just missed receiving large
NIH grants. They document that these grants produce positive but small effects on research
output, leading to about one additional publication over five years (an increase of 7 percent). One
explanation for this modest effect is that marginal unsuccessful NIH grant applicants often obtain
other sources of funding to continue their research. Consistent with that story, productivity
effects are larger among researchers who are likely to be more reliant on NIH funding (for whom
alternative funding sources may be less likely to be available).
       Looking beyond academic output, public research and development grants may affect
private firms in several ways. First, public R&D grants to academics can generate spillovers to
private firms (as discussed above). Azoulay et al. (2019a) exploit quasi-experimental variation in
funding from the National Institutes of Health across research areas to show that a $10 million
increase in NIH funding to academics leads to 2.7 additional patents filed by private firms.
Second, private firms themselves sometimes conduct publicly funded R&D. Moretti,
Steinwender, and Van Reenen (2019) use changes in military R&D spending, which is
frequently driven by exogenous political changes, to look at the effect of public subsidies for
military R&D. They document that a 10 percent increase in publicly funded R&D to private
firms results in about a 4 percent increase in private R&D, suggesting that public R&D crowds in
private R&D (and also, they document, raises productivity growth). Third, private firms can
directly receive public subsidies. Howell (2017) examines outcomes for Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) grant applicants, comparing marginal winners and losers. She
estimates that early-stage Department of Energy SBIR grants roughly double the probability that
a firm will receive subsequent venture capital funding, and that receipt of an SBIR grant has
positive impacts on firm revenue and patenting. Howell et al. (2021) find that SBIR grants in the
US Air Force also have positive effects on these measures of innovation.


4.2.3 National Labs
       Governments can also fund their own R&D labs--for example, SLAC National
Accelerator Laboratory at Stanford University. These labs can generate more research activity
and employment in the technological and geographical area in which the lab specializes. Jaffe
and Lerner (2001) analyze national labs, which are often managed by universities, and document
evidence of spillovers. The United Kingdom's Synchrotron Diamond Light Source appeared to

                                                13
create spillovers (Helmers and Overman 2017), but it seems in that case to have occurred mainly
through relocation of research activity within the country rather than by spurring an increase in
nationwide research efforts.


4.2.4 Academic Incentives
          Controversy has arisen over how to design complementary policies that enable the
resulting discoveries--when made at universities--to be translated into technologies that benefit
consumers. The 1980 Bayh-Dole Act in the United States made some key changes in the
ownership of inventions developed with public R&D support. In part because of Bayh-Dole,
universities have an ownership share in the intellectual property developed by those working at
their institutions, and many universities set up "technology transfer offices" to provide additional
support to the commercialization of research. Lach and Schankerman (2008) provide evidence
consistent with greater ownership of innovations by scientists being associated with more
innovation. In addition, evidence from Norway presented in Hvide and Jones (2018) suggests
that when university researchers enjoy the full rights to their innovations, they are more likely to
patent inventions as well as to launch start-ups. That is, ideas that might have remained in the
ivory tower appear more likely to be turned into real products because of changes in the financial
returns to academic researchers.


4.3 Immigration
          Migration offers an alternative lens into the effects of human capital on innovation.
Historically, the US has had a relatively open immigration policy compared to other developed
countries, which helped to make the nation a magnet for talent. Immigrants account for about 14
percent of the US workforce but make up 17≠18 percent of college graduates and 52 percent of
STEM doctorates. They also account for about a quarter of all patents and a third of all US Nobel
Prizes.
          Kerr and Kerr (2021) go into more detail on immigration and innovation and survey
policy options around migration. Broadly, a considerable body of research supports the idea that
US immigrants, especially high-skilled immigrants, have boosted innovation. For example, using
state panel data from 1940 to 2000, Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle (2010) document that a one-
percentage-point increase in immigrant college graduates' population share increases patents per
capita by 9 to 18 percent. Kerr and Lincoln (2010) exploit policy changes affecting the number

                                                  14
of H1-B visas and argue that the positive effects come solely through the new migrants' own
innovation. Bernstein et al. (2018) use the death of an inventor as an exogenous shock to team
productivity and argue for large spillover effects of immigrants on native innovation (Hunt and
Gauthier-Loiselle 2010 also estimate large spillovers).
       The US federal government's introduction in the early 1920s of immigration quotas with
varying degrees of strictness--for example, southern Europeans, like Italians, were more
strongly affected than northern Europeans, like Swedes--has been used to document how
exogenous reductions of immigration damaged innovation. Moser and San (2019) use rich
biographical data to show that these quotas (perhaps inadvertently) discouraged eastern and
southern European scientists from coming to the United States, and that this reduced aggregate
invention. Doran and Yoon (2018) also find negative effects of these quotas. Moser, Voena, and
Waldinger (2014) show that American innovation in chemistry was boosted by the arrival of
Jewish scientists who were expelled by the German Nazi regime in the 1930s.
       Some work pushes back against this generally positive view of the impact of immigration
on innovation. Using H1-B visa lotteries, Doran, Gelber, and Isen (2015) estimate smaller effects
than Kerr and Lincoln (2010). In addition, Borjas and Doran (2012) actually argue for negative
effects on academic publications by Americans in mathematics journals following the fall of the
Soviet Union. They do not attempt, however, to estimate aggregate effects, and they note that
their findings may reflect a feature specific to academic publishing where there are (in the short
run) constraints on the size of academic journals and departments. In addition, Moser, Voena,
and Waldinger (2014) estimate that most of the effect of immigration on innovation comes from
new entry, rather than incumbents.
       In summary, my reading of the literature is that good evidence demonstrates that
immigration, especially skilled immigration, raises innovation. It is a particularly attractive
policy because the cost of educating immigrants has been borne by other countries rather than by
American taxpayer subsidies, and, unlike many other supply side policies, the increase in human
capital can occur very quickly. However, there are severe political problems with relaxing
immigration policy (see Tabellini 2020).




                                                 15
4.4 Increasing the Quality of Inventors: Lost Einsteins
4.4.1 New Facts on Inventor Backgrounds
       There has long been interest in the background of inventors, with statistical analysis of
this characteristic beginning with Schmookler's (1957) study. More recent work has documented
many features of inventors in near population datasets. Bell et al. (2019a) measure inventors by
those individuals who are named as inventors on the patent document (both applied and granted
patents), not just those who are granted the intellectual property rights (typically the assignees
will be the companies that the inventors works for, rather than the individuals themselves).
Looking at about 1.2 million inventors since the mid-1990s, they find that many groups are
highly underrepresented, such as women, minorities, and those born into low-income families.
       Using the inventor data matched to deidentified US IRS data, Bell et al. (2019a, 2019b)
are able to follow potential inventors across their life cycles. Figure 3 shows the fraction of
children who grow up to be inventors by the percentile of their parents' income. There is a strong
upward-sloping relationship, showing that being born to wealthier parents dramatically increases
the likelihood of becoming an inventor later in life. For example, children born into the top 1
percent of the parental income distribution are 10 times more likely to grow up to be inventors
than are those born in the bottom half of the parental income distribution. This is not due to
wealthier children simply producing low-value innovations; conditioning on the top 5 percent of
the most highly cited patents produces nearly identical results.




                                                 16
Figure 3: Probability of growing up to be an inventor as a function of parental income




Notes: Sample of children is 1980-84 birth cohorts. Parent Income is mean household income
from 1996-2000. Source: Bell et al (2019a); Intergenerational sample


         An obvious explanation for the dramatic differences in figure 3 could be that kids in
poorer families have worse innate abilities than their richer counterparts. For example, if
wealthier parents are smarter, their kids are likely to be smarter and, since intelligence and
inventiveness are correlated, this could explain the patterns. To examine this hypothesis, Bell et
al. (2019a) match math (and English) test score results from third grade and later, which are
available for a subsample of the data. There is indeed a strong correlation between third grade
math scores3 and the probability of becoming an inventor in later life. However, these early test
scores account for only under a third of the innovation gap; they cannot account for the vast
majority of the innovation-parental income relationship.4 Figure 4 illustrates this by separating



3 Bell et al. (2019a, 2019b) cannot observe math scores before third grade, but it is likely that these partly reflect
    nurture rather than nature. As the work by Heckman and others has shown, early childhood experience has
    effects on cognitive and noncognitive outcomes at very young ages.
4 For example, we can statistically "give" the distribution of math test scores of rich kids to poor kids using the
    DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) reweighting technique.

                                                           17
the inventor-ability gradient by whether a child was born in the top quintile of the parental
income distribution or bottom four quintiles. For both "rich" and "poor" children the probability
of growing up to be an inventor rises with math ability and is especially strong for kids in the top
10 percent of the test score distribution. However, even for kids who are in the top 5 percent of
talent for math, figure 4 shows that those from richer families are far more likely to become
inventors.


Figure 4: Relationship between math test scores and Probability of becoming an inventor




Source: Bell et al (2019a); New York City sample.


       Interestingly, later test scores become more informative for inventor status: eighth grade
math test scores account for just under half of the inventor-parental income gradient. By the time
we know which college young people attended (e.g., MIT or Stanford), the role of parental
income is tiny. Of course, being born to a poor family means that the chances of going to a top
college are very, very low. This suggests that an important part of the transmission mechanism
between parental income and later outcomes is through the quality of schooling--something we
return to below when discussing policy.
       A similar story holds for gender and race (see also Cook and Kongcharoen 2010). About
18 percent of inventors born in 1980 were female, up from 7 percent in the 1940 cohort. At this
rate of improvement, it would take another 118 years to achieve gender parity. Looking at the


                                                 18
New York City data, there is essentially no difference in the third grade math ability distribution
for boys and girls (even in the right tail). With regard to race, 1.6 per 1,000 white children who
attended New York City public schools become inventors compared to 0.5 per 1,000 Black
children. Early ability accounts for only a tenth of these differences.5
        Rather than ability differences, an alternative explanation for the patterns in figure 3 is
that it reflects a misallocation of talent. There has been a flourishing of work in recent years
suggesting that large amounts of productivity are lost due to such frictions (e.g., Celik 2018;
Hsieh and Klenow 2009). Hsieh et al. (2019), for example, estimate that 40 percent of the growth
in US GDP per person between 1960 and 2010 is due to reductions in discrimination against
women and Black people. Under this view, if disadvantaged groups were given the same
opportunities as their similarly talented but more privileged peers, many more of them could
have pursued an inventor career and increased the quality and quantity of aggregate human
capital. For example, Bell et al. (2019b) estimate a potential quadrupling of aggregate US
innovation from reducing such barriers.
        Bell et al. (2019a) document that an important cause of the lower invention rate of
disadvantaged groups appears to be differential exposure rates to inventors in childhood. They
measure exposure by family environment, proxies for the work network of parents, and
innovation rates in the commuting zones where kids grew up. They find a strong association
between the probability of growing up to be an inventor and measures of childhood exposure to
inventors. Figure 5, for example, shows that children growing up in a commuting zone with a
high density of inventors are much more likely to become inventors as adults. About 5.5 children
in 1,000 in the San Jose, California, commuting zone (which encompasses Silicon Valley)
become inventors, compared to about 1 in 1,000 in Brownsville, Texas.




5 Cook (2014) shows that racist violence between 1870 and 1940 led to 1,100 "missing patents," compared to 726
    actual patents among African American inventors.

                                                       19
Figure 5: Growing up in a high innovation area, makes it much more likely you will become
an inventor as an adult




Source: Bell et al (2019a). 100 most populous Commuting Zones


       The relationship between place and outcomes appears to be causal. For example, it is not
simply the fact that kids who grow up in Silicon Valley are more likely to be inventors; they are
more likely to invent in the detailed technology classes (relative to other classes) that the valley
specializes in (say, software compared to medical devices). Girls who grow up in places where
there is a disproportionate fraction of women compared to men inventors are more likely (than
boys) to grow up to become inventors. Furthermore, kids who move to high-innovation areas at
an earlier age are more likely to become inventors than kids who move at a later age, again
suggesting a causal impact of place.
       This "exposure-based" view of invention could lead to much larger welfare losses than in
the standard talent misallocation models. In Hsieh et al. (2019), for example, barriers to entry
into occupations (the R&D sector in this case) mean a loss of talent. However, since their model
is a fully rational Roy sorting model, only the marginal inventors are discouraged from becoming
inventors. Great inventors--like Einstein or Marie Curie--will never be put off. In the exposure-


                                                 20
based model, however, even very talented people from (say) a poor family may end up not
becoming inventors because they are never exposed to the possibility. Bell et al. (2019b) show
evidence in favor of this and argue for large first-order welfare losses.


4.4.2 Some Policies toward the Lost Einsteins
       If we took seriously the idea that much talent is being lost because of a lack of exposure
to the possibility of becoming an inventor, what are the appropriate policy responses?
       A classic set of responses would focus on improving conditions in disadvantaged
neighborhoods, particularly in schools. These are justified on their own terms, but the
misallocation losses add to the usual equity arguments. It would make sense to target resources
on those most likely to benefit: disadvantaged kids who show some early promise. Figure 4
shows that being in the top 5 percent of third grade math scores was a strong predictor of future
inventor status. This suggests looking into programs that identify early high achievers from
underrepresented minorities.
       One example is Card and Giuliano (2016), who review the effect of in-school tracking for
minorities. They look at one of the largest US school districts, where schools with at least one
gifted fourth (or fifth) grader had to create a separate "gifted/high achiever" (GHA) classroom.
Since most schools only had a handful of gifted kids per grade, most seats in the GHA classroom
were filled with nongifted students who were high achievers in the same school grade. They
served as upper-track classes for students based on past achievement. Moreover, since schools
were highly segregated by race and income, the program effectively treated a large number of
minority students who would typically not be eligible for standard "gifted and talented"
interventions.
       Card and Giuliano (2016) use a regression discontinuity design to examine the causal
effects on students who are tracked since selection is based on a continuous measure of past
achievement with a threshold. They found that students significantly improve their math,
reading, and science when assigned to a GHA classroom, but these benefits were
overwhelmingly concentrated among Black and Hispanic participants. Minorities gained about
0.5 standard deviation units in math and reading scores, a result that persisted until at least the
sixth grade (where their data end). These are very substantial gains, comparable in magnitude to
"high performance" charter schools evaluated by Angrist, Pathak, and Walters (2013). A concern
is that the gains of the participating minorities were at the expense of those who were left behind.

                                                  21
To address this, the paper uses a cohort difference-in-differences design comparing schools that
tracked to those that did not. They find no evidence of negative (or positive) spillovers from this
analysis. The effects do not appear to be coming from teacher quality or peer quality. Rather, the
authors suggest that teacher expectations may play a very important role in exposing students to
the possibility of greater learning.
        Changing to in-school tracking has little financial cost, as there is not an expansion of the
number of teachers, classes, or school day. The in-school tracking results from a reallocation of
existing resources. This suggests that such interventions could yield very large benefits in terms
of growth as well as equity.
        Card and Giuliano (2016) look at the short-term outcomes of within-school tracking. By
contrast, Cohodes (2020) examines the long-term effects of a similar program in Boston Public
Schools' Advanced Work Class (AWC) program. Pupils who do well on third grade test scores
are placed in the AWC program and receive a dedicated classroom with high-achieving peers,
advanced literacy curricula, and accelerated math in later grades. While the students who
participate in AWC tend to be more advantaged than Boston Public School students as a whole,
about half of AWC students are Black or Latino, and two-thirds of them receive subsidized
school lunch.
        Cohodes (2020) estimates the effect of the program using a fuzzy regression discontinuity
design (RDD) comparing those who scored just above and just below the admissions threshold.
There is a large increase in high school graduation for minority students. Perhaps most
importantly, AWC boosts college enrollment rates. The program increases college enrollment by
15 percentage points overall, again with gains primarily coming from Black and Latino students.
This results in a 65 percent increase in college enrollment for Black and Latino students, most of
it at four-year institutions. Using estimated earnings associated with colleges from Chetty et al.
(2017) as a measure of college quality, AWC appears to increase college quality by about $1,750
for all students and $8,200 for Black and Latino students, though these differences are not
statistically significant.6


6 Although attending an AWC class boosts the average test scores of peers by over 80 percent of a standard
    deviation, Cohodes (2020) finds little evidence to support peer effects as an explanation for AWC impacts.
    While AWC teachers have a higher value added, the change is not large enough to account for the gains in
    college attendance observed here. Instead, it appears that AWC is the beginning of a chain of events that causes

                                                        22
       Bui, Craig, and Imberman (2014) is sometimes seen as a counterexample, as their RDD
analysis of a gifted and talented program found no effect. However, the paper does find an effect
on science outcome, which may be the critical element for inventors. Furthermore, the paper
does not look at heterogeneity of the treatment effect by parental income or minority status.
       Another set of targeted policies is around mentorship. Many nonprofit foundations (such
as the Lemelson Foundation and the Conrad Foundation) run "inventor education" programs
targeting disadvantaged children in middle and high schools. Important parts of the program are
hands-on experience of problem solving in the local community, and meeting inventors who look
like the targeted groups (e.g., women scientists for girls). More generally, one can imagine
internship and work exchange programs aimed at young people who would not normally be
exposed to high-innovation environments.
       Gabriel, Ollard, and Wilkinson (2018) have developed a useful survey of a wide range of
"innovation exposure" policies focusing on school-age programs. Although there is a large
number of such programs (science competitions being a leading example), they tend to be
dominated by students with higher-income parents, boys, and nonminorities. Moreover, the
programs are almost never subject to evaluation. One immediate priority should be devoting
resources to researching their impact.


5 Conclusions
       Innovation is at the heart of growth, and increasing the supply of potential inventors
would seem the natural place to start to think about innovation policy. Yet the literature has
tended to focus much more on policies that raise the demand for innovation through the tax
system or through direct government grants, rather than policies that intervene on the supply
side. At one level, this is surprising: if supply is inelastic, then demand side policies may do little
to the volume of innovation and may merely increase the wages of R&D scientists. On another
level, it is unsurprising: supply side policies will tend to work better in the long run, which
makes them harder to empirically evaluate.
       In this paper, I have looked at several different human capital policies for innovation:
increasing STEM, immigration reform, university expansion, and exposure policies for the


   participants to stay on track for college throughout high school.

                                                        23
disadvantaged. Clean causal identification of policies is rarer here than in other areas, but there
have been some recent and encouraging contributions. In the short run, liberalizing high-skilled
immigration is likely to yield a high return. In the longer run, I suggest that exposure policies
may produce the greatest effect, but much more work needs to be done in evaluating the
effectiveness of such policies.




References

Acs, Zoltan, David Audretsch, and Marianne Feldman. 1992. "Real Effects of Academic
       Research: Comment." American Economic Review 82: 363≠67.
Akcigit, Ufuk, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2020. "Taxation and Innovation: What Do We Know?"
       NBER Working Paper No. 27109. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
       Research.
Andrews, Michael. 2020. "How Do Institutions of Higher Education Affect Local Invention?
       Evidence from the Establishment of U.S. Colleges." Mimeo, University of Maryland.
Angrist, Joshua, Parag Pathak, and Christopher Walters. 2013. "What Explains Charter School
       Effectiveness?" American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5 (4): 1≠27.
Arora, Ashish, Sharon Belenzon, and Andrea Patacconi. 2018. "The Decline of Science in
       Corporate R&D." Strategic Management Journal 39 (1): 3≠32.
Arrow, Kenneth. 1962. "Economic Welfare and Allocation of Resources for Invention." In
       National Bureau of Economic Research, The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity:
       Economic and Social Factors, 609≠26. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Autor, David, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz. 2020. "The Race between Education and
       Technology Revisited." American Economic Review 110: 347≠51.
Azoulay, Pierre, Joshua S. Graff Zivin, Danielle Li, and Bhaven N. Sampat. 2019a. "Public R&D
       Investments and Private Sector Patenting: Evidence from NIH Funding Rules." Review of
       Economic Studies 86 (1): 117≠52.
Belenzon, Sharon, and Mark Schankerman. 2013. "Spreading the Word: Geography, Policy and
       Knowledge Spillovers." Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (3): 884≠903.
Bell, Alexander, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen. 2019a.

                                                 24
       "Who Becomes an Inventor in America? The Importance of Exposure to Innovation."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (2): 647≠713. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy028.
Bell, Alexander, Raj Chetty, Xavier Jaravel, Neviana Petkova, and John Van Reenen. 2019b.
       "Do Tax Cuts Produce More Einsteins? The Impacts of Financial Incentives vs. Exposure
       to Innovation on the Supply of Inventors." Journal of the European Economic
       Association 17 (3): 651≠77.
Bernstein, Shai, Rebecca Diamond, Timothy McQuade, and Beatriz Pousada. 2018. "The
       Contribution of High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States." Mimeo,
       Stanford University.
Bianchi, Nicola, and Michela Giorcelli. 2019. "Scientific Education and Innovation: From
       Technical Diplomas to University STEM Degrees." NBER Working Paper No. 25928.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bloom, Nicholas, Chad Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb. 2020. "Are Ideas
       Becoming Harder to Find?" American Economic Review 110 (4): 1104≠44.
Bloom, Nicholas, Mark Schankerman, and John Van Reenen. 2013. "Identifying Technology
       Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry." Econometrica 81 (4): 1347≠93.
Bloom, Nicholas, and John Van Reenen. 2007. "Measuring and Explaining Management
       Practices across Firms and Nations." Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4): 1351≠
       1408.
Bloom, Nicholas, Heidi Williams, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "A Toolkit of Policies to
       Promote Innovation." Journal of Economic Perspectives 33 (3): 163≠84.
Borjas, George J., and Kirk B. Doran. 2012. "The Collapse of the Soviet Union and the
       Productivity of American Mathematicians." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (3):
       1143≠1203.
Bui, Sa, Steven Craig, and Scott Imberman. 2014. "Is Gifted Education a Bright Idea? Assessing
       the Impact of Gifted and Talented Programs on Students." American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy 6 (3): 30≠62.
Card, David, and Laura Giuliano. 2016. "Can Tracking Raise the Test Scores of High-Ability
       Minority Students?" American Economic Review 106 (10): 2783≠816.
Carneiro, Pedro, Kai Liu, and Kjell Salvanes. 2018. "The Supply of Skill and Endogenous
       Technical Change: Evidence from a College Expansion Reform." Discussion Paper

                                              25
       Series in Economics 16/2018, Norwegian School of Economics, Department of
       Economics.
Celik, Murat. 2018. "Does the Cream Always Rise to the Top? The Misallocation of Talent in
       Innovation." Mimeo, University of Toronto.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan. 2017.
       "Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility." Human
       Capital and Economic Opportunity Working Group Working Paper 2017-059.
Cohodes, Sarah. 2020. "The Long-Run Impacts of Specialized Programming for High-Achieving
       Students." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 12 (1): 127≠66.
Cook, Lisa. 2014. "Violence and Economic Activity: Evidence from African American Patents,
       1870≠1940." Journal of Economic Growth 19: 221≠57.
Cook, Lisa, and Chaleampong Kongcharoen. 2010. "The Idea Gap in Pink and Black." NBER
       Working Paper No. 16331. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
DiNardo, John, Michelle Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. "Labor Market Institutions and the
       Distribution of Wages: 1973≠1992: A Semi-Parametric Approach." Econometrica 64 (5):
       1001≠44.
Doran, Kirk, Alex Gelber, and Adam Isen. 2015. "The Effects of High-Skilled Immigration
       Policy on Firms: Evidence from H-1B Visa Lotteries." NBER Working Paper No. 20668.
       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Doran, Kirk, and Chungeun Yoon. 2018. "Immigration and Invention: Evidence from the Quota
       Acts." Mimeo, University of Notre Dame.
Furman, Jeffrey, and Megan MacGarvie. 2007. "Academic Science and the Birth of Industrial
       Research Laboratories in the US Pharmaceutical Industry." Journal of Economic
       Behavior and Organization 63: 756≠76.
Gabriel, Madeleine, Juliet Ollard, and Nancy Wilkinson. 2018. "Opportunity Lost: How
       Inventive Potential Is Squandered and What to Do about It." London: Nesta.
       https://media.nesta.org.uk/documents/Opportunity-Lost-December-2018.pdf.
Goolsbee, Austan. 1998. "Does Government R&D Policy Mainly Benefit Scientists and
       Engineers?" American Economic Review 88 (2): 298≠302.
Griffith, Rachel, Simon Lee, and John Van Reenen. 2011. "Is Distance Dying at Last? Falling
       Home Bias in Fixed Effects Models of Patent Citations." Quantitative Economics 2: 211≠

                                              26
       49.
Griliches, Zvi. 1958. "Research Costs and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn and Related
       Innovations." Journal of Political Economy 66: 419.
Griliches, Zvi. 1992. "The Search for R&D Spillovers." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 94:
       29≠47.
Hall, Bronwyn, and Josh Lerner. 2010. "The Financing of R&D and Innovation." In Handbook
       of the Economics of Innovation, vol. 1, edited by Bronwyn Hall and Nathan Rosenberg,
       609≠39. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Hausman, Naomi. 2018. "University Innovation and Local Economic Growth." Mimeo, Hebrew
       University.
Helmers, Christian, and Henry G. Overman. 2017. "My Precious! The Location and Diffusion of
       Scientific Research: Evidence from the Synchrotron Diamond Light Source." Economic
       Journal 127 (604): 2006≠40.
Howell, Sabrina T. 2017. "Financing Innovation: Evidence from R&D Grants." American
       Economic Review 107 (4): 1136≠64.
Howell, Sabrina T., Jason Rathje, John Van Reenen, and Jun Wong. 2021. "OPENing up
       Military Innovation: An Evaluation of Reforms to the U.S. Air Force SBIR Program."
       Mimeo, New York University.
Hsieh, ChangTai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow. 2019. "The Allocation of
       Talent and U.S. Economic Growth." Econometrica 87 (5): 1439≠74.
Hsieh, Chiang-Tai, and Peter Klenow. 2009. "Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
       and India." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1403≠48.
Hunt, Jennifer, and Marjolaine Gauthier-Loiselle. 2010. "How Much Does Immigration Boost
       Innovation?" American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2 (2): 31≠56.
Hvide, Hans K., and Benjamin F. Jones. 2018. "University Innovation and Professor's
       Privilege." American Economic Review 108 (7): 1860≠98.
Jacob, Brian, and Lars Lefgren. 2011. "The Impact of Research Grant Funding on Scientific
       Productivity." Journal of Public Economics 95 (9≠10): 1168≠77.
Jaffe, Adam. 1986. "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'
       Patents, Profits and Market Value." American Economic Review 76: 984≠1001.
Jaffe, Adam. 1989. "Real Effects of Academic Research." American Economic Review 79 (5):

                                              27
       957≠70.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Josh Lerner. 2001. "Reinventing Public R&D: Patent Policy and the
       Commercialization of National Laboratory Technologies." RAND Journal of Economics
       32 (1): 167≠98.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson. 1993. "Geographic Localization
       of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 108 (3): 577≠98.
Janeway, William. 2012. Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy: Markets, Speculation
       and the State. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, Benjamin, and Lawrence Summers. 2020. "A Calculation of the Social Returns to
       Innovation." NBER Working Paper No. 27863. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research.
Jones, Charles. 2015. "The Facts of Economic Growth." In Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol.
       2A, edited by John Taylor and Harald Uhlig, chap. 1. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Kerr, Sari Pekkala, and William R. Kerr. 2021. "Immigration Policy Levers for US Innovation
       and Startups." In Innovation and Public Policy, edited by A. Goolsbee and B. F. Jones,
       chap. 3. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kerr, William, and William Lincoln. 2010. "The Supply Side of Innovation: H-1B Visa Reforms
       and U.S. Ethnic Invention." Journal of Labor Economics 28 (3): 473≠508.
Lach, Saul, and Mark Schankerman. 2008. "Incentives and Invention in Universities." RAND
       Journal of Economics 39 (2): 403≠33.
Lerner, Josh. 2005. The Boulevard of Broken Dreams. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lucking, Brian, Nicholas Bloom, and John Van Reenen. 2020. "Have R&D Spillovers Declined
       in the 21st Century?" Fiscal Studies 40 (4): 561≠90.
Mazzucato, Mariana. 2013. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking Public vs. Private Sector
       Myths. London: Anthem Press.
Moretti, Enrico, Claudia Steinwender, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "The Intellectual Spoils of
       War? Defense R&D, Productivity and International Technology Spillovers." NBER
       Working Paper No. 26483. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Moser, Petra, and Shmuel San. 2019. "Immigration, Science, and Invention: Evidence from the
       1920s Quota Acts." Mimeo, New York University.

                                              28
Moser, Petra, Alessandra Voena, and Fabian Waldinger. 2014. "German Jewish …migrÈs and US
       Invention." American Economic Review 104 (10): 3222≠55.
National Science Board. 2018. Science & Engineering Indicators 2018. Alexandria, VA:
       National Science Board.
Romer, Paul M. 2001. "Should the Government Subsidize Supply or Demand in the Market for
       Scientists and Engineers?" In Innovation Policy and the Economy, vol. 1, edited by Adam
       Jaffe, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, 221≠52. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schmookler, Jacob. 1957. "Inventors Past and Present." Review of Economics and Statistics 39
       (3): 321≠33.
Sianesi, Barbara, and John Van Reenen. 2003. "Education and Economic Growth: A Review of
       the Literature." Journal of Economic Surveys 17 (2): 157≠200.
Tabellini, Marco. 2020. "Gifts of the Immigrants, Woes of the Natives: Lessons from the Age of
       Mass Migration." Review of Economic Studies 87 (1): 454≠86.
Toivanen, Otto, and Lotta V‰‰n‰nen. 2016. "Education and Invention." Review of Economics
       and Statistics 98 (2): 382≠96.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. "A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of
       Innovations." RAND Journal of Economics 21 (1): 172≠87.
Valero, Anna, and John Van Reenen. 2019. "The Economic Impact of Universities: Evidence
       from Across the Globe." Economics of Education 68: 53≠67.
Van Reenen, John. 2011. "Wage Inequality, Technology and Trade: 21st Century Evidence."
       Labour Economics 18 (6): 730≠41.
Zucker, Lynne, Michael Brewer, and Marilynn Darby. 1998. "Intellectual Capital and the Birth
       of US Biotechnology Enterprises." American Economic Review 88: 290≠306.




                                              29
