                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                     KNOWLEDGE, STIGMA, AND HIV TESTING:
                AN ANALYSIS OF A WIDESPREAD HIV/AIDS PROGRAM

                                          Dean Yang
                                        James Allen IV
                                       Arlete Mahumane
                                       James Riddell IV
                                            Hang Yu

                                      Working Paper 28716
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28716
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          April 2021

Most importantly, we thank Faustino Lessitala for stellar leadership and field management
throughout the project. Carolina Salvaterra, Danito Angorete, Fernando Padama, and Filipe
Murgorgo made essential contributions in the field. Kyal Berends, Moustafa El-Kashlan, Sihang
Cai, Ryan McWay, Jared Stolove, and Derek Xu provided first-rate research assistance. Lauren
Tingwall's grant administration was world-class. This study would not have been possible
without the multi-year engagement and commitment of Nathaniel Lohman and Dionisio Matos of
USAID, and of Michael Carter and Tara Chiu of the BASIS research program. Amy Aberra and
Joshua Volle of USAID provided important context and feedback. We appreciate feedback from
Michael Carter, Paul Gertler, Sharon Maccini, Grant Miller, and Stephen Smith. Our 2020 virtual
summer interns -- Sidi Cheng, Zhiyan Guo, Dedrick McCord, Matthew Riddell, Maggie Wolf,
Lana Yang-Maccini, and Pu (Priscilla) Zhao -- gave us vital help with data entry. We appreciate
the cooperation of World Education Inc./Bantwana, in particular Prince Mulondo Yosia, Karen
Rowe, Tawanda Madhangi, and Obert Darara. This study's protocols were approved by
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) in Mozambique (Ministry of Health, approval number 2233/
GMS/002/016) and at the University of Michigan (Health Sciences and Social and Behavioral
Sciences IRB, approval number HUM00115541). Empirical analyses were pre-specified in a pre-
analysis plan submitted to the American Economic Association's RCT Registry on March 8, 2019
(AEARCTR-0003990). This research was funded by the United States Agency for International
Development via the BASIS research program at University of California, Davis (grant numbers
AID-OAA-L-12-00001, AID-OAA-LA-16-0004, and AID391A1500006). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dean Yang, James Allen IV, Arlete Mahumane, James Riddell IV, and Hang Yu. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Knowledge, Stigma, and HIV Testing: An Analysis of a Widespread HIV/AIDS Program
Dean Yang, James Allen IV, Arlete Mahumane, James Riddell IV, and Hang Yu
NBER Working Paper No. 28716
April 2021
JEL No. D10,D80,I12

                                         ABSTRACT

Using randomized methodologies, we study a common community HIV/AIDS program that
seeks to promote HIV testing by improving knowledge and reducing stigmatizing attitudes.
Contrary to expectations, the program has a substantial negative effect on HIV testing rates. We
provide evidence of likely mechanisms behind the program's negative effect: it inadvertently
increased misinformation about HIV, and worsened HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes.
Subsequent household-level randomized treatments providing correct information and addressing
stigma concerns counteract the program's negative effect on HIV testing. These findings highlight
the importance of improving knowledge and alleviating stigma concerns when promoting HIV
testing.

Dean Yang                                       James Riddell IV
University of Michigan                          Department of Internal Medicine
Department of Economics and                     University of Michigan Medical School
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy          Ann Arbor, MI 48109
735 S. State Street, Room 3316                  jriddell@umich.edu
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                        Hang Yu
deanyang@umich.edu                              National School of Development
                                                Peking University
James Allen IV                                  hangyu@umich.edu
Department of Economics and
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 S. State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
alleniv@umich.edu

Arlete Mahumane
Beira Operational Research Center (CIOB)
Rua Correia de Brito 1323
Beira City
Sofala Province
Mozambique
cynthiwea@gmail.com

Research project website with supplementary material is available at
https://fordschool.umich.edu/mozambique-research/fcc-hiv-aids
1     Introduction
HIV testing plays a central role in global programs combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic
(Granich et al., 2009). Widespread HIV testing in areas of high prevalence is important
because people with HIV infection are often asymptomatic for years before the disease
progresses to AIDS. When individuals are found to be infected with HIV, it is recommended
that they immediately start antiretroviral therapy (ART) (WHO, 2017). Rapid initiation
of ART lowers HIV plasma viral loads, providing private benefits for infected individuals in
the form of better health outcomes (Ford et al., 2018).1 In addition, early initiation of ART
has public health benefits due to a positive externality (Greenwood et al., 2019). During
the asymptomatic phase, those with HIV infection can transmit HIV to others. Initiation of
ART leads to reduced HIV viral loads and a much lower risk of transmitting HIV to sexual
partners (Rodger et al., 2019).
    While there has been substantial progress in expanding HIV testing around the world,
testing rates remain far from achieving targets set by public health officials. The UN's
90-90-90 goals are widely-adopted objectives: 90% of people with HIV infection should
be diagnosed, 90% of those diagnosed should be in treatment, and 90% of individuals in
treatment should have an undetectable HIV viral load (United Nations, 2016). However,
UNAIDS estimates that in 2019, of the 38 million people infected with HIV globally, about
7.1 million (19%) are undiagnosed (UNAIDS, 2020).
    We seek to shed light on the impact of a major type of HIV/AIDS program on HIV testing
rates, and to understand the mechanisms underlying its effectiveness (or lack thereof). We
focus on two mechanisms: alleviating imperfect information related to HIV and reducing
HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes. We start with a simple theoretical model. Individuals
decide whether to have an HIV test, trading off health benefits with social stigma costs of
revealing one's HIV risk type to others. Individuals revealed to have high HIV infection risk
are stigmatized (excluded from social interactions). Beliefs about HIV transmission affect
the extent to which people are stigmatized if they are observed getting an HIV test and
reveal themselves as having high risk of HIV infection. The less people believe that HIV is
transmissible, the lower stigma, and the higher HIV testing. Conversely, if people believe
that HIV is more transmissible, stigmatizing attitudes rise, and HIV testing falls.
    With this model as a framework, we study a program in Mozambique, Força à Comu-
nidade e Crianças (FCC, "Strengthening Communities and Children"), that aims to raise
HIV testing rates by improving knowledge about HIV/AIDS and reducing HIV-related stig-
matizing attitudes. FCC is a community-level program that implements home visits to
households, as well as complementary interventions in communities and schools. The pro-
   1 In particular, treatment is significantly more complex, and mortality outcomes worse, when when HIV

diagnosis is delayed and opportunistic infections develop (Simmons et al., 2013; Belay et al., 2017; Chen
et al., 2017).




                                                   1
gram is representative of a broad category of HIV/AIDS interventions, known as programs
for "orphans and vulnerable children" (OVCs), that are funded by the U.S. Presidential
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR).2
    We designed a randomized controlled trial to estimate the causal impact of the FCC pro-
gram on HIV testing rates and the mechanisms through which it operates. We specified our
analyses in advance in a pre-analysis plan (PAP). The research design involves three stages
of randomization, as presented in Figure 1. The sample is composed of 3,700 households
that we have been following from a 2017-18 baseline through a 2019 endline survey. First,
we randomized half of 76 communities to treatment (receiving the program) and half to
the control group. Second, motivated by concerns about statistical power, we randomized
a subset of households within treatment communities to a strong encouragement to partic-
ipate in the FCC program ("FCC-enrolled" households). FCC-enrolled households received
home visits by FCC community workers and were assessed for inclusion in various FCC
components. FCC enrollment led them to have higher participation rates in the program
than other households in treatment communities.3 An endline survey collected data on
a range of household outcomes, including self-reported HIV testing in the household. As
pre-specified, all treatment effects reported in this paper are the effect of being an FCC-
enrolled household in a treatment community, with the comparison group being households
in control communities.
    Immediately after the endline survey, our research staff then randomly assigned house-
holds to a set of "minitreatments" aimed at encouraging further HIV testing, or a minitreat-
ment control group. The different minitreatments provide HIV-related information, seek to
alleviate concerns about HIV-related stigma, and provide additional financial incentives for
HIV testing.4 Our research staff implemented the minitreatment to which a household was
assigned (if any), and then offered coupons to encourage household members to get HIV
tests at the nearest health clinic.5
    Our primary outcome of interest in this study is whether anyone in the household received
an HIV test in the 14 days after the endline survey, measured by redemption of these
encouragement coupons. As an administrative outcome, this measure of HIV testing is not
subject to survey reporting biases.6
   2 PEPFAR is the world's largest source of funding for HIV/AIDS programs in developing countries (PEP-

FAR, 2020), with an annual budget ranging from $6.6 to $6.9 billion in 2015-2020 (US State Department,
2019).
   3 Other households not randomly selected for direct enrollment were exposed to the FCC program as

well, but at lower rates. We pre-specified treatment effects on these "FCC-ambient" households as of sec-
ondary interest; results are presented in the Populated Pre-Analysis Plan (PAP). We provide the link to the
Populated PAP in Section 5 below.
   4 The initial motivation for these minitreatments was to examine complementarity between the FCC

program and more targeted interventions to raise HIV testing. As it turns out, these minitreatments end
up revealing mechanisms through which the FCC program's effects on testing operate.
   5 Conditional on the individual getting an HIV test, the coupons were redeemable at the clinic up to 14

days later for a financial reward of 50 meticais (PPP US$2.42).
   6 As pre-specified, we prioritize the coupon-redemption-based measure of HIV testing because treatment




                                                    2
    This research design yields several treatment effects. The treatment effect of primary
interest is the impact of FCC enrollment on the coupon-based HIV testing measure. This
is Comparison A in Figure 1, the testing rate of FCC-enrolled households in treatment
communities who did not receive any minitreatments, minus the testing rate of households
in control communities who also did not receive any minitreatments. This is the "pure"
effect of the FCC program that is not clouded by any effects of minitreatments.
    Contrary to expectations, we find that the FCC program has a negative effect on HIV
testing: -10.9 percentage points, relative to a base of 26.3 percent in the control group.
    In pre-specified secondary analyses, we shed light on mechanisms behind the FCC pro-
gram's negative effect on HIV testing. These analyses estimate the Comparison B treatment
effect in Figure 1, comparing FCC-enrolled households in treatment communities with all
households in control communities. Outcomes are potential mechanisms measured in the
endline survey.7 We find that the program did not improve HIV-related overall knowledge,
and in fact increased misinformation. Treated respondents became more likely to believe
"myths" about HIV transmission (e.g., that HIV can be spread by shaking hands or by
witchcraft). In addition, the program actually worsened HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes,
measured by answers to survey questions on HIV-related stigma (such as whether one would
buy vegetables from an HIV-positive vendor, or thinks that an HIV-positive person should
be a teacher).
    These findings are suggestive that the FCC program's negative impacts are due to wors-
ened information and increased stigma. However, simply showing that the treatment leads
to worsened information and increased stigma does not establish with certainty that these
are mechanisms behind the program's impacts, since these outcomes could co-move with
HIV testing without being mechanisms in the causal chain linking FCC enrollment with
testing. The minitreatments we implemented after the endline survey provide more direct
evidence that changes in information and stigma are mechanisms behind the FCC program's
negative impact on testing.
    The minitreatments provided information about HIV; information about HIV treatment
(ART); both HIV and ART information; information to reduce concerns about HIV-related
stigma; and a higher financial incentive to receive an HIV test.8 There was also a control
group that got no minitreatment. In analyses that were also pre-specified, we examine how
these treatments affect the coupon-based measure of HIV testing. In Figure 1, these analyses
involve comparing households in the grey-shaded "Pure Control" box among FCC-enrolled
effects using this measure differ from treatment effects on self-reported HIV testing from the endline survey.
Treatment effects on self-reported HIV testing are significantly more positive, likely due to experimenter
demand effects.
    7 Comparison B is the appropriate comparison for the outcomes in the endline survey, as it maximizes

sample size; the minitreatments were implemented after the endline survey and therefore cannot affect
endline survey outcomes.
    8 The higher financial incentive for this minitreatment was 100 meticais per coupon, double the incentive

offered to all other households.



                                                      3
households (FCC-enrolled households receiving no minitreatment) with households in the
five boxes just below it (FCC-enrolled households assigned to some minitreatment).
    The minitreatments counteract the negative effect of the FCC program. Among FCC-
enrolled households, those getting an information minitreatment or the anti-stigma mini-
treatment have substantially higher HIV testing rates than the minitreatment control group.
These findings help confirm that the FCC program worsened HIV knowledge and increased
stigmatizing attitudes, and that the minitreatments targeting these mechanisms helped re-
verse these negative effects of the FCC program.
    Overall, our theoretical model encapsulates the mechanisms behind our empirical find-
ings. The FCC program led to misinformation about the transmission of HIV, which wors-
ened stigmatizing attitudes, and led to lower HIV testing rates. The minitreatments offset
the FCC program's negative impact on information and stigmatizing attitudes, raising HIV
testing rates.
    The main contribution of this paper is to provide evidence on the importance of two
intermediating mechanisms behind the efficacy of HIV/AIDS public health initiatives. We
highlight the importance of 1) public health information, and 2) concerns about disease-
related stigma. Our work is related to a large existing literature studying the role of in-
formation in health decision-making, and a much smaller literature on how stigma affects
health decisions.
    Studies of the role of information imperfections in health decision-making are reviewed
by Dupas and Miguel (2016). In the HIV/AIDS context, provision of general HIV/AIDS
information has been shown to affect knowledge, health behaviors, and demand for health
goods (Duflo et al., 2015; Dupas, 2011; Godlonton et al., 2016; Ciancio et al., 2020; Kim
et al., 2017; Chong et al., 2013; Banerjee et al., 2020). Other studies have examined the
impact of learning one's own HIV infection status (Delavande and Kohler, 2012; Gong,
2015). Our study is novel in finding that a major type of HIV/AIDS program can create
misinformation. As such, our findings concord with the smaller number of studies that find
that informational HIV/AIDS interventions can lead to misinformation or have harmful
effects (Jamison et al., 2013; Godlonton et al., 2016; Friedman, 2018).
    While there has been a great deal of interest in stigma in the context of the HIV/AIDS
pandemic,9 economics research on the topic is scarce.10 Prior work using randomized or ex-
perimental methodologies has shown that interventions can reduce HIV-related stigmatizing
attitudes (Hoffmann et al., 2016; Lubega et al., 2019), thereby leading to higher rates of
HIV testing (Derksen et al., 2020; Yu, 2020). Relative to this literature, our work is novel in
finding that a major type of widely implemented HIV/AIDS program can actually worsen
   9 Mahajan  et al. (2008) and Stangl et al. (2013) review public health research on HIV/AIDS stigma.
  10 Economists  have studied stigma in other contexts (Moffitt, 1983; Vishwanath, 1989; Akerlof et al., 1996;
Furuya, 2002; Ishida, 2003; O'Flaherty and Sethi, 2008; Bharadwaj et al., 2017); see Durlauf and Blume
(2008) for a review.




                                                      4
HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes, and that a simple anti-stigma intervention implemented
later can offset the program's negative impacts on HIV testing.
    This research also contributes to economic research on large-scale HIV/AIDS programs,
of which PEPFAR is the largest funder worldwide. FCC is a representative example of
PEPFAR programs for orphans and vulnerable children (OVC). U.S. law requires PEPFAR
to spend 10% of its budget on OVC programs (US State Department, 2015). Among OVC
programs, FCC is emblematic in key ways. The program delivers a multifaceted array of
services through schools, as cornerstone institutions in communities. These school-based
programs operate alongside household-level case management: visits to households by pro-
gram workers who deliver informational and anti-stigma messaging, encourage HIV testing,
assess household needs, and connect households and individuals with appropriate program
components (USAID, 2012; US State Department, 2019).
    Prior studies of PEPFAR programs have not exploited prospectively randomized research
designs. In addition, past studies have not tracked defined households or individuals over
time (from before to after program implementation), raising concerns about sample selection
biases (Bryant et al., 2012). Bendavid et al. (2012) examine the impact of PEPFAR funding
at the country level using a difference-in-difference approach, finding substantial reductions
in adult mortality in Africa. A number of past studies have used randomized controlled
trials to examine the impact of more targeted interventions related to HIV/AIDS, such as
Thornton (2008), McCoy et al. (2017), Ssewamala et al. (2009), Ivers et al. (2014), Baird
et al. (2011), Kiene et al. (2017), and Yotebieng et al. (2017). None of these have stud-
ied PEPFAR or community-level programs, or examined the interplay between knowledge,
stigma, and HIV testing as we do.


2    Theoretical Model
We model the HIV testing decision as a one-sided signaling game with two players over two
periods. Our model is a simplified version of the model in Derksen et al. (2020). Rational
individuals decide whether to test for HIV. The benefit of testing is initiating treatment if one
tests positive. The cost of testing includes revealing to others that one has a high probability
of having HIV, and experiencing stigma as a result. We model stigma as being excluded
from social interactions with others. Beliefs about HIV transmission affect the extent to
which people are stigmatized (excluded from social interactions) if they are believed to at
high risk for having HIV. If people start to believe that HIV is less transmissible, this leads
to less stigma, and higher HIV testing.
     Consider two players, A and B , from two continua of individuals A = [0, 1] and B =
[0, 1], respectively. Each player A has private information about his own type (a , ya ). a
represents A's probability of being HIV-positive and it takes two values: a  {L , H },



                                               5
0 < L < H < 1 (low and high risk, respectively). The fraction of A with a = H is r. ya
is player A's valuation of social engagement. Each player B is known to be HIV-negative
and has a private valuation of social engagement, yb . ya and yb follows the same distribution
G with a positive support (y, +). r and G are common knowledge.
    In the first period, player A decides whether to take an HIV test. A's action can be
observed by individuals in B . Player A is then randomly matched with a player B in a social
activity. In the second period, player B decides whether to interact with player A (social
inclusion) or not (social avoidance). We denote A's action as ta  {0 : do not test, 1 : test}
and B 's action as mb  {0 : do not interact, 1 : interact}.
    In period 1, player A's direct cost for taking a test is c. c summarizes time and monetary
costs as well as physical and psychological costs associated with the trip to taking a test.
If testing positive, player A receives ART treatment which brings a health benefit of v .11
We denote A's real HIV status as ha , which takes value 1 if positive and 0 if negative. The
payoff for A in period 1 is given by

                                         u1
                                          a (ta ) = ta (ha v - c).


                                                          a (1) - ua (0)], is equal to a v - c.
   The expected gain in period 1 for taking a test, Eha [u1        1

   We make the following assumptions to restrict the parameter values:



                                             L v < c < H v                                                 (1)
                                              y < H v - c                                                  (2)

    Assumption (1) states that a low-risk (a = L ) person does not have a high enough
health-related incentive to take a test, but a high-risk person does. Assumption (2) means
that the health benefit of testing is higher than the value of social engagement for at least
some high-risk A.
    In period 2, player B forms a belief about a based on the observed ta ,     ^b (ta ). If B
chooses to interact with A, both players will receive utility from social engagement but B
also faces a cost due to potential HIV transmission from A. We denote B 's perceived HIV
transmission probability as  ^  [0, 1], and her health cost from HIV infection as z . If B
chooses not to interact, both players obtain no utility in this period. To sum up, in period
2, player A's payoff is

                                            u2
                                             a (mb ) = mb ya ,
 11 ART   is only offered to those who are tested HIV-positive, and when offered, ART is free of charge.




                                                     6
   and player B 's payoff is

                                     u2                  ^b (ta )z .                     (3)
                                      b (mb ) = mb yb - ^

   We make further assumptions to bound parameter values:

                             Pr yb >  ¯ = 1 and Pr (yb < 
                                     ^hz                 ^H z ) > 0,                     (4)

which means that no one in B would reject an unknown person from the general population,
A, for fear of HIV transmission; but at least some would avoid social interactions with a
person of high risk.
   Overall, the payoff function for player A is12

                                         Ua = u1          2
                                               a (ta ) + ua (mb ).

Proposition 1 There are two classes of pure strategy Perfect Bayesian Equilibria in this
game. The first is a partially separating equilibrium. A fraction S of individuals in B
discriminate: they avoid A who has sought an HIV test. The remaining fraction (1 - S )
of individuals interact with any A. The second is a pooling equilibrium. A fraction P of
individuals in B interact if and only if A has sought an HIV test.

    In what follows, we characterize the partially separating equilibrium of the game where
stigmatizing behavior (social avoidance) occurs, and defer the formal proof of Proposition
1 to the Appendix A.
    First, consider player A's optimization problem given S . A chooses to take an HIV test
or not to maximize his expected utility Eha ,mb [Ua ]:

                                      max (a v - c - Sya )ta + ya .
                                    ta {0,1}

   His optimal strategy is to test if and only if

                                                      a v - c
                                               ya <           .
                                                         S
   Combining Assumption (1), (2), and that ya > 0, we know that a player A with a = L
never takes a test; and that some a = H will take a test. Player B , with Bayesian updating,
forms the belief of  ^b (ta ) accordingly:

                                         ^b (1) = H ; 
                                                      ^b (0) < h.
                                                               ¯                         (5)

  Given A's strategy, now consider B 's optimization problem. B chooses mb  {0, 1} to
maximize the payoff as in (3):
 12 Without   loss of generality, we assume the intertemporal discount factor to be 1.


                                                      7
                                  max      m b yb - ^^b (ta )z .
                                mb {0,1}

   By Assumption (4) and belief (5), we know that when ta = 0, B 's best response is
mb = 1; while when ta = 1, B 's best response is to interact if and only if

                                           yb > ^H z.

    Thus,

                                               ^H z
                                        S=             dG .                               (6)
                                               y
    Proposition 2 directly follows from (6).

Proposition 2 Stigmatization S becomes more (less) severe as individuals' perceived HIV
transmission risk ^ increases (decreases).

    In this equilibrium, the testing rate among the population A is given by
                                                   H v -c
                                                    S
                                     Rt = r                 dG .                          (7)
                                               y
    Expression (7) leads to the following proposition.

Proposition 3 A higher (lower) rate of stigmatization S suppresses (encourages) HIV test-
ing.

    In sum, with knowledge (beliefs about the transmission of HIV) having such a central role
in raising HIV testing, much can go wrong if a program inadvertently fails in its knowledge-
raising objective, and instead creates misinformation. If a program leads people to believe
that HIV is more transmissible, more people come to stigmatize those infected with HIV,
and HIV testing falls. We now turn to the empirical analysis of the FCC program, which
we interpret in the context of this model.


3     Research Design
3.1    Country and Program Context
Out of an estimated 36.9 million people living with HIV worldwide in 2017, 25.7 million
are in Sub-Saharan Africa. The region also accounts for a dominant share of new HIV
infections: 1.17 million out of a global 1.8 million in that year. In Mozambique in 2017, 2.1
million people out of a population of 29.7 million were living with HIV (7.1%), out of which


                                               8
170,000 were children (aged 14 or below). The country has an estimated 130,000 new HIV
infections annually, of which 13.8% are children. Mozambique recorded 70,000 AIDS-related
deaths in 2017, likely because only slightly more than half of HIV-infected patients have
access to antiretroviral therapy (ART). Poor access and adherence to ART contributes to
AIDS-related morbidity and mortality, as well as HIV transmission (to other adults as well
as from mothers to children) (UNAIDS, 2019). Only an estimated 77% of Mozambicans
with HIV infection know their status (UNAIDS, 2020). In our own Mozambican sample,
nearly half of adults and 90% of children are reported to have never been tested for HIV.
    The U.S. Government's most important program responding to the HIV/AIDS crisis
is the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). PEPFAR mandates that
10% its funding be devoted to programs benefiting children orphaned or made vulnerable
by HIV/AIDS ("orphans and vulnerable children," or OVCs).13 In 2016, PEPFAR OVC
programs supported 6.2 million OVCs and their caregivers worldwide (PEPFAR, 2017).14


3.2     The Program
The program we study, Força à Comunidade e Crianças (FCC, "Strengthening Communities
and Children"), is a representative example of PEPFAR OVC programs. Its high-level aim
is to improve families' and communities' ability to support, protect, and care for orphans
and vulnerable children, their caregivers, and their households more generally.
    The FCC program is composed of a number of interrelated components and is imple-
mented in study districts by local implementing partner (LIP) organizations under contract
to the international NGO World Education Inc. (WEI)/Bantwana. Several FCC program
components are school-based, and so programs are implemented in local communities sur-
rounding a focal school. In each community, activities take place with the collaboration and
advice of a Community Child Protection Committee (CCPC) whose membership includes
community leaders, volunteers, and local government officials.15
    The most widespread FCC program component is home visits by LIP staff known as
"Case Care Workers" (CCWs) to households. Roughly 700 CCWs work across the study
communities. LIPs hire CCWs locally, in part based on recommendations by the CCPC
and community leaders. In common with the local populations they serve, they typically
have no more than a primary school education. Roughly 80% of CCWs are female. They
  13 The UN defines an "orphan" as a child who has lost one or both parents. An estimated 13.4 million

children and adolescents (0-17 years of age) worldwide had lost one or both parents to AIDS as of 2015.
More than 80% of these children (10.9 million) live in sub-Saharan Africa (UNICEF, 2016). PEPFAR's
2008 reauthorization mandated it to spend 10% of its funds on OVC programs. PEPFAR OVC funding
amounted to $3.58 billion in total from 2015-2020 (PEPFAR (2017), PEPFAR (2020)).
  14 Reviews of research on OVCs include Bryant and Beard (2016), Goldberg and Short (2016), Nyberg

et al. (2012), and Shann et al. (2013). Also see Evans and Miguel (2007), Case et al. (2004), Larson et al.
(2013), and Whetten et al. (2015).
  15 Program provinces and districts are: Manica province (Manica, Chimoio, and Gondola districts), Sofala

province (Dondo and Nhamatanda districts), and Zambezia province (Namacurra and Nicoadala districts).



                                                    9
range in age from 18 to 48, with most falling between 25 and 40 years of age. CCWs receive
a stipend of 3,100 MZN per month (roughly US$150), as well as in-kind compensation in
the form of a bicycle, a work uniform, and cellphone airtime.
    CCWs conduct home visits of OVC households, based on personal knowledge and rec-
ommendations of the CCPC.16 The home visit itself is a conduit for the dissemination of
information and advice by CCWs. Household members may then participate in other FCC
components, based on the results of the home visit. In home visits, CCWs conduct sys-
tematic vulnerability assessments, and households (and individuals therein) are then linked
to appropriate programs and services in communities, schools, and health facilities. One
of the most important results of these home visits is the referrals of individuals for HIV
testing at the local PEPFAR-funded health clinic. The expectation is that CCWs refer all
FCC program beneficiaries (both adults and children of all ages) who do not know their
HIV status for HIV testing, and that testing should be repeated every twelve months even
upon a negative test result. The number of individuals referred to HIV testing is a key
outcome indicator for the FCC program, monitored by PEPFAR in the context of achiev-
ing the UNAIDS 90-90-90 global goals (90% of those with HIV diagnosed, 90% of those on
ART, and 90% of those virally suppressed by 2020) (PEPFAR, 2017). Those testing positive
for HIV are then referred to initiate antiretroviral therapy (ART) through the local clinic.
CCWs in the community then follow up with individuals initiating ART to promote ART
adherence on an ongoing basis. Because of the centrality of encouraging HIV testing in the
FCC program, it is the primary outcome of interest in this study.
    During home visits, CCWs seek to increase HIV testing rates via two mechanisms we
examine explicitly: improving information and reducing stigma concerns. CCWs seek to
improve FCC beneficiaries' information related to HIV/AIDS, such as methods of disease
transmission, progression of the disease, treatment, HIV testing, and locations of health
clinics providing testing and treatment. Information is conveyed verbally and, at the LIP's
discretion, on printed material given to the household. In addition, CCWs are expected to
engage program beneficiaries in "sensitization" to address stigma related to HIV (both one's
own stigmatizing attitudes, and fear of stigma from others). CCWs engage in discussions
to reduce stigmatizing attitudes among program beneficiaries. They provide psychosocial
support (PSS) and gradually gain program beneficiaries' trust over time in repeated in-
teractions, with the expectation that reductions in fear of stigma will encourage people to
be open to HIV testing, voluntarily disclose HIV-positive status to CCWs, and be open to
future CCW follow-up promoting ART initiation and adherence.
    Households are connected to other FCC program components after the home visits, based
  16 CCWs were provided with a detailed "Home Visit Guide" detailing information they are expected to

convey to households, covering health (HIV/AIDS in particular), education, nutrition, infant care, legal
rights, savings, and psychosocial help. The home visit guide is included as part of our pre-analysis plan
(PAP) at our AEA RCT Registry entry (https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.3990-5.0).




                                                   10
on needs assessments conducted by CCWs. These program components include Village
Savings and Loan (VSL) groups and nutritional screenings of children. Many components
are school-based, so children can also be included in these components through their schools.
Relatively few households report participating in these other program components. For
further details on these other program components, see Appendix B.


3.3    Sample and Data
The study timeline is shown at the bottom of Figure 1, illustrating key points in data
collection and the randomized interventions. We provide an overview of data collection
here, and provide details in Appendix C.
    In the 76 study communities, we selected households for inclusion in the sample using
random-route sampling, with route starting points at the focal school in each community. In
keeping with the focus on the FCC program, we administered a "vulnerability assessment"
(designed jointly with WEI/Bantwana) to identify OVC households. 71.68% of households
were determined to be OVC households and were administered informed consent. If granting
consent, they were included in our study sample. The vulnerability assessment and consent
process for inclusion in the study sample occurred from May to November 2017. A subset of
consenting households were randomly selected to be administered a comprehensive baseline
survey, which was administered from May 2017 to March 2018. The primary role of the
baseline survey in the study is as the source of data on HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes
in the community for the anti-stigma minitreatment.
    We administered an endline survey from May to November 2019. In both the baseline
and endline surveys, the primary survey respondent is the head of household. For some
questions (in particular, self-reported HIV testing, HIV knowledge, and HIV-related stig-
matizing attitudes) we also surveyed other adults who were present at the time of the survey.
The sample is composed of 3,658 households included in the endline survey, composed of
22,773 individuals, of whom 12,152 were children (aged below 18) at the time of the endline
survey. Household-level outcomes are reported by the primary household respondent or by
aggregating reports of surveyed individuals.
    The primary outcome of interest in this study is HIV testing at the household level. We
focus on an objective, administrative measure of HIV testing by our study participants.17
At the end of the endline survey, our survey team recommended that individuals in the
household be tested for HIV (if they had not had a test performed within the past three
months) at their local health clinic within the next 14 days. Local health clinics in each
study community collaborated with us to conduct the HIV testing and facilitated collection
of testing data. To allow tracking of those who followed through with testing, households
were given coupons redeemable for a financial incentive (50 MZN) at the health clinic after
 17 This   approach follows Kranzer et al. (2017).



                                                     11
having the HIV test.18 Coupons had a unique code for each household, allowing us to track
their redemption. Households were given as many coupons as needed, for however many
individuals did not know their status or who reported being HIV negative but were tested
more than three months in the past. To receive the financial incentive after having their
HIV test, individuals had to present the coupon to our research staff (also stationed at the
health clinic), along with a form signed by clinic staff that the individual had just gotten
an HIV test.
    An indicator for at least one of a household's coupons being used (indicating at least
one household member had an HIV test in the 14-day window after the endline survey)
is our primary outcome variable. Because this outcome is a directly-observed, admin-
istratively recorded health behavior, it avoids potential reporting biases associated with
survey-reported HIV testing. Conceptually, it captures a household's receptiveness to a
recommendation to be HIV tested.
    As a secondary outcome, we examine a self-reported measure of HIV testing: an indicator
for anyone in the household having had an HIV test in the previous 12 months, reported
in the endline survey (self-reported by adults, and reported by the primary caregiver for
children under the age of 18). Prioritizing the coupon-based measure of HIV testing over
the self-reported measure follows a decision rule we pre-specified in our PAP, stemming from
the fact that treatment effects differ across the two measures (see section 4.2 below).
    We also examine secondary outcome variables related to information and stigma mech-
anisms, reported in the endline survey. These outcomes are at the individual level, for all
adult respondents of the endline survey. The information questions assess objective knowl-
edge about HIV: correct transmission methods, incorrect transmission methods ("transmis-
sion myths"), protection methods, and treatment. Stigma questions measure stigmatizing
attitudes towards HIV-positive individuals (would buy food from HIV-positive seller, would
allow HIV-positive teacher, would keep a relative's HIV-positive status secret, would care
for HIV-positive relative). The questions measuring stigmatizing attitudes are adopted from
the AIDS Indicator Survey of the DHS Program, which have been used in Mozambique as
well as other DHS countries since 2003 (INS, 2017). Figure 2 shows how responses to these
questions have been evolving over time. There has been a substantial increase in HIV-
supportive attitudes (reductions in stigma) in recent years for three of the questions, but
increasing stigmatizing attitudes for the fourth (on keeping a relative's HIV-positive status
secret). Please see Appendix D for the full list of information and stigma questions.
  18 PPP $1 was equal to 20.62 meticais (MZN) in 2018. 50 MZN is approximately the daily cost of living

for a poor household in Mozambique. In Mozambique, 62.4% and 81.5% of the population are under the
$1.90 and $3.20 (2011 PPP) per day poverty thresholds, respectively (World Bank, 2020), and our study
households are typically below these thresholds.




                                                  12
3.4    Methodology
We aim to estimate causal effects of the FCC program using a randomized controlled trial
(RCT) methodology. Random assignment allows estimated relationships to be interpreted
as causal effects, rather than simply correlations. Our approach involves a three-stage
randomized controlled trial methodology to estimate causal effects of the FCC program,
and to shed light on some of the mechanisms through which its effects operate.
    Figure 1 displays the research design and timeline of the study. In November 2016, we
randomly assigned 76 communities to be FCC treatment communities or control commu-
nities (Randomization Stage 1), after which WEI/Bantwana initiated the program in FCC
treatment communities. FCC beneficiary counts in WEI/Bantwana's data indicate rela-
tively smooth enrollment of FCC beneficiaries across quarters, from Q1 (Jan-Mar) 2017 to
Q1 (Jan-Mar) 2018. The program then continued serving beneficiaries, remaining active
through the period of our endline survey.
    We administered informed consent and included households in the study sample from
May to November 2017 for 98.7% of our eventual sample.19 Appendix Figure A.1 displays
the number of households that were enrolled in the study sample by month. WEI/Bantwana's
data indicate that about two-thirds to three-quarters of eventual FCC beneficiaries (depend-
ing on program subcomponent) had received their first contact with the program by Q3
(Oct-Dec) 2017. The fact that household enrollment into the study occurred after initiation
of FCC program activities raises potential concerns about selection into treatment commu-
nities. We show in Section 5.1.1 below that observable characteristics of households show no
relationship with FCC treatment, and that there is no impact of treatment on in-migration
into treatment communities.
    After households were enrolled in the study, households in treatment communities were
randomly assigned to FCC-enrolled vs. FCC-ambient status (Randomization Stage 2), and
afterwards CCWs conducted home visits to FCC-enrolled households. We implemented the
endline survey from May to November 2019. At the end of the endline survey we randomly
assigned households to the minitreatments (Randomization Stage 3) and offered all house-
holds encouragement coupons for HIV testing. We collected the HIV testing encouragement
coupons up to each community's deadline (14 days after conclusion of the endline survey in
a community). We now discuss each of the three stages of randomization in detail.

Randomization Stage 1: Assigning FCC and Control Communities

The FCC program is a community-level intervention, so the first stage was random selection
of communities to receive or not receive the FCC program. FCC interventions are centered
in primary and secondary schools, so geographic areas of interest are residential areas sur-
  19 46 households in one community (1.3% of the sample) were enrolled in Mar 2018 due to an implemen-

tation error. For simplicity we refer to May-Nov 2017 as our household enrollment period.



                                                 13
rounding schools. (We refer to areas surrounding schools simply as "communities", each
of which has a "focal school" where school-based program components are implemented.)
WEI/Bantwana consulted with local implementing partners (LIPs) and government officials
in the three provinces and seven districts in which the FCC program was to be implemented
to identify a set of 76 communities deemed eligible for the program. These communities
were chosen on the basis of being geographically proximate to ART sites (health clinics of-
fering HIV testing and treatment), having sufficient populations of orphans and vulnerable
children (OVCs), and having no other active donor funded HIV/AIDS programs. These
76 communities were then sorted into stratification cells of matched community pairs, sets
of two communities that were very similar in terms of distance to ART sites, school type
(secondary or primary), and student enrollments.
    Within each matched pair, treatment status was randomly assigned to one community,
with the other school assigned to control status. Randomization of treatment status within
matched pairs helps ensure balance in baseline characteristics between treatment and con-
trol units, so that treatment-control comparisons can then be credibly interpreted as causal
effects of the program. This random assignment was carried out on the computer of one
of the coauthors, one time, with no re-randomization. We communicated the result of the
randomization to WEI/Bantwana in November 2016. The FCC program was then imple-
mented in treatment communities, and not in control communities. Maps of the locations
of FCC treatment and control communities can be found in Appendix F.

Randomization Stage 2: FCC Enrollment within FCC Communities

The second stage of randomization, at the household level, was implemented only within
treatment communities. This randomization stage was motivated by concerns that treat-
ment effect estimates based on generally comparing households in treatment and control
communities would have low statistical power (because of low penetration of the program in
treatment communities). This stage of randomization creates a subgroup in treatment com-
munities, FCC-enrolled households, with relatively high take-up or participation in the FCC
program. Estimates of the impact of the FCC program comparing FCC-enrolled households
to households in control communities, therefore, have higher statistical power.
    Among households in FCC communities who consented and were included in the study
sample, a subset was randomly assigned to "FCC enrolled" status. GPS coordinates and
household head's name and contact information of FCC-enrolled households were provided
to WEI/Bantwana and their local implementing partners (LIPs). LIP staff (case care work-
ers, CCWs) then conducted home visits to these households.
    We carried out the randomization one FCC community at a time, with no re-randomization,
on the computer of one of the co-authors, in November and December 2017.20 Seven-twelfths
 20 By   November 2017, we had completed all enrollments of households in the study sample necessary for



                                                   14
(58.33%) of study households in each FCC community were assigned to FCC-enrolled sta-
tus.21 Other households not randomly selected for direct enrollment, which we refer to as
"FCC-ambient", end up being exposed to the FCC program at lower rates.
    CCWs conducted home visits with FCC-enrolled households alongside their broader FCC
responsibilities over the course of the following several months. Our research team supported
LIPs with training in use of GPS devices to locate households using latitude and longitude
coordinates. WEI/Bantwana reported that CCWs had completed home visits to 44% of
FCC-enrolled households by February 2018. This figure rose to 64% by May 2018, and 77%
by their final update to our research team in November 2018 (six months before the start
of the endline survey).
    We pre-specified in our PAP that the causal effect of FCC-enrollment would be of primary
interest, while the causal effect of FCC-ambient status would be of secondary interest. In this
paper, we focus on effects of FCC-enrollment, and report FCC-ambient effects in overview
in Section 5.3 below (with full detail in the Populated PAP).

Randomization Stage 3: The Minitreatments

In the third part of our randomized methodology, after households completed the endline
survey, we randomly assigned them to one of five treatment conditions or a control condition.
We refer to these post-endline-survey treatments as "minitreatments". The outcome variable
of interest for the minitreatments is the redemption of the incentive coupon for HIV testing.
This outcome is the only HIV testing outcome we observe after the minitreatments, because
the self-reported measure is collected in the endline survey itself.
    We originally conceived of these minitreatments as providing insight into whether the
FCC program is complementary with or substitutable for more targeted interventions to
promote HIV testing. The minitreatments turn out to help reveal likely mechanisms through
which the FCC program's (negative) effects operate.
    The minitreatments were randomly assigned, and then implemented by the same research
staff member who had just administered the endline survey to the respondent.22 For further
randomization of FCC-enrolled status (Randomization Stage 2). The implementation of Randomization
Stage 2 was spread out over November and December 2017, as we completed data cleaning and finalized
the study sample before implementing the randomization, community by community. The one community
whose 46 household study enrollments were delayed until March 2018 happened to have been a control
community, so there was no Randomization Stage 2 for that community.
  21 Because the FCC-enrolled treatment was to be of primary interest, we chose to have the probability

of FCC enrollment be slightly above half, to increase our statistical power to detect the FCC-enrolled
treatment effect. The probability of seven-twelfths derived from the ratio of 35 out of 60 households in the
targeted endline survey sample in each community. Due to attrition, we have fewer than 60 households per
community in the ultimate sample for analysis in this paper.
  22 When we started the endline survey, we had IRB approval for only the anti-stigma (item 1 below),

HIV/AIDS information (2), and ART information (3) minitreatments, and were awaiting IRB approval
of an amendment to add two additional treatments: HIV/AIDS and ART information combined (4), and
high incentive for HIV testing (5). For the first 14 study communities (659 households), households were
randomly assigned with one-fourth probability each to minitreatments 1, 2, 3, or control (item 6 below).



                                                    15
information about these treatments (including links to videos), please see Appendix E.

   1. Anti-Stigma : Individual-specific information aimed at reducing concerns about HIV-
      related stigma in the community. Past surveys in Mozambique have shown that many
      stigmatizing attitudes have fallen over time, as depicted in Figure 2.23 However,
      individuals tend not fully realize this. Yu (2020) shows that correcting such overly-
      pessimistic beliefs about stigma can encourage HIV testing.24 The anti-stigma mini-
      treatment follows the Yu (2020) protocol. We ask endline-survey respondents about
      the fraction of residents in their community they think hold specific stigmatizing at-
      titudes towards people living with HIV. Respondents overestimating this fraction for
      any question are told the true (lower) value we collected from the baseline survey. As
      predicted by our theoretical model, informing people that the rate of stigmatization
      against HIV-positive individuals is actually lower than they think can lead them to be
      more willing to get an HIV test.

   2. HIV/AIDS Information: Factual information about HIV/AIDS, delivered through a
      short video presented on a computer tablet, in a language chosen by the respondent.
      The video covers the negative health consequences of leaving HIV infection untreated,
      how HIV infection transmits, and how infected people may look and feel normal before
      the infection develops into AIDS.

   3. Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) Information: Factual information about ART, deliv-
      ered through a short video presented on a computer tablet, in a language chosen by
      the respondent. The video stresses that HIV infection is no longer a death sentence
      because free ART treatment is available and effective in helping people stay healthy
      and preventing transmission. The point that ART helps reduce transmission is poten-
      tially important, because this fact is often not widely known (Kaler et al., 2016). It
      explains that taking a test opens the door to access to ART for infected people.

   4. Both HIV/AIDS and ART Information: The combination of items 2 and 3 above.
      Respondents assigned to this minitreatment are shown both the HIV/AIDS and ART
      Information videos, in that order.

   5. High Incentive for HIV Testing: Each HIV testing coupon offered to the household
      provides a financial incentive of 100 MZN or PPP $4.85, instead of the 50 MZN (PPP
After approval of the IRB amendment adding minitreatments 4 and 5, in the remaining 62 communities
(2999 households), households were randomly assigned with one-sixth probability each to minitreatments 1
through 5 or control (6).
  23 Figure 2 shows improvements over time in three out of the four stigma measures that have been consis-

tently used in the past AIS surveys. The anti-stigma minitreatment focuses on the three measures for which
we can deliver positive news about the absence of HIV-related stigma. For each of these three questions, we
correctly report that majorities in one's community have supportive (non-stigmatizing) attitudes.
  24 Similar "norm-based" interventions have been studied in contexts such as energy consumption (Schultz

et al., 2007), attitudes toward healthy sexual relationships (Banerjee et al., 2019), and female labor force
participation (Bursztyn et al., 2020).


                                                    16
      $2.42) coupons offered to all other households. This minitreatment helps scale the size
      of other minitreatment effects with respect to variation in financial incentives.

    6. Control: None of the above minitreatments.

    The minitreatments were randomly assigned on the computer of one of the co-authors one
time, with no re-randomization. The randomization was stratified by unique combinations
of community, FCC-enrolled status, and baseline asset level.25 Figure 1 presents the full
cross-cutting set of treatments, indicating the number of households per cell.


4     Hypotheses
4.1     Study Registration, Pre-Analysis Plan, and Pre-Results Re-
        view
We registered this study on the AEA RCT Registry (ID AEARCTR-0003990) on March
8, 2019 (https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.3990-5.0). On that date, we uploaded our first pre-
analysis plan (PAP) to the registry. This date was prior to the endline survey and HIV
testing coupon redemption, which were carried out between May and November 2019.
    We had previously submitted our study as a Pre-Results Review Paper to the Journal
of Development Economics (JDE). The JDE refereeing process led to minor changes to our
pre-specified analyses. The JDE accepted our Pre-Results Review Paper on July 22, 2019
(Yang et al., 2019). We then uploaded the JDE Pre-Results Review Paper to our AEA RCT
Registry as our second (and final) PAP on July 24, 2019.26 Both time-stamped PAPs are
available for public viewing at our AEA RCT Registry record.
    The submission of the second PAP was two months into the seven-month period covering
the endline survey and HIV testing coupon redemption. No changes to the PAP between our
first and second PAP submissions were informed by any analyses of endline or HIV testing
coupon redemption data. Prior to submitting the second PAP, we had only conducted data
quality control checks for feedback to enumerators in the field.
    The differences between the first and second PAPs are as follows. In the first PAP, we
stated two final outcomes of primary interest: 1) the coupon-based HIV testing measure,
and 2) school attendance of children. We classified self-reported HIV testing as an outcome
of secondary interest. In response to JDE referee and editor feedback, in the second PAP,
we stated only one final outcome of primary interest: the combined measure of HIV testing
(equal to one if either the coupon-based or self-reported HIV testing measure was equal to
  25 For stratification by baseline asset levels, we grouped households into three groups: above median of a

baseline asset index, below median baseline asset index, and missing data on baseline asset index.
  26 Following acceptance based on pre-results review, the JDE allows authors to submit the full-length

paper, with results, to other journals. Further details are available at http://jde-preresultsreview.org/.



                                                    17
one, and zero otherwise). The two components of this HIV testing measure (self-reported
and coupon-based) were individually listed as of secondary interest. We also stated in
the second PAP the decision rule that if treatment effects differed across the self-reported
and coupon-based HIV testing outcomes, we would base conclusions on the coupon-based
measure. We also relegated child school attendance to be of secondary interest.27
    This paper reports on all primary analyses pre-specified in our second and final PAP,
as well as a selection of secondary analyses. Remaining secondary analyses are described
briefly in Section 5.3 below, and more fully in our Populated PAP.28 All empirical analyses
in this paper are conducted exactly as pre-specified, with one modification: all regressions
include a control variable for a community's affectedness by Cyclone Idai, which struck our
Sofala and Manica study areas in March 2019, immediately prior to the endline survey and
HIV testing coupon redemption (see Appendix Section G for further details). We did not
mention this control variable in either PAP. Inclusion of this control has a negligible impact
on treatment effect estimates, but assuages concerns that treatment effects are confounded
by chance correlation between the cyclone's incidence and our randomized treatments. The
Populated PAP presents regression results without the control for Cyclone Idai affectedness.
    In the remainder of this paper, "PAP" refers to the second and final PAP.


4.2     Primary Hypotheses
HIV testing is the outcome variable of primary interest because it is a prerequisite for ben-
efiting from the FCC program in the health domain.29 HIV testing opens the door to FCC
interventions promoting ART treatment initiation and adherence. Our hypotheses related to
HIV testing focus on household-level outcomes because the intervention components related
to HIV testing are delivered at the household level (not at the individual level).
    The primary question of interest in this study is: what is the impact of FCC enrollment
on HIV testing? We address this question by estimating the causal effect of a household
being randomly assigned to enrollment in the FCC program. In estimating this effect, all
households in control communities serve as the control group.30 We hypothesized in our
PAP that FCC enrollment would have a positive effect on HIV testing.
   27 The second PAP also listed a few robustness tests recommended by referees ("Other Secondary Analy-

ses"), the results of which we present in the Populated PAP.
   28 We follow Duflo et al. (2020),         assembling the full set of pre-specified analyses in a
Populated PAP document.             The Populated PAP can be accessed at our research website,
https://fordschool.umich.edu/mozambique-research/fcc-hiv-aids.
   29 Our HIV testing outcomes include both adults and children. Adults' HIV status is an important

determinant of the outcomes of children in their households. HIV testing can lead adults to learn they are
HIV positive, leading them to initiate ART, with positive effects on children in their households. HIV testing
is also important for children (those aged below 18), in particular after puberty and sexual debut leads to
non-trivial rates of new HIV infection. There are also much lower but nonzero rates of HIV infection from
mothers (or other household members) to younger children.
   30 FCC-ambient households in treatment communities are the subject of secondary analyses, discussed

briefly in Section 5.3 and more extensively in the Populated PAP.



                                                     18
    Our primary outcome of interest is an indicator that at least one of a household's HIV
testing coupons has been redeemed. This is a household-level variable equal to 1 if at least
one of a household's encouragement coupons was presented at the local health clinic for the
HIV testing incentive payment before the 14-day deadline, and 0 otherwise. In presenting
this coupon-based HIV testing measure as our primary outcome of interest, we are following
a decision rule pre-specified in our PAP (page 11): if treatment effects on the coupon-based
HIV testing measure differ significantly from treatment effects on the self-reported HIV
testing measure, we would base our conclusions on the coupon-based measure. We pre-
specified this decision rule because of concerns that the self-reported testing measure may
be subject to reporting biases due to experimenter demand effects (Orne, 1962; Rosenthal,
1966; Zizzo, 2010; De Quidt et al., 2018). Experimenter demand effects may lead testing
to be differentially overstated in the endline survey by treated households. Because the
coupon-based measure is an administrative outcome, it is immune from reporting biases.
Coupons were only redeemable with written confirmation of having just had an HIV test.31
    While we focus on the coupon-based HIV testing measure, we also show treatment effects
on the self-reported HIV testing measure. This outcome is an indicator equal to 1 if at least
one household member is reported in the endline survey to have had an HIV test in the last
12 months, and 0 otherwise. In addition, we show treatment effects on the composite HIV
testing measure that is equal to 1 if HIV testing (self-reported) is equal to 1 or HIV testing
(coupon-based) is equal to 1, and 0 otherwise.32


4.3      Secondary Hypotheses
A number of pre-specified secondary hypotheses are of interest, in particular outcomes rep-
resenting potential mechanisms. We hypothesized in the PAP that FCC-enrollment would
lead to improvements in HIV-related knowledge and reductions in HIV-related stigmatizing
attitudes.
    In addition, we hypothesized that the minitreatments would have positive effects on HIV
testing overall, and that these effects would be smaller among FCC-enrolled households (i.e.,
that the minitreatments and FCC enrollment would be substitutes).33


4.4      Multiple Hypothesis Testing
To conduct correct statistical inference in the context of testing multiple hypotheses, we do
the following. To reduce the number of hypotheses tested, following Finkelstein et al. (2010)
 31 Please  refer to Appendix C.3 for further details on the coupon-based testing measure.
 32 In  our PAP we said that this composite outcome would be our primary outcome variable of interest if
treatment effects on its components (self-reported HIV testing and coupon-based HIV testing) were similar.
Our decision rule leads us to downgrade this composite measure to secondary status.
  33 We will see that the opposite turns out to be the case, revealing ways in which the FCC program was

deficient in the areas of information and stigma.



                                                   19
and Almeida et al. (2014), we construct indices of HIV-related knowledge and HIV-related
stigmatizing attitudes. Within sets of related coefficients, we report p-values adjusted for
the familywise error rate on each coefficient, following the List et al. (2019) method, modified
to allow inclusion of control variables by Barsbai et al. (2020).
    We pre-specified our multiple hypothesis test (MHT) adjustments incompletely (and
with some errors) in the PAP. We describe here the MHT adjustments we carry out in each
table, making clear which adjustments were pre-specified, which were not, and how we have
rectified pre-specification errors. We follow the PAP whenever possible, and otherwise have
sought to remain true to the spirit of the pre-specified MHT adjustments.

    · Table 1. As pre-specified, we report MHT-adjusted p-values within the set of the
      three coefficients on Treatment status in Columns 1-3.

    · Table 2. As pre-specified: 1) we adjust p-values within the set of two coefficients
      on Treatment in column 1 (coupon-based HIV testing measure) and 3 (self-reported
      HIV testing measure), and 2) we do not adjust the p-value on Treatment in column 4
      (combined HIV testing measure), since the outcome in that regression combines infor-
      mation from the outcomes in columns 1 and 3. We pre-specified this MHT adjustment
      presuming the primary outcome of interest would be the combined HIV testing mea-
      sure. We did not pre-specify what MHT correction we would apply if we followed the
      pre-specified decision rule that leads us to prioritize the coupon-based HIV testing
      measure over the combined measure. Now that we are in this case, a more natural
      approach would be to apply the MHT adjustment among the three coefficients on
      Treatment in columns 1, 3, and 4.34 For coefficients in Column 2, we report p-values
      adjusted for MHT across all five coefficients in that column.35

    · Tables 3 and 4. First, we reduce the number of outcomes by creating indices of
      overall knowledge, knowledge subindices by topic, and stigmatizing attitudes. Second,
      when we examine multiple outcomes (knowledge subindices and the separate stigma
      questions), we apply MHT adjustments within outcome families (the knowledge and
      stigma families separately). In the PAP, we said that we would apply MHT adjust-
      ments within one family of the 33 knowledge questions, and separately within the
      family of four stigma questions. Due to an oversight, we did not pre-specify creation
      of indices. Analyses of the indices should therefore be taken as exploratory, but we note
      that analysis of such indices is a widely-used approach to addressing MHT concerns
      (Finkelstein et al. (2010), Almeida et al. (2014)).
  34 Such an adjustment would lead to even larger p-values, strengthening the conclusion of null Treatment

(FCC-enrolled) effects in these regressions.
  35 Column 2 estimates Equation 9, which was not pre-specified in our PAP; it is a simplified version of

pre-specified Equation 11 below, and simply highlights Comparison A, the pure effect of the FCC program.
The MHT adjustments we apply to the coefficient p-values in Column 2 (Equation 9), Table 2 are analogous
to the MHT adjustments we apply to the coefficient p-values in Column 2 (Equation 11), Table 5.


                                                   20
             Table 3. We apply no MHT adjustment to the coefficient p-value in Column 1;
       the overall index incorporates information from all knowledge questions, so the single
       coefficient on Treatment in this regression reveals impacts on overall knowledge. We
       apply MHT adjustments within the set of five Treatment coefficients in Columns 2-6.
           Table 4. MHT adjustments in this table are analogous to those we apply in Table
       3: we do not adjust the coefficient p-value in Column 1, and we adjust coefficient p-
       values within the group of four coefficients in Columns 2-5.

    · Table 5. The MHT adjustment we pre-specified in our PAP was incomplete: when
      stating the set of coefficients we would consider as a group when adjusting p-values, we
      listed just three out of five of the minitreatment coefficients (and interaction terms),36
      and we neglected to include the coefficient on the main effect of Treatment in the
      set of coefficients listed. We now conservatively adjust p-values within a larger set of
      coefficients than pre-specified: for Column 1, we apply MHT adjustment to p-values
      within the group of all six coefficients presented; for Column 2, do the same within
      the group of all 11 coefficients presented.


5     Empirical Analyses
We estimate impacts of Treatment (FCC-enrolled) status using ordinary-least-squares re-
gression analyses, with the following regression equation:

            Yijs =  + T reatmentijs + F CCambientijs + Cyclonej + s + ijs                                   (8)

    Yijs is the post-treatment outcome for individual or household i in community j in
stratification cell (matched pair) s. T reatmentijs is the indicator that community j was
randomly assigned as an FCC community, and that household i was randomly assigned to
FCC-enrolled status in that community (1 if so, and 0 otherwise). F CCambientijs is the in-
dicator for a household being in a treatment community but not randomly assigned to FCC-
enrolled status (1 if FCC-ambient, and 0 if not). (Both T reatmentijs and F CCambientijs
are equal to zero for anyone in a control community. In other words, T reatmentijs and
F CCambientijs partition households in treatment communities into two mutually exclusive
subgroups.) Cyclonej is a control for affectedness by Cyclone Idai, which struck many study
areas in March 2019, immediately prior to the start of endline survey fieldwork. Inclusion
of this control absorbs residual variance and addresses any chance correlation of treatment
with cyclone exposure. We measure cyclone affectedness as the estimated maximum wind
speed experienced in community j , as predicted by a simple model of hurricane windspeed,
  36 Specifically, we failed to edit this part of the 2nd (final) PAP after adding two additional minitreatments

between the 1st and 2nd PAPs.



                                                      21
as in Yang (2008) and Mahajan and Yang (2020).37 s is a fixed effect for stratification cell
s.38 ijs is a mean-zero error term. We cluster standard errors at the level of 76 commu-
nities (Moulton, 1986). For each coefficient we report p-values after making corrections for
multiple hypothesis testing (MHT) (as described in Section 4.4).
    The coefficient  is the primary treatment effect of interest. It is the intent to treat (ITT)
effect of assignment to FCC-enrolled status. The coefficient  is the corresponding effect
of being in an FCC treatment community but not being assigned to FCC-enrolled status;
as pre-specified, this is of secondary interest. Random assignment allows these coefficients
to be interpreted as causal effects. In this paper we focus on the primary effect of FCC
enrollment, the coefficient  on T reatmentijs .


5.1        Treatment Effect Estimates
We first discuss balance with respect to treatment, and whether attrition is related to
treatment. Then we turn to treatment effect estimates.

5.1.1      Balance and Attrition

In Appendix Section H, we test and discuss whether there is any relationship between
our randomized treatments, on the one hand, and household characteristics at the time
of study enrollment, in-migration, and endline survey attrition, on the other. Balance
tests are important because, as mentioned in Section 3.4, enrollment of households into the
study sample occurred slightly after the start of FCC program activities in communities
(Randomization Stage 1).
    In Appendix Table A.3, we find no imbalance of household characteristics at study
enrollment, in-migration, or attrition with respect to our primary randomized treatment
of interest, assignment to Treatment (FCC-enrolled) status. In Appendix Tables A.4 and
A.5, we also show analogous tests for balance and differential migration with respect to the
Randomization Stage 3 minitreatments. These regressions have large numbers of coefficients,
so random variation would lead some coefficients to be statistically significant by chance. We
also find no indication of imbalance in these analyses: the share of statistically significant
coefficients is very similar to what would be expected to occur by chance.

5.1.2      Impacts on Contacts with FCC Program

We first examine treatment effects on knowledge of, contact with, and services provided
by the FCC local implementing partner (LIP) organization. While we are not conducting
  37 Forfurther details on this cyclone affectedness measure, see Appendix G.
  38 The inclusion of the stratification cell fixed effects reduces standard errors by absorbing residual vari-
ation. Stratification is at the level of 38 matched pairs of communities within which treatment status was
randomly assigned (so stratification cell fixed effects are equivalent to matched pair fixed effects).



                                                      22
instrumental variables (IV) estimation, these could be considered "first stage" outcomes that
confirm and measure the extent to which the FCC program reached the intended benefi-
ciaries. These outcomes come from the endline survey, reported by the primary household
respondent. We examine an indicator for a household having heard of the LIP, an indicator
for a household having been visited by a Case Care Worker (CCW) of the LIP, and an
indicator for a household having been referred to or received any services from the LIP. The
indicator is constructed from several survey questions asking about services received from
non-government organizations (NGOs), and which organization provided these services.
    Regression results from estimating Equation 8 for these are in Table 1. Treatment leads
to higher rates of having heard of, been contacted by, or received services referred by the
LIP. Each coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero.
    These results indicate that the FCC program did differentially reach households in treat-
ment communities compared to households in control communities.39 That said, these
treatment effect estimates imply contact and referral rates for treated households that are
lower than expected in advance. WEI/Bantwana reported (based on data collected from
LIPs) that 77.0% of households assigned to treatment (FCC-enrolled) status were success-
fully administered a home visit by a CCW. By contrast, our estimates imply that 13.9% of
FCC-enrolled households were contacted by LIPs, and 21.2% were referred to any service
by LIPs (these figures are the sum of the mean in the control group and the coefficient on
Treatment in Columns 2 and 3). It is possible that households under-report interactions
with LIPs. The fact that the share of FCC-enrolled households saying they were referred to
any service by LIPs is larger than the share saying they were contacted by LIPs is one indi-
cation of under-reporting. Reasons for under-reporting may include that CCWs interacted
with a different household member than the survey respondent, the survey respondent has
forgotten the interaction with the LIPs, or the survey respondent did not correctly report
the identity of the organization with which the household had a contact or referral.40
    To the extent that the rates of CCW visit and receipt of FCC services are not just due
to under-reporting, any treatment effects that we do find should be interpreted as lower
bounds on the effect of an FCC-like program if it were to be implemented with higher rates
of penetration into the population.41
  39 The means of the outcome variables are nonzero in control communities. This is to be expected, because

LIPs are established local organizations with other activities separate from the FCC program.
  40 When presented with these results, WEI/Bantwana also suggested that some households may have

received only brief evaluative visits by CCWs, were found to no longer meet OVC criteria, and were not
visited again. These visits could then have been imperfectly recalled in the endline survey.
  41 Note that all treatment effect estimates below are based on equation 8, so they are ITT estimates and

therefore not inflated by these low reported rates of contact (as they would be in IV regressions).




                                                    23
5.1.3   Impacts on HIV Testing

We now test the primary hypotheses of impacts on HIV testing. Results are presented in
Table 2. The coefficient on the pre-specified primary outcome of interest, the coupon-based
HIV testing measure (Column 1), is negative but not statistically significantly different from
zero at conventional levels. The point estimate indicates a 2.47 percentage point decline in
testing rates, relative to the 26.3% rate in control communities. This treatment effect is
based on Comparison B in Figure 1, comparing testing rates of all FCC-enrolled households
to all households in control communities.
    That estimate is not the "pure" effect of FCC enrollment, because many FCC-enrolled
households were assigned the Randomization Stage 3 minitreatments before being offered
the HIV testing coupons. The treatment effect in Column 1 is an average treatment effect,
pooling households who received minitreatments with those who did not. If there is any
interaction between the minitreatments and FCC enrollment, the estimate in Column 1 will
not be identical to the pure effect of FCC enrollment.
    The pure effect of FCC enrollment is given by Comparison A in Figure 1, the testing
rate of FCC-enrolled households in treatment communities who did not receive any mini-
treatment, compared to the testing rate of control community households who also did not
receive any minitreatment. While we pre-specified that we would estimate Comparison A in
the context of analyzing the Randomization Stage 3 minitreatments (in Section 5.2 below,
Table 5), we show a simplified version of it here as well in Table 2, to emphasize the contrast
between Comparisons A and B.
    We estimate the pure effect of FCC enrollment (Comparison A) using the following
modification of Equation 8:

           Yijs =  + T reatmentijs + T reatmentijs × AnyM initreatmentijs
               + F CCambientijs + F CCambientijs × AnyM initreatmentijs                    (9)
               + AnyM initreatmentijs + Cyclonej + s + ijs

    AnyM initreatmentijs is an indicator equal to 1 if a household received any of the
minitreatments, and 0 otherwise. Equation 9 includes this as a main effect as well as in
interaction with T reatmentijs and F CCambientijs .
    We present coefficient estimates from this regression in Column 2. The coefficient 
in this regression is the pure effect of FCC enrollment on households not receiving any
minitreatment. This effect is negative and statistically significantly different from zero (p-
value 0.022). The coefficient indicates a -10.5 reduction in HIV testing rates, which is very
large (two-fifths of the mean HIV testing rate in control community households).
    The coefficient  on the interaction term represents how the impact of FCC enrollment
changes when a household receives some minitreatment. This coefficient is positive, large in


                                              24
magnitude, and statistically significantly different from zero (p-value 0.014).
    These coefficient estimates in Column 2 indicate that FCC enrollment by itself (the neg-
ative coefficient  ) has a large negative effect on HIV testing. Receiving some minitreatment
offsets this negative effect of FCC enrollment (the positive coefficient ).  and  are about
the same magnitude, indicating that receiving any minitreatment approximately counteracts
the negative effect of FCC enrollment.
    Which minitreatment(s) in particular is (are) having this positive counteracting effect?
We defer this to Section 5.2 when we examine the separate minitreatments in detail.
    To conclude the discussion of Table 2, we proceed to Columns 3 and 4. In Column
3 we estimate Equation 8 where the outcome variable is self-reported HIV testing from
the endline survey. The coefficient is positive, small in magnitude, and not statistically
significantly different from zero. We can compare this treatment effect estimate to expert
predictions elicited in advance. Prior to our results being known, in DellaVigna et al. (2020)
collected from subject-matter experts their forecasts of the treatment effect of being FCC-
enrolled on self-reported HIV testing.42 The mean expert prediction was 11.36 percentage
points. The actual treatment effect, 3.08 percentage points, is statistically significantly
below the expert prediction (p-value < 0.001).
    Comparing the coefficients on treatment in Columns 1 and 3, we can say with confidence
that the coefficient on T reatmentijs in Column 1 is more negative than the coefficient in
Column 3: an F-test rejects equality of the two at the 10% level (p-value 0.0858). Even more
striking, the coefficients on T reatmentijs in columns 2 and 3 are statistically significantly
different from one another at the 1% level (p-value 0.0021). These statistical tests lead us
to follow our pre-specified PAP decision rule to base substantive conclusions on the coupon-
based HIV testing measure, rather than the self-reported HIV testing measure.
    For completeness, in Column 4 we show the coefficient on T reatmentijs from estimation
of Equation 8 when the outcome variable is the composite HIV testing measure. The
coefficient is positive, but modest in size and not statistically significantly different from
zero.
    In sum, FCC enrollment leads to lower rates of HIV testing. To explore the mechanisms
through which this negative effect operates, we now turn to analyses of endline survey
outcomes in Section 5.1.4, and detailed analyses of the minitreatments in Section 5.2.

5.1.4    Potential Mechanisms Behind Negative Impacts on HIV Testing

We now shed light on mechanisms behind the negative impact of FCC enrollment on HIV
testing. We focus on two key mechanisms we pre-specified: information on HIV/AIDS,
and HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes. As emphasized in the theoretical model, worsened
  42 DellaVigna et al. (2020) elicited predictions from 73 anonymous experts, mostly in December 2019. The

online survey eliciting predictions closed on January 3, 2020.




                                                   25
misinformation could lead to heightened stigma and thereby lower HIV testing. The 33
information and four stigma questions are detailed in Appendix Section D.
    In Table 3 we estimate Equation 8 using individual-level data, examining impacts of
treatment on knowledge regarding HIV/AIDS. These regressions implement Comparison B
in Figure 1, comparing outcomes of all FCC-enrolled households to all households in control
communities. This is the appropriate comparison because outcomes of interest in the table
are measured in the endline survey, and therefore cannot be affected by the minitreatments
(which happened after the endline survey).
    In Column 1, we examine impacts on an overall HIV knowledge index (the share of
questions answered correctly). In Columns 2 to 6, we examine analogous knowledge sub-
indices by topic: correct methods of HIV transmission, myths about HIV transmission,
methods to protect against HIV, and treatments for HIV. Each index is defined so that
higher values represent improvements in knowledge.
    Treatment status has no large or statistically significant impact on the overall index or
any of the subindices, except for the outcome in Column 4, the "transmission myth index".
These are questions about whether HIV can be transmitted in certain ways, all of which
are not transmission channels (in other words, correct answers to these questions are all
"no"): mosquito bites, shaking hands, kissing, sharing food, or witchcraft. Strikingly, the
impact is negative, indicating that knowledge on this front worsens: respondents are more
likely to believe myths about HIV transmission. This negative coefficient on treatment is
statistically significantly different from zero (p-value 0.099).43
    The other key mechanism through which HIV testing might be influenced by the FCC
program is HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes. We examine impacts on responses to four
yes/no questions from the AIDS Indicator Survey of the Demographic and Health Surveys
(DHS), which have been fielded in Mozambique and other DHS countries since 2003 (INS,
2017). We examine treatment effects on an index of the four questions (Column 1), as well as
on responses to each question separately (Columns 2-5). Each outcome variable is defined
such that higher values indicate less stigma (Column 1 is the share of non-stigmatizing
responses, and the remaining columns are indicators for giving a non-stigmatizing response.)
    We report regression results in Table 4. Column 1 indicates that treatment worsens
stigmatizing attitudes: the coefficient is negative and statistically significant (p-value 0.015).
Treatment reduces the share of non-stigmatizing responses by 1.24 percentage points. The
standard deviation of this outcome variable is 0.1463, so this treatment effect is equal to
0.085 of a standard deviation.
    Results in the other columns of the table indicate that treatment effects on each stigma
question individually are also negative, but none are individually statistically significantly
different from zero at conventional levels.
  43 Regression analyses of Treatment effects on each of the 33 individual knowledge questions can be found

in our Populated PAP.



                                                    26
5.2    Minitreatments
The results presented so far are consistent with the theoretical model presented above.
Increased misinformation about transmission may lead people to believe the probability of
transmission is higher, leading to higher stigma against people with HIV, and thus to lower
HIV testing rates. However, the above results do not prove conclusively that increased
misinformation and higher stigma are mechanisms or intermediate links in the causal chain
linking the FCC program with testing.
    The minitreatments help reveal potential mechanisms behind the negative effects of
FCC enrollment more directly. If FCC-enrollment inadvertently caused misinformation
about HIV to rise, leading to increases in HIV-related stigma, and as a result depressing
HIV testing, then interventions providing correct HIV information and alleviating stigma
concerns should raise HIV testing differentially among FCC-enrolled households.
    We first examine the effect of the minitreatments by estimating the following modification
of Equation 8:



  Yijs = + T reatmentijs + F CCambientijs +  Mijs + Cyclonej + s + ijs .                  (10)

    Yijs is the coupon-based HIV testing measure (the only outcome available after the
minitreatments). Mijs is a vector of indicator variables for each of the five minitreatments.
 is the vector of coefficients representing the intent to treat (ITT) effects of household
assignment to the corresponding minitreatment.
    Analyses of the minitreatments' effects on the FCC-enrolled treatment effect are con-
ducted using the following regression equation, which is a modification of Equation 10:


  Yijs = + T reatmentijs + F CCambientijs +  Mijs +  T reatmentijs × Mijs
                                                                                          (11)
         +  F CCambientijs × Mijs + Cyclonej + s + ijs .

    This regression is similar to Equation 10, but adds interaction terms between T reatmentijs
and each of the minitreatments, as well as interaction terms between F CCambientijs and
each of the minitreatments. These interaction terms reveal whether the effects of the mini-
treatments differ for FCC-enrolled and FCC-ambient households, compared to the effect in
control communities. Because of the inclusion of these interaction terms, the coefficients
in the vector  represent the ITT effects of assignment to the respective minitreatment in
control communities.
    The coefficients in the vector  represent the difference in the ITT effect of the respective
minitreatments for FCC-enrolled households, compared to the effect of the minitreatments
for households in control communities. Alternately, they represent how the respective mini-


                                              27
treatment changes the effect of FCC-enrollment, compared to the effect of FCC-enrollment
for households receiving no minitreatment. (There are analogous coefficients related to the
effects for FCC-ambient households.)
    Both Equations 10 and 11 are as described in our pre-analysis plan. Results from esti-
mating Equations 10 and 11 are displayed in Table 5.
    Estimation of the average effects of minitreatments in the full sample (Equation 10,
Column 1) reveals that the high-value coupon has a positive effect on HIV testing rates,
7.29 percentage points, that is statistically significantly different from zero (p-value 0.012).
    Estimation of differential effects of the minitreatments across treatment groups (Equation
11, Column 2) provides explanations for the effects found in prior results tables. The
coefficient on the treatment main effect (top row of Column 2) represents the impact of
treatment status for individuals who did not get any of the minitreatments. The coefficient is
negative, large in magnitude (10.9 percentage points), and statistically significantly different
from zero (p-value 0.022).44
    Coefficients on the interaction terms between treatment status and each minitreatment
(coefficient rows 7-11 of Column 2) indicate how the minitreatments modify the main effect
of FCC enrollment. Nearly all the interaction term coefficients are positive, and most are
large in magnitude and statistically significantly different from zero at conventional lev-
els. Providing HIV-related information, providing ART-related information, counteracting
concerns about HIV-related stigma, and providing higher financial incentives all improve
the impact of FCC-enrolled status on HIV testing. The exception to this pattern is the
coefficient on the interaction term with the combined HIV and ART information treatment,
which is negative, much smaller in magnitude, and not statistically significantly different
from zero at conventional levels. It is possible that providing too much information to re-
spondents reduces the effectiveness of all information provided, perhaps by causing lapses
in respondents' attention or retention.45
    The main effects of the minitreatments in Column (2) (coefficient rows 2-6) represent
impacts in control communities. Most effects are negative, small in magnitude, and not
statistically significantly different from zero. The exception is the coefficient on the anti-
stigma treatment, which is negative and statistically significantly different from zero (p-
value 0.076) in control communities (2nd row, Column 2). This may reveal that in control
communities, where people may not have HIV-related stigma at top of mind, simply raising
  44 This  coefficient is nearly the same as the coefficient in Table 2, Column 2, discussed previously, but
is not exactly identical because Equation 11 replaces the "Any Minitreatment" indicator (and associated
interaction terms) with the full set of five separate minitreatment indicators.
  45 In pre-specified secondary analyses, we show that the finding that the information minitreatments offset

the negative "pure" effect of the FCC program on HIV testing is robust to pooling the information minitreat-
ments rather than examining their effects individually. We estimate a modified version of Equation 11 in
which we pool the HIV information, ART information, and combined HIV/ART information minitreatment
indicators into one "Pooled HIV and ART information" minitreatment indicator. In this analysis, which
we show in the Populated PAP, the coefficient on the Treatment * "Pooled HIV and ART information"
interaction term is negative and statistically significantly different from zero.


                                                     28
the topic of stigma may increase its salience. In control communities, people may not
pay as much attention to the actual quantitative information we provide on HIV-related
stigmatizing attitudes, and only increase their worry that going for an HIV test may reveal
to others that they are at high risk of having HIV in their household. This then leads the
anti-stigma treatment to have a negative effect on testing in control communities.
    The positive interaction term on "Treatment * Anti-Stigma" in the same column could
then indicate that once concerns about HIV-related stigma had previously been raised (by
FCC enrollment itself), the anti-stigma treatment can have a positive effect by revealing to
people that stigmatizing attitudes are not as bad as they previously thought.
    All told, this analysis of the minitreatments provides additional support for the inter-
pretation of our prior results. The negative effect of FCC enrollment on HIV testing likely
stems from the unintended consequence that the program worsened HIV-related misinfor-
mation, leading to increases in stigmatizing attitudes and a large decline in HIV testing.
From this starting point of a negative effect of FCC enrollment, the minitreatments provid-
ing correct HIV information and countering concerns about HIV-related stigma raise HIV
testing among FCC-enrolled households.


5.3    Other Pre-specified Analyses
In the PAP, we pre-specified some secondary analyses not reported in this paper. The
Populated Pre-Analysis Plan (Populated PAP) contains results of all pre-specified analyses,
including those presented in this paper. We briefly discuss them here.
    We pre-specified that the impacts of FCC-ambient status were of secondary interest.
FCC-ambient households are those in treatment communities who were not randomly as-
signed to FCC enrollment in Randomization Stage 2. FCC-ambient households are included
in all samples analyzed in this paper. All regressions include an indicator for FCC-ambient
status (and corresponding interaction terms with minitreatments, as appropriate) on the
right-hand-side. FCC-ambient effects are generally smaller in magnitude and less statis-
tically significant than FCC-enrolled effects. No effects of minitreatments among FCC-
ambient households are statistically significantly different from effects of minitreatments in
control communities. These patterns reflect that FCC-ambient households had less contact
with the FCC program than FCC-enrolled households.
    In other pre-specified analyses, we present treatment effect estimates from estimation of
Equation 8 where the dependent variables are indicators for correct answers to each of 33
HIV knowledge questions, positive responses to three questions on positive attitudes related
to HIV, and "safe" responses to eight questions on sexual behavior. Among these results, one
that stands out is that FCC enrollment leads to a reduction in reported number of sexual
partners in the last 12 months (p-value 0.060). We view this finding as related to increased
fears of transmission of HIV (due to increases in beliefs in transmission myths), as well as


                                             29
fears of stigma should one become infected with HIV.46
    We also find no large or statistically significant effect of FCC enrollment on child school
attendance, life satisfaction, or household asset ownership. We examine impacts on anti-
retroviral therapy (ART) initiation and adherence among individuals who self-report being
HIV positive, and also find no large or statistically significant treatment effects. Finally,
we find no evidence of spillovers (via geographic or social proximity) from FCC-enrolled to
FCC-ambient households within FCC communities.


6     Conclusion
We study the impacts of a widespread community health program on HIV testing in Mozam-
bique. We exploit a multilevel randomized research design to identify causal effects. We
find that the program Força à Comunidade e Crianças (FCC) had a negative effect on
HIV testing rates. Analysis of rich survey data on secondary outcomes suggests that the
program's negative impacts are due to increased misinformation about HIV, and worsened
HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes.
    This interpretation is bolstered by additional treatments we administered at the house-
hold level. These additional treatments providing correct HIV-related information and coun-
tering HIV-related stigma concerns make the treatment effects of the FCC program on HIV
testing rates more positive, suggesting that the FCC program was deficient in these areas.
    We provide a rare glimpse into the impacts and mechanisms of a widespread community-
level program seeking to raise HIV testing. Our results point to a thus-far neglected pos-
sibility: programs seeking to raise HIV testing may fail due to deficiencies in information
provision and in counteracting HIV-related stigma. Indeed, such programs may inadver-
tently worsen HIV knowledge and increase stigmatizing attitudes, leading to less voluntary
HIV testing.
    These results suggest priority directions for future research. A key question is how exactly
the program led to increased misinformation on HIV transmission, and to worsened HIV-
related stigmatizing attitudes. It is possible that providing basic information that HIV is
transmitted via bodily fluids could lead people to believe in transmission myths, since some
of these also involve possible sharing of bodily fluids (e.g., shaking hands, kissing, sharing
food). FCC home visits could have also increased the salience of HIV and of HIV-related
stigmatizing attitudes in the community, if it was known in the community that home visits
by program staff (CCWs) were targeted towards households with HIV infection.47
  46 Delavande et al. (2014) offer a theoretical model explaining how increased stigma could reduce risky

sexual behavior, since stigma imposes additional social costs for HIV-positive individuals.
  47 CCWs explicitly had responsibilities to regularly visit households with HIV-infected people, to promote

adherence to antiretroviral therapy (ART). A CCW home visit could have been taken by observers as a
signal that someone in the household was infected with HIV.




                                                    30
    Because we did not anticipate these negative findings, we did not collect information
needed to understand how the program could have increased misinformation and worsened
stigmatizing attitudes. In future studies, it will be important to collect detailed data on what
exactly program staff do, what kind of information they convey, and how people react to
and interpret the information. It is also important to understand how people respond to and
interpret home visits, either as recipients of visits or observers of others' visits. This could
require high-frequency household surveys as the program is taking place, in combination with
spot checks and direct observation of program staff. Controlled lab-in-the-field studies could
also reveal mechanisms through which people come to believe incorrect information (such
as transmission myths), and how they come to acquire HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes
and concerns about such stigma.
    A related area for future exploration is ways to improve people's knowledge about HIV
and to reduce HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes. Our own findings suggest that there
are simple and cheap ways to improve knowledge and to reduce stigma, as evidenced by
the effects of our minitreatments (at least among households who had suffered worsened
information and heightened concerns about stigma beforehand). Future work should seek
to pursue these and other related research directions.


References
Akerlof, G. A., J. L. Yellen, and M. L. Katz (1996). An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing in the
  United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2), 277­317.
Almeida, R., S. Hirshleifer, D. McKenzie, C. Ridao-Cano, and A. L. Yener (2014). The Impact of Vocational
  Training for the Unemployed: Experimental Evidence from Turkey. Economic Journal 126 (597), 2115­
  2146.
Baird, S., C. McIntosh, and B. Ozler (2011, Oct). Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash Transfer
  Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4), 1709­1753.
Banerjee, A., E. L. Ferrara, and V. Orozco-Olvera (2020). The Entertaining Way to Behavioral Change:
  Fighting HIV with MTV. Working Paper .
Banerjee, A., E. L. Ferrara, and V. H. Orozco-Olvera (2019). The Entertaining Way to Behavioral Change:
  Fighting HIV With MTV. NBER Working Paper 26096 .
Barsbai, T., V. Licuanan, A. Stienmayr, E. Tiongson, and D. Yang (2020). Information and the Acquisition
  of Social Network Connections. NBER Working Paper 27346 .
Belay, H., F. Alemseged, T. Angesom, S. Hintsa, and M. Abay (2017). Effect of Late HIV Diagnosis on
  HIV-Related Mortality Among Adults in General Hospitals of Central Zone Tigray, Northern Ethiopia:
  A Retrospective Cohort Study. HIV/AIDS - Research and Palliative Care 9, 187­192.
Bendavid, E., C. B. Holmes, J. Bhattacharya, and G. Miller (2012). HIV Development Assistance and Adult
  Mortality in Africa. JAMA 307 (19), 2060­2067.
Bharadwaj, P., M. M. Paic, and A. Suziedelyte (2017). Mental Health Stigma. Economics Letters 159,
  57­60.
Bryant, M. and J. Beard (2016). Orphans and Vulnerable Children Affected by Human Immunodeficiency
  Virus in Sub-Saharan Africa. Pediatric Clinics 63 (1), 131­147.
Bryant, M., J. Beard, L. Sabin, M. I. Brooks, N. Scott, B. A. Larson, G. Biemba, C. Miller, and J. Simon



                                                   31
   (2012). PEPFAR's Support for Orphans and Vulnerable Children: Some Beneficial Effects, But Too
   Little Data, And Programs Spread Thin. Health Affairs 31 (7), 1508­1518.
Bursztyn, L., A. L. Gonzalez, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2020). Misperceived Social Norms: Women Working
   Outside the Home in Saudi Arabia. American Economic Review 110 (10), 2997­3029.
Case, A., C. H. Paxson, and J. Ableidinger (2004). Orphans in Africa: Parental Death, Poverty, and School
   Enrollment. Demography 41 (3), 483­508.
Chen, L., X. Pan, Q. Ma, J. Yang, Y. Xu, J. Zheng, H. Wang, X. Zhou, T. Jiang, J. Jiang, L. He, and
   J. Jiang (2017). HIV Cause-Specific Deaths, Mortality, Risk Factors, and Combined Influence of HAART
   and Late Diagnosis in Zhejiang, China, 2006-2013. Scientific Reports 7, 42366.
Chong, A., M. Gonzalez-Navarro, D. Karlan, and M. Valdivia (2013). Effectiveness and Spillovers of Online
   Sex Education: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Colombian Public Schools. NBER Working
   Paper Series W18776 .
Ciancio, A., A. Delavande, and H.-P. Kohler (2020). Mortality Risk Information, Survival Expectations
   and Sexual Behaviors. University of Pennsylvania Population Center Working Paper (PSC/PARC),
   2020-39 20, 817­875.
De Quidt, J., J. Haushofer, and C. Roth (2018). Measuring and Bounding Experimenter Demand. American
   Economic Review 108, 3266­3302.
Delavande, A. and H.-P. Kohler (2012). The Impact of HIV Testing on Subjective Expectations and Risky
   Behavior in Malawi. Demography 49, 1011­1036.
Delavande, A., M. Sampaio, and N. Sood (2014). Hiv-related social intolerance and risky sexual behavior
   in a high hiv prevalence environment. Social Science & Medicine 111, 84­93.
DellaVigna, S., N. Otis, and E. Vivalt (2020). Forecasting the Results of Experiments: Piloting an Elicitation
   Strategy. American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings 110, 75­79.
Derksen, L., A. Muula, and J. van Oosterhout (2020). Love in the Time of HIV: Testing as a Signal of Risk.
   Natural Field Experiments .
Duflo, E., A. Banerjee, A. Finkelstein, L. Katz, B. Olken, and A. Sautmann (2020). In Praise of Moderation:
   Suggestions for the Scope and Use of Pre-Analysis Plan for RCTs in Economics. NBER Working Paper
   Series W26993 .
Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2015). Education, HIV, and Early Fertility: Experimental Evidence
   from Kenya. American Economic Review 105 (9), 2757­2797.
Dupas, P. (2011). Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence from a Field Experiment in
   Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1), 1­34.
Dupas, P. and E. Miguel (2016). Impacts and Determinants of Health Levels in Low-Income Countries.
   Handbook of Field Experiments .
Durlauf, S. N. and L. E. Blume (2008). In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Palgrave Macmillan.
Evans, D. K. and E. Miguel (2007). Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A Longitudinal Analysis. Demogra-
   phy 44 (1), 35­57.
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, H. Allen, J. Gruber, J. Newhouse, B. Wright, and K. Baicker (2010). The
   Short-Run Impact of Extending Public Health Insurance to Low-Income Adults: Evidence from the First
   Year of the Oregon Medicaid Experiment. Analysis Plan .
Ford, N., C. Migone, A. Calmy, B. Kerschberger, S. Kanters, S. Nsanzimana, E. Mills, G. Meintjes, M. Vi-
   toria, M. Doherty, , and Z. Shubber (2018). Benefits and Risks of Rapid Initiation of Antiretroviral
   Therapy. AIDS 32 (1), 17­23.
Friedman, W. H. (2018). Antiretroviral Drug Access and Behavior Change. Journal of Development Eco-
   nomics 135, 392­411.
Furuya, K. (2002). A Socio-economic Model of Stigmaand Related Social Problems. Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 48, 281­290.
Godlonton, S., A. Munthali, and R. Thornton (2016). Responding to Risk: Circumcision, Information, and




                                                     32
   HIV Prevention. Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (2), 333­349.
Goldberg, R. E. and S. E. Short (2016). What Do We Know About Children Living With HIV-Infected
   Or AIDS-Ill Adults in Sub-Saharan Africa? A Systematic Review of The Literature. AIDS Care 28 (2),
   130­141.
Gong, E. (2015). HIV Testing and Risky Sexual Behaviour. The Economic Journal 125 (582), 32­60.
Granich, R. M., C. F. Gilks, C. Dye, K. M. De Cock, and B. G. Williams (2009). Universal Voluntary HIV
   Testing with Immediate Antiretroviral Therapy as a Strategy for Elimination of HIV Transmission: A
   Mathematical Model. The Lancet 373 (9657), 48­57.
Greenwood, J., P. Kircher, C. Santos, and M. Tertilt (2019). An Equilibrium Model of the African HIV/AIDS
   Epidemic. Econometrica 87 (4), 1081­1113.
Hoffmann, M., S. MacCarthy, A. Batson, A. Crawford-Roberts, J. Rasanathan, A. Nunn, L. A. Silva, and
   I. Dourado (2016). Barriers Along the Care Cascade of HIV-Infected Men in a Large Urban Center of
   Brazil. AIDS Care 28, 57­62.
INS (2017). Inquerito de Indicadoresde Imunizacao, Malaria eHIV/SIDA 2015. INS.
Ishida, J. (2003). The Role of Social Norms in a Model of Marriage and Divorce. Journal of Economic
   Behavior & Organization 51, 131­142.
Ivers, L. C., J. E. Teng, J. G. Jerome, M. Bonds, K. A. Freedberg, and M. F. Franke (2014). A Randomized
   Trial of Ready-to-Use Supplementary Food Versus Corn-Soy Blend Plus as Food Rations for HIV-Infected
   Adults on Antiretroviral Therapy in Rural Haiti. Clinical Infectious Diseases 58 (8), 1176­1184.
Jamison, J., D. Karlan, and P. Raffler (2013). Mixed Method Evaluation of a Passive mHealth Sexual
   Information Texting Service in Uganda. Information Technologies & International Development 9 (3),
   1­28.
Kaler, A., N. Angotti, and A. Ramaiya (2016). They are Looking Just the Same": Antiretroviral Treatment
   as Social Danger in Rural Malawi. Social Science & Medicine 167, 71­78.
Kiene, S. M., S. C. Kalichman, K. M. Sileo, N. A. Menzies, R. Naigino, C.-D. Lin, M. H. Bateganya,
   H. Lule, and R. K. Wanyenze (2017). Efficacy of An Enhanced Linkage to HIV Care Intervention at
   Improving Linkage to HIV Care and Achieving Viral Suppression Following Home-Based HIV Testing
   in Rural Uganda: Study Protocol for The Ekkubo/PATH Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial. BMC
   Infectious Diseases 17 (1), 460.
Kim, B., B. Haile, and T. Lee (2017). Promotion and Persistence of HIV Testing and HIV/AIDS Knowledge:
   Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial in Ethiopia. Health Economics 26 (11), 1394­1411.
Kranzer, K., J. Bradley, J. Musaazi, M. Nyathi, H. Gunguwo, W. Ndebele, M. Dixon, M. Ndhlovu,
   A. Rehman, P. Khan, F. Vogt, T. Apollo, and R. A. Ferrand (2017). Loss to Follow-up Among Children
   and Adolescents Growing up with HIV Infection: Age Really Matters. Journal of the International AIDS
   Society 20, 21737.
Kranzer, K., V. Simms, T. Bandason, E. Dauya, G. McHugh, S. Munyati, P. Chanzi, S. Dakshina, H. Mujuru,
   H. A. Weiss, and R. A. Ferrand (2017). Economic Incentives for HIV Testing by Adolescents in Zimbabwe:
   A Randomized Controlled Trail. Lancet HIV 5, 79­86.
Larson, B. A., N. Wambua, J. Masila, S. Wangai, J. Rohr, M. Brooks, and M. Bryant (2013). Exploring
   Impacts of Multi-Year, Community-Based Care Programs for Orphans and Vulnerable Children: A Case
   Study From Kenya. AIDS Care 25 (sup1), S40­S45.
List, J. A., A. M. Shaikh, and Y. Xu (2019). Multiple Hypothesis Testing in Experimental Economics.
   Experimental Economics 22 (4), 773­793.
Lubega, P., F. Nakakawa, G. Narciso, C. Newman, and C. Kityo (2019). HIV Status, Role Models and
   Attainable Goals: Experimental Evidence on Inspiring Women in Uganda. Working Paper .
Mahajan, A. P., J. N. Sayles, V. A. Patel, R. H. Remien, S. R. Sawires, D. J. Ortiz, G. Szekeres, and T. J.
   Coates (2008). Stigma in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic: A Review of the Literature and Recommendations
   for the Way Forward. AIDS 22 2, S67­S79.




                                                    33
Mahajan, P. and D. Yang (2020). Taken by Storm: Hurricanes, Migrant Networks, and U.S. Immigration.
   American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12 (2), 250­77.
McCoy, S. I., P. F. Njau, C. Fahey, N. Kapologwe, S. Kadiyala, N. P. Jewell, W. H. Dow, and N. S. Padian
   (2017). Cash vs. Food Assistance to Improve Adherence to Antiretroviral Therapy Among HIV-Infected
   Adults in Tanzania. AIDS 31 (6), 815­825.
Moffitt, R. (1983). An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma. The American Economic Review 73 (5), 1023­35.
Moulton, B. R. (1986). Random Group Effects and The Precision of Regression Estimates. Journal of
   Econometrics 32 (3), 385­397.
Nyberg, B. J., D. D. Yates, R. Lovich, D. Coulibaly-Traore, L. Sherr, T. R. Thurman, A. Sampson, and
   B. Howard (2012). Saving Lives for A Lifetime: Supporting Orphans and Vulnerable Children Impacted
   by HIV/AIDS. JAIDS Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes 60, S127­S135.
Orne, M. T. (1962). On the Social Psychology of the Psychological Experiment: With Particular Reference
   to Demand Characteristics and Their Implications. American Psychologist 17, 776­783.
O'Flaherty, B. and R. Sethi (2008). Racial Stereotypes and Robbery. Journal of Economic Behavior and
   Organization 68 (3-4), 511­524.
PEPFAR (2006). Orphans and Other Vulnerable Children: Programming Guidance for United States Gov-
   ernment In-Country Staff and Implementing Partners. Washington, USA: PEPFAR.
PEPFAR (2017). 2017 Annual Report to Congress. Washington, USA: PEPFAR.
PEPFAR (2020). PEPFAR 2020 Annual Report to Congress. Washington, USA: Washington, USA: United
   States Department of State.
Rodger, A., V. Cambiano, T. Bruun, P. Vernazza, S. Collins, O. Degen, G. M. Corbelli, V. Estrada,
   A. Geretti, and A. Beloukas (2019). Risk of HIV Transmission Through Condomless Sex in Serodifferent
   Gay Couples with the HIV-Positive Partner Taking Suppressive Antiretroviral Therapy (PARTNER):
   Final Results of a Multicentre, Prospective, Observational Study. The Lancet 393 (10189), 2428­2438.
Rosenthal, R. (1966). Experimenter Effects in Behavioral Research. New York, USA: Appleton-Century-
   Crofts.
Schultz, P. W., J. M. Nolan, R. B. Cialdini, N. J. Goldstein, and V. Griskevicius (2007). The Constructive,
   Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms. Psychological Science 18, 429­434.
Shann, M. H., M. H. Bryant, M. I. Brooks, P. Bukuluki, D. Muhangi, J. Lugalla, and G. Kwesigabo (2013).
   The Effectiveness of Educational Support to Orphans and Vulnerable Children in Tanzania and Uganda.
   ISRN Public Health 2013, 1­9.
Simmons, R. D., B. C. Ciancio, M. M. Kall, B. D. Rice, and V. C. Delpech (2013). Ten-year Mortality
   Trends Among Persons Diagnosed with HIV Infection in England and Wales in the Era of Antiretroviral
   Therapy: AIDS Remains a Silent Killer. HIV Medicine 14, 596­604.
Ssewamala, F. M., C.-K. Han, and T. B. Neilands (2009). Asset Ownership and Health and Mental Health
   Functioning Among AIDS-Orphaned Adolescents: Findings from A Randomized Clinical Trial in Rural
   Uganda. Social Science & Medicine 69 (2), 191­198.
Stangl, A. L., J. K. Lloyd, L. M. Brady, C. E. Holland, and S. Baral (2013). A Systematic Review of
   Interventions to Reduce HIV-Related Stigma and Discrimination from 2002 to 2013: How Far Have We
   Come? Journal of the International AIDS Society 16, 18734.
Thornton, R. L. (2008). The Demand for, and Impact of, Learning HIV Status. American Economic
   Review 98 (5), 1829­1863.
UNAIDS (2019). UNAIDS Data 2018. Geneva, Switzerland:: Joint United Nations Programme on
   HIV/AIDS.
UNAIDS (2020). UNAIDS Data 2019. Geneva, Switzerland:: Joint United Nations Programme on
   HIV/AIDS.
United Nations (2016). Political Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to Accelerating the
   Fight Against HIV and to Ending the AIDS Epidemic by 2030. New York, USA: United Nations General




                                                    34
   Assembly.
US State Department (2015). PEPFAR Country/Regional Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2016 Guidance.
   The U.S. President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. PEPFAR.
US State Department (2019). Congressional Budget Justification: Department of State, Foreign Operations,
   and Related Programs Fiscal Year 2020. District of Columbia, USA: United States Department of State.
USAID (2012). Guidance for Orphans and Vulnerable Children Programming. The U.S. President's Emer-
   gency Plan for AIDS Relief. PEPFAR.
Vishwanath, T. (1989). Job Search, Stigma Effect, and Escape Rate from Unemployment. Journal of Labor
   Economics 7 (4), 487­502.
Whetten, K., J. Ostermann, B. W. Pence, R. A. Whetten, L. C. Messer, S. Ariely, K. O'Donnell, A. I.
   Wasonga, V. Vann, D. Itemba, M. Eticha, I. M. andN. M. Thielman, and POFO (2015). Three-Year
   Change in The Well being of Orphaned and Separated Children in Institutional and Family-Based Care
   Settings in Five Low-And Middle-Income Countries. PLOS One 9 (8), 1­10.
WHO (2017). Mozambique: HIV Country Profile: 2016. WHO.
World Bank (2020). Work Bank Open Data.
Yang, D. (2008). Coping with Disaster: The Impact of Hurricanes on International Financial Flows. B.E.
   Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 13.
Yang, D., A. Mahumane, J. Riddell, and H. Yu (2019). Direct and Spillover Impacts of a Community-
   Level HIV/AIDS Program: Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trail in Mozambique. Journal of
   Development Economics, Pre-Results Review Paper, Stage 1 .
Yotebieng, M., K. E. Moracco, H. Thirumurthy, A. Edmonds, M. Tabala, B. Kawende, L. K. Wenzi, E. W.
   Okitolonda, and F. Behets (2017). Conditional Cash Transfers Improve Retention in PMTCT Services
   by Mitigating the Negative Effect of Not Having Money to Come to The Clinic. Journal of Acquired
   Immune Deficiency Syndromes 74 (2), 150­157.
Yu, H. (2020). Social Stigma as a Barrier to HIV Testing: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in
   Mozambique. University of Michigan Working Paper .
Zizzo, D. J. (2010). Experimenter Demand Effects in Economic Experiments. Experimental Economics 13,
   75­98.




                                                  35
            Figure 1: Randomization Design and Timeline


     Randomization             Randomization              Randomization
           Stage 1                   Stage 2                    Stage 3
            (Nov. 2016)        (Nov. ­ Dec. 2017)      (Immediately Following
                                                             Endline Survey,
                                                           May ­ Nov. 2019)       Pure Control
                                                                                   334 Households


                                                                                   HIV Info.
                                                                                   332 Households


                             Control                                               ART Info.
                           Communities                                             325 Households

                           38 Communities                                       HIV & ART Info.
                           1812 Households                                         250 Households


                                                                                  Anti-Stigma
                                                                                   321 Households


                                                                                   High Value
                                                                                    Coupon
                                                                                   250 Households


                                                                                 Pure Control
                                                                                  200 Households


                                                                                   HIV Info.
                                                                                  176 Households


                                                                                   ART Info.
Full Sample                                                                       209 Households
76 Communities

3658 Households
                                                      FCC Enrolled              HIV & ART Info.
                                                       1068 Households            145 Households


                                                                                  Anti-Stigma
                                                                                  193 Households


                                                                                  High Value
                          FCC Treatment                                            Coupon
                                                                                  145 Households
                           Communities
                           38 Communities                                        Pure Control
                           1846 Households                                        146 Households


                                                                                   HIV Info.
                                                                                  152 Households


                                                                                   ART Info.
                                                      FCC-ambient                 129 Households

                                                       778 Households           HIV & ART Info.
   Comparison A
                                                                                  102 Households

   Comparison B
                                                                                  Anti-Stigma
                                                                                  144 Households


                                                                                  High Value
                                                                                   Coupon
                                                                                  105 Households



                                   Study Enrollment          Endline Survey            Coupon-Based HIV Testing

                                  (May ­ Nov. 2017)        (May ­ Nov. 2019)            (14 Days After Endline)




                                              36
       Figure 2: Stigma Environment Measures in Mozambique over Time




Source: Data points for 2003, 2009, 2011, 2015 are calculated from the nationally representative
sample of Mozambique AIDS Indicator Survey (AIS) under the Demographic and Health Surveys
program (www.dhsprogram.com) funded by USAID. Data points for 2017 are calculated by taking
simple averages from the baseline survey of this study.




                                                37
            Table 1: Knowledge of, Contact with, and Services Provided by FCC LIPs

                                                  (1)                         (2)                        (3)
              VARIABLES                   Heard of FCC LIP         Visited by Case Worker         Received Services


              Treatment                          0.150                     0.0658                       0.111
                                               (0.0252)                   (0.0110)                    (0.0211)
                                                [0.002]                    [0.001]                     [0.002]

              Observations                      3,658                      3,658                       3,658
              R-squared                         0.123                      0.072                       0.101
              Obs level                       Household                  Household                   Household
              Control Mean Dep. Var.            0.482                     0.0563                       0.100

Notes: Dependent variables are as follows. Column 1: indicator for having heard of the FCC local implementing
partner (LIP) organization. Column 2: indicator for having been visited by the LIP Case Care Worker (CCW).
Column 3: indicator for having received any services from the FCC program. "Treatment" is indicator equal to one
if household randomly assigned to "FCC enrolled" status in Randomization Stage 2, and zero otherwise. Coefficient
on Treatment was pre-specified as of primary interest in this study. All regressions control for indicator for "FCC
ambient" status, matched pair fixed effects, and for a community-level index of affectedness by Cyclone Idai. Standard
errors clustered at the community level in parentheses. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing (as described
in Section 4.4) in square brackets.


                                                Table 2: HIV Testing

                                                 (1)                    (2)                 (3)                  (4)
          VARIABLES                       Coupon Redemption    Coupon Redemption     Self-Reported      Combined HIV
                                            for HIV Testing      for HIV Testing      HIV Testing       Testing Measure


          Treatment                             -0.0247                 -0.105          0.0308                  0.0257
                                               (0.0188)               (0.0386)         (0.0245)                (0.0199)
                                                [0.341]                [0.022]          [0.364]                 [0.201]
          Any Minitreatment                                            -0.0256
                                                                      (0.0259)
                                                                       [0.332]
          Treatment * Any minitreatment                                 0.103
                                                                      (0.0403)
                                                                       [0.014]

          Observations                          3,658                  3,658            3,489                3,658
          R-squared                             0.058                  0.060            0.034                0.031
          Obs level                           Household              Household        Household            Household
          Control Mean Dep. Var.                0.263                  0.263            0.652                0.721

Notes: Dependent variables are as follows. Columns 1­2: indicator equal to one if someone in household got an
HIV test at local health clinic (based on redemption of encouragement coupon for HIV testing), and zero otherwise.
Column 3: indicator equal to one if someone in household self-reported in endline survey having gotten an HIV test
in last 12 months, and zero otherwise. Column 4: indicator that either the coupon-based or self-reported HIV testing
measures is equal to one, and zero otherwise. "Treatment" defined in Table 1. "Any Minitreatment" is indicator equal
to one if household was assigned to any minitreatment after the endline survey in Randomization Stage 3, and zero
otherwise. See Section 5.2 for definition of minitreatments. All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient"
status, matched pair fixed effects, and for a community-level index of affectedness by Cyclone Idai. Regression
in Column 2 also includes interaction term between "Any Minitreatment" and indicator for "FCC ambient" status.
Standard errors clustered at the community level in parentheses. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing
(as described in Section 4.4) in square brackets.



                                                              38
                                    Table 3: HIV-Related Knowledge

                              (1)            (2)                   (3)                  (4)                (5)           (6)
 VARIABLES                   HIV         General HIV       Correct Methods          Transmission     Protection   Knowledge about
                          Knowledge       Knowledge        of Transmission             Myth           Methods      HIV Treatment
                            Index           Index               Index                  Index           Index           Index


 Treatment                  -0.00358       -0.00247           -0.00372                 -0.0352        0.00537          0.00622
                           (0.00823)      (0.00982)           (0.0134)                (0.0148)       (0.00926)        (0.00958)
                             [0.664]        [0.842]            [0.842]                 [0.099]        [0.656]          [0.608]

 Observations               3,940           3,940              3,940                   3,940              3,940        3,940
 R-squared                  0.063           0.054              0.040                   0.072              0.052        0.067
 Obs level                  Adult           Adult              Adult                   Adult              Adult        Adult
 Control Mean Dep. Var.     0.756           0.623              0.831                   0.747              0.823        0.772

Notes: Dependent variables are as follows. Column 1: fraction of all 33 HIV knowledge questions
answered correctly. Columns 2-6: fraction of subsets of HIV knowledge questions answered cor-
rectly. For full list of knowledge questions and groupings by subcategory, see Appendix Section
D. "Treatment" defined in Table 1. All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient" sta-
tus, matched pair fixed effects, and for a community-level index of affectedness by Cyclone Idai.
Standard errors clustered at the community level in parentheses. P-values adjusted for multiple
hypothesis testing in square brackets.


                          Table 4: HIV-Related Stigmatizing Attitudes

                                (1)                 (2)                    (3)                      (4)                 (5)
 VARIABLES                 HIV Stigma       Buy Groceries          Not Keep               Care for Infected       Infected Teacher
                            Attitude        from Infected       Infected Family           Family Member               Should be
                             Index             Person           Member a Secret            in Own Home            Allowed to Teach


 Treatment                    -0.0124          -0.0132                    -0.0234                 -0.00495            -0.00330
                             (0.00496)        (0.0102)                   (0.0185)                (0.00318)           (0.00644)
                              [0.015]          [0.352]                    [0.359]                  [0.238]             [0.681]

 Observations                  3,820               3,756                  3,777                    3,801               3,748
 R-squared                     0.026               0.039                  0.049                    0.017               0.028
 Obs level                     Adult               Adult                  Adult                    Adult               Adult
 Control Mean Dep. Var.        0.746               0.858                  0.168                    0.993               0.965

Notes: Dependent variables are as follows. Column 1: fraction of four questions on HIV-related
stigma answered in a non-stigmatizing way. Columns 2-5: for each separate question on HIV-related
stigmatizing attitudes, indicator equal to one if answered in a non-stigmatizing way, and zero other-
wise. For full detail on each stigmatizing attitudes question, see Appendix Section D. "Treatment"
defined in Table 1. All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient" status, matched pair
fixed effects, and for a community-level index of affectedness by Cyclone Idai. Standard errors
clustered at the community level in parentheses. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing
(as described in Section 4.4) in square brackets.


                                                              39
      Table 5: Minitreatment Impacts on HIV Testing Coupon Redemption

                                             (1)                         (2)
   VARIABLES                                 HIV Testing                 HIV Testing
                                             Coupon Redemption           Coupon Redemption


   Treatment                                 -0.0249                     -0.109
                                             (0.0188) [0.358]            (0.0389) [0.022]
   Anti-Stigma                               0.00393                     -0.0523
                                             (0.0231) [0.872]            (0.0283) [0.076]
   HIV Info.                                 -0.0138                     -0.0473
                                             (0.0233) [0.568]            (0.0329) [0.168]
   ART Info.                                 -0.00829                    -0.0286
                                             (0.0245) [0.739]            (0.0331) [0.396]
   High Value Coupon                         0.0729                      0.0350
                                             (0.0287) [0.012]            (0.0449) [0.441]
   HIV and ART Info.                         -0.0223                     -0.0129
                                             (0.0242) [0.365]            (0.0368) [0.734]
   Treatment * Anti-Stigma                                               0.142
                                                                         (0.0491) [0.006]
   Treatment * HIV Info.                                                 0.119
                                                                         (0.0526) [0.031]
   Treatment * ART Info.                                                 0.121
                                                                         (0.0547) [0.032]
   Treatment * High Value Coupon                                         0.118
                                                                         (0.0592) [0.056]
   Treatment * HIV and ART Info.                                         -0.0100
                                                                         (0.0555) [0.871]


   Observations                              3,658                       3,658
   R-squared                                 0.062                       0.068
   Obs level                                 Household                   Household
   Control Mean Dep. Var.                    0.263                       0.263

Notes: Dependent variable in both columns is indicator equal to one if someone in household got
an HIV test at local health clinic (based on redemption of encouragement coupons for HIV testing),
and zero otherwise. "Treatment" defined in Table 1. See Section 5.2 for definition of minitreatments.
All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient" status, matched pair fixed effects, and for a
community-level index of affectedness by Cyclone Idai. Column 2 regression also controls for "FCC-
Ambient" indicator interacted with each minitreatment indicator. Coefficients on "FCC-Ambient"
main effect and interaction terms reported in Populated PAP. Standard errors clustered at the
community level in parentheses. P-values adjusted for multiple hypothesis testing (as described in
Section 4.4) in square brackets.
                                                   40
Online Appendix
A      Proof of Proposition 1
We characterize the pure strategy Perfect Bayesian Equilibria of our theoretical model. In
Section 2 the main text, we analyzed the partially separating equilibrium of Proposition 1.
We now analyze the pooling equilibrium.
    In this equilibrium, a fraction P  (0, 1] of individuals in B interact if and only if A has
sought an HIV test. The remaining fraction 1 - P of player B interact with all matches.
The equilibrium is based on some extreme off-equilibrium beliefs about those who do not
test, and P must be large enough to induce universal HIV testing.
    To characterize the pooling equilibrium, first consider the strategy of player A given the
fraction P . A chooses his strategy to

                              max (a v - c + P ya )ta + (1 - P )ya .
                            ta {0,1}

    He will test if and only if

                                                  c - a v
                                          ya >            .
                                                     P
    Assumption (1) yields that c - H v < 0, so all high-risk individuals in A will test. We
next show that, for a pooling equilibrium to exist, all low-risk individuals must also choose
to test, or equivalently,

                                                 c - L v
                                       Pr(ya >           ) = 1.                          (A.1)
                                                    P
   To see why, assume that some low-risk players choose not to test, players in B will
then conclude that the non-test-taker's type is a = L . According to Assumption (4),
every B  B will choose to interact with a low-risk A, and therefore P = 0, which is a
contradiction. For Equation (A.1) to hold, P needs to be large enough such that

                                                 c - L v
                                          P >            .                               (A.2)
                                                    y
   To sum up, given a P  (0, 1] that satisfies the restriction in (A.2), all individuals in A
choose to take tests (universal testing).
   Now consider B 's best responses given universal testing in A. By Assumption (4),
individuals in B will interact with any matched A.
   Since the best response of all player A  A is to get tested, B 's belief about an untested
match can take any value. In fact, this action is off the equilibrium path. A belief that
maximizes P is   ^b (0) = 1. In this case, B will interact with an untested A if and only if


                                                  1
y>^z and P is given by

                                                     ^z
                                          P =             dG .                               (A.3)
                                                 y
    A pooling equilibrium exists if and only if parameters in this model allow both (A.2)
and (A.3) to hold.
    The final step in proving Proposition 1 is ruling out two other types of potential equi-
libria: (i) S = P = 0, (ii) S, P > 0.
    First, consider S = P = 0, which means that all individuals in B interact whether or not
A has been tested. Now the optimization problem A faces becomes

                                      max (a v - c)ta + ya
                                    ta {0,1}

   Assumption (1) implies that the high-risk type will test and the low-risk type will not.
So a player B will update her belief to ^b (1) = H . By Assumption (4), some B  B will
then reject A that has been tested, which contradicts S = 0.
   Then, consider the case where S, P > 0. In this case, A faces the problem of

                           max [a v - c + (P - S )ya ]ta + (1 - P )ya .
                         ta {0,1}

    Suppose P > S > 0, we consider two subcases. First, when P - S is not large enough
to induce universal testing, that is,

                                                c - L v
                                     Pr(ya >            ) < 1,
                                                 P -S
some low-risk A will not test. Hence, individuals in B will update their beliefs to ^b (0) = L .
By assumption (4), B will always interact with untested A, which contradicts P > 0.
   Second, if P - S is large enough to induce universal testing, i.e.,

                                                c - L v
                                     Pr(ya >            ) = 1,
                                                 P -S
then, the rational belief about those who get tested is the average risk level     ^b (1) = h
                                                                                            ¯ . So,
B will accept every tested A, thus S = 0, which also leads to contradiction.
    Suppose S  P > 0, a low-risk A will never test. If some high-risk A choose to test,
then, B will update her belief to   ^b (0) < h
                                             ¯ , which leads to P = 0. If no high-risk A takes a
                                        ^
test either, B will hold the belief of b (0) = h ¯ , which again leads to P = 0. In sum, there is
no equilibrium such that S = P = 0 or S, P > 0.




                                                 2
B     Other Components of FCC Program
The other FCC program components are as follows. These other components reached only
a relatively small fraction of those reached by home visits.

    · Education subsidies for girls: The FCC program provides a limited amount of funding
      to support school participation among girls considered particularly at-risk of dropping
      out of school. LIPs select the most at-risk girls in a particular community after
      consultation with school officials and the Community Child Protection Committee
      (CCPC). Beneficiary secondary school-age girls each receive up to US$75 in school
      fees, and elementary school-age girls up to US$50 in school materials (books and
      uniforms). The exact amounts and funded items vary by community and LIP. In
      FCC communities, 6.33% of households in the endline survey reported benefiting from
      the education subsidies for girls component of FCC. The corresponding share among
      FCC-enrolled households is 6.36%.

    · Child Rights Clubs (CRCs): These are school-based clubs for both girls and boys
      aiming to equip children with knowledge and skills related to child protection, gender-
      based violence, and psychosocial support. Topics covered include early marriage, teen
      pregnancy, reproductive and sexual health, and HIV/AIDS. Participants learn how to
      report abuse and how to make healthy choices. Activities are child-facilitated with
      adult oversight. Girls concurrently also take part in associated "Girls' Empowerment
      Clubs" which provide additional mentoring and support tailored to girls. In FCC com-
      munities, exactly 0% of households (whether FCC-enrolled or overall) in the endline
      survey reported any participation by their children in the Child Rights Clubs (CRCs)
      component of FCC.

    · Health and Nutrition Assessments: Using an established protocol, LIP staff conduct
      nutritional screenings of OVCs aged 6 months to 14 years. Screenings occur in school
      and community settings. Children identified as malnourished may be provided with
      food supplements for a limited period, and the most severely malnourished are referred
      to health clinics. In FCC communities, 3.95% of households reported in the endline
      survey that some child in the household participated in the health and nutrition as-
      sessments component of FCC; the corresponding figure for FCC-enrolled households
      was 4.40%.

    · Youth Economic Strengthening (YES) clubs: YES clubs are a community-based finan-
      cial education program for both girls and boys who are out-of-school OVCs aged 15-18.
      Separate clubs are established for girls and boys. The program provides livelihood and
      entrepreneurship training, aimed at small-scale commercial rather than subsistence
      agriculture. In FCC communities, 0.92% of households reported in the endline survey

                                              3
  that some child in the household participated in the Youth Economic Strengthening
  (YES) component of FCC; the corresponding figure for FCC-enrolled households was
  0.75%.

· Village Savings and Loan (VSL) groups: VSL programs involve facilitating and train-
  ing individuals to organize themselves into simple savings and credit groups, with the
  aim of improving access to savings and credit in populations that are poorly served by
  formal institutions. Members can take loans from the communal pool of savings, upon
  review and approval by the group. Loans are repaid with interest, at an interest rate
  decided upon by the group. Groups manage their own funds, which are all internally
  generated from savings and interest earnings from loans. LIP staff formed VSL groups
  with a mixture of OVC and non-OVC households, as well as youth participating in
  YES clubs. In FCC communities, 4.23% of households reported participating in the
  Village Savings and Loan (VSL) groups component of FCC; the corresponding figure
  for FCC-enrolled households was 3.93%.




                                         4
C      Details of Data Sources
Key data sources are a vulnerability assessment survey administered at household enrollment
in the study, an endline survey, and HIV testing as observed from redemption of testing
encouragement coupons.


C.1      Vulnerabilty Assessment, Household Study Enrollment, and
         Baseline Survey
The target population of this study is OVCs and the households in which they live. OVC
households were identified via door-to-door enumeration of households with a predefined
list of questions to identify orphans and vulnerable children. Due to the sensitive nature
of such questions, the protocol for identifying OVCs and their households was designed in
close consultation with FCC program local implementing partner (LIP) organizations, and
field-tested to ensure cultural acceptance.
    Within both treatment and control communities, creation of the study household sample
proceeded in several stages. First, 120 households were selected for administration of a
vulnerability assessment (VA), whose purpose was to identify OVC households (intended
beneficiaries of the FCC program). In communities surrounding eligible schools, households
were selected for VAs using random-route sampling.1 The VA consisted of a short set
of questions to determine the household's OVC status. Households were defined as OVC
households if any of the following conditions were true: a grandparent was head of the
household (with no parents present); the ratio of children to adults was greater than four;
at least one school-aged child was not attending school; the household ate fewer than two
meals per day; the household goes some days without food; the household has illegal income
or no income; the household has a chronically ill member, an HIV infected member, or a
member receiving antiretroviral therapy (ART); there are orphans in the household (one
or both parents deceased); or an adult died of a chronic illness in the last five years.2 We
administered vulnerability assessment (VA) surveys to 10,056 households. Of these, we
   1 From the focal school in each of 76 study communities, interviewers were given a starting point from

which they followed routing instructions that defined travel directions and selection of households to in-
terview. Directions were randomly assigned, as were distances between successive surveyed households.
This procedure resulted in households distributed as far as two kilometers from the focal school in each
community.
   2 This definition was agreed upon with USAID's Mozambique Mission and World Education/Bantwana,

and captures households disadvantaged for reasons beyond the narrow definition of an OVC according to
PEPFAR. PEPFAR's definition (PEPFAR, 2006) of an OVC is a child, 0-17 years old, who is either orphaned
or made more vulnerable because of HIV/AIDS. An "orphan" is a child who has lost one or both parents to
HIV/AIDS. A child is considered "vulnerable" if he or she: (a) is HIV-positive; (b) lives without adequate
adult support (e.g., in a household with chronically ill parents, a household that has experienced a recent
death from chronic illness, a household headed by a grandparent, and/or a household headed by a child);
(c) lives outside of family care (e.g., in residential care or on the streets); or (d) is marginalized, stigmatized,
or discriminated against.




                                                         5
classified 71.7% as OVC households. These OVC households are the population of interest
in this study.
    We then selected a subset of households for administration of a household baseline sur-
vey. Within the set of OVC households in a community (typically numbering 80-90), 40 were
randomly selected as baseline survey households. The baseline survey asked a comprehen-
sive set of questions at household and individual levels on demographics, health (morbidity,
mortality, and child anthropometric measurements), schooling, assets, income, labor sup-
ply, migration, financial access (credit and savings), and financial decision-making. It also
included a comprehensive set of questions on beliefs about HIV, HIV testing and treatment,
and sexual behavior. These baseline data were mainly used to provide an understanding
of the general characteristics of households in the sample. Because the baseline was not
administered to all households, we make limited use of it in the present study. The base-
line survey's main use for the present paper is as the data source for community-specific
information on HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes, for the anti-stigma minitreatment (see
Appendix Section E.1 below).
    All surveys were conducted in the main local languages spoken in the study districts by
a Mozambican survey research firm under the supervision of the co-authors. The survey
respondent for household-level questions was the adult (aged above 18) household head.
Other adult household members were administered certain survey sections (such as on health
and sexual activity) with individual responses, if they were present at the time of the survey.
For children (aged 0-18), their parent or guardian was asked to answer health questions on
their behalf.
    Survey responses in the field were recorded on digital tablets using SurveyCTO soft-
ware with internal logic checks to reduce data entry error. Real-time digital data collection
eliminated the need for separate data entry from paper surveys, eliminating one important
source of data entry error. Data collected in the field were uploaded to a secure cloud server
at the end of each workday, for immediate review and processing. Exact geo-coordinates
(latitude and longitude) of each household were recorded using the tablet's GPS functional-
ity, greatly easing the process of locating households between the vulnerability assessment,
baseline survey, and endline survey.3
    Vulnerability assessments and administration of informed consent for household enroll-
ment in the study occurred from May to November 2017, with the exception of 46 sample
households (1.3%) in one community that were enrolled in March 2018 due to an implemen-
tation delay. Figure A.1 shows the number of households in our study sample by month of
enrollment.
   3 See our research website (https://fordschool.umich.edu/mozambique-research/fcc-hiv-aids) for our sur-

vey instruments.




                                                    6
      Figure A.1: Number of Study Sample Households Enrolled, by Month




Notes: Number of study sample households administered vulnerability assessment for determination
of OVC status and consenting to participation in this research study, by month from May 2017 to
March 2018. 98.7% of sample households were enrolled in study by November 2017.


    The baseline survey was administered to a randomly-selected subset of households en-
rolled in the study. It was fielded on a rolling basis from May 2017 to March 2018.


C.2     Endline Survey
The endline household survey was administered from May to November 2019. The endline
survey collected data on an array of intermediate and final outcomes. Communities were
surveyed in the same order they were contacted for the vulnerability assessment and study
enrollment in 2017-18.
    Due to budget limitations, we aimed to survey at endline only a subset of households who
had been enrolled in the study in 2017. We first designated for inclusion in the endline survey
all households that had been randomly assigned to be fielded the baseline survey, numbering
approximately 40 per community. We then randomly selected another 20 households from
among study-enrolled households that had been administered only the vulnerability assess-


                                               7
ment but not the full baseline survey. This resulted in a pre-defined sample of study-enrolled
households to include in the endline survey.4
    A total of 4,546 households (59.8 households per community) were targeted for endline
surveying in May-Nov 2019. The sample for analysis in this paper are the 3,658 (80.5%)
who we were able to reach in the endline survey in the first week of endline survey fieldwork
in each community (the endline survey "first round"). We show in Table A.3 in the main
text that there is no imbalance in survey success rates among FCC-enrolled households and
control households.
    The 19.5% of households that we were not able to survey in the first few days of endline
fieldwork were subject to intensive follow-up efforts some weeks later (the endline survey
"intensive follow-up round"), and will be included in future papers that examine longer-
term effects of the FCC program (as well as related work on impacts of Cyclone Idai).
We eventually were able to find and survey 62.5% of these remaining households. These
households surveyed in the "intensive follow-up round" cannot be included in this paper's
analysis because we do not have data for them on our primary outcome variable of interest,
coupon-based HIV testing. Redemption of the encouragement coupons for HIV-testing was
organized by our research staff, whom we could not afford to keep posted at local health
clinics beyond the 14-day period after the endline survey "first round". Households surveyed
in the "intensive follow-up round" were not provided with the encouragement coupons for
HIV testing.

                      Table A.1: Sample Households by Treatment

                                                      FCC Treatment         FCC Control     Total
 Randomization Stage 3 Treatments            FCC Enrolled    FCC-ambient
 Anti-Stigma                                        193           144            321        658
 HIV/AIDS Information                               176           152            332        660
 ART Information                                    209           129            325        663
 Combined HIV/AIDS and ART Information              145           102            250        497
 High Testing Incentive                             145           105            250        500
 Pure Control                                       200           146            334        680
 Total                                              1068          778           1812        3658




C.3      Coupon-based Measure of HIV Testing
The outcome variables in the endline survey are all self-reported. With self-reported mea-
sures, there are concerns about reporting bias. In particular, there is a worry that those in
   4 We defined these households for inclusion in the endline survey in November and December 2017,

immediately prior to implementation of Randomization Stage 2 which randomly assigned FCC-enrolled
status among these households.




                                                8
the treatment group will tend to falsely overstate outcomes in the direction of being more
"compliant" with expectations for HIV testing. We therefore measure HIV testing via direct
observation of behavior. We also measure self-reported HIV testing in the endline survey.
We state in our pre-analysis plan that if estimated treatment effects point in different di-
rections for the survey-reported and directly-observed coupon-based HIV testing outcomes,
we will base conclusions on the coupon-based HIV testing outcome.
    The directly-observed HIV testing measure is based on redemption of HIV testing coupons
at health clinics.5 At the time of the endline survey, our survey team recommended that in-
dividuals in the household be tested for HIV (if they had not had a test performed within the
past three months) at a specified local health clinic within the next 14 days. To allow track-
ing of those who follow through with testing, households were given coupons redeemable
for a small financial incentive (50 MZN) at the health clinic after having the HIV test. To
receive the financial incentive after having their HIV test, individuals had to present the
coupon to our research staff (also stationed at the health clinic), along with a form signed
by clinic staff that the individual had just gotten an HIV test. Coupons had a unique
household code, allowing us to track redemption of the coupons. Coupons were offered
in all households, whether in treatment or control communities, and irrespective of FCC
enrollment status.6
    An indicator for at least one of a household's coupons being redeemed (indicating at least
one household member had an HIV test in the 14-day window) is our directly observed HIV
testing outcome variable. Because this outcome represents a real, administratively recorded
health behavior, it avoids potential reporting biases associated with survey-reported HIV
testing. Conceptually, it captures a household's receptiveness to a recommendation to be
HIV tested.


C.4      Blinding
There is no blinding of treatment status. Participants are aware that the research project
aims to evaluate the FCC program, but are not explicitly informed of trial hypotheses.
Households randomized into FCC-enrolled status (Randomization Stage 2) were not explic-
itly told their CCW home visit resulted from being randomly assigned to FCC-enrolled
    5 Our protocols are modeled on Kranzer et al. (2017), who successfully implemented this approach to

measuring HIV testing rates in neighboring Zimbabwe.
    6 We gave households as many coupons as needed, for however many individuals did not know their status

or reported being HIV negative but were tested more than three months in the past. In the informed consent
process, households were informed of this invitation to be tested for HIV, that the unique code on the coupon
allowed the study to know if it was redeemed, and of controls in place to ensure the confidentiality of the
coupon redemption data. We allowed study participants to opt out of being offered coupons, and remain
in the study. In the rare case of a household in which all individuals are reported to be HIV positive in the
survey, the recommendation to undergo HIV testing was not extended and the coupons not offered. The
coupon-based HIV testing outcome variable is coded as zero for households refusing incentive coupons, and
in households where everyone had been tested within the last three months or in which everyone was already
(known and reported to be) HIV-positive.



                                                     9
status. While FCC-ambient households in FCC communities may not realize their com-
munity has the FCC program, this information is not withheld from them. Households
randomly selected for minitreatments (Randomization Stage 3) were not explicitlyold their
minitreatment was provided as the result of random assignment.
    Treatment effect estimates related to Randomization Stages 1 and 2 may be subject
to biases in self-reporting in the endline survey. For example, there may be experimenter
demand effects if respondents realize that the FCC program is intended to raise rates of HIV
testing, leading them to falsely overstate this outcome. (Treatments administered during
Randomization Stage 3 were administered only after administration of the endline survey
and so cannot influence endline survey data.) The possibility of such biased self-reporting
motivates the coupon-reported measure of HIV testing.




                                            10
D     Questions on HIV-Related Stigmatizing Attitudes and
      on HIV Knowledge
We use four questions on HIV-related stigmatizing attitudes that we adopted from the world-
wide panel AIDS Indicator Survey of the DHS Program.7 The questions have been fielded
in Mozambique as well as other DHS countries since 2003. The most recent round with data
available is from 2015. We asked these questions in the baseline survey (administered to a
randomly selected subset of sample households) and the endline survey (administered to all
sample households). Answers taken to be non-stigmatizing are indicated in parentheses.

    · J17: Would you buy fresh vegetables from a shopkeeper or vendor if you knew that
      this person had HIV? (Yes)

    · J18: If a member of your family got infected with HIV, would you want it to remain
      a secret? (No)

    · J19: If a member of your family became sick with AIDS would you be willing to care
      for them in your own household? (Yes)

    · J20: In your opinion, if a teacher has HIV but is not sick, should they be allowed to
      continue teaching at school? (Yes)

   Responses to these questions from our baseline survey, shown in Table A.2 and used for
implementation of the anti-stigma minitreatment, are consistent with the findings from the
Mozambique AIS panel. Figure 2 presents the four rounds of AIS and our baseline sample
together. For questions J17, J19, and J20 , the four rounds of AIS between 2003 and 2015
show falling stigmatizing attitudes. For the question on keeping a relative's HIV secret
(J18), stigmatizing attitudes (the desire to keep a relative's HIV secret) have worsened over
time.
   We also ask 33 questions on HIV-related knowledge. Questions are indicators and are
coded as 1 if answered correctly, and 0 otherwise. (Correct answers are in parentheses below,
with additional detail as needed.) The subgroups of these knowledge questions are: general
HIV knowledge, correct methods of transmission, transmission myths, protection methods,
and knowledge about HIV treatment.

    · General HIV Knowledge

        ­ J03: Have you ever heard of an infection called HIV? (Yes)
        ­ J16: Is it possible for a person who looks healthy to have HIV? (Yes)
        ­ J16a: Is it possible for a person who feels healthy to have HIV? (Yes)
  7 https://dhsprogram.com/methodology/survey/survey-display-467.cfm




                                               11
    ­ J29: Can HIV be cured? (No)
    ­ J28: If HIV is left untreated can it cause AIDS (deficiency of the immune system
      that can lead to severe infections and death)? (Yes)
    ­ JA11: If not treated, how long do you think it takes for an HIV infected person to
      develop AIDS (deficiency of the immune system that can lead to severe infections
      and death)? (Exact answer is 10 years. Coded as correct if absolute difference
      between respondent's answer and 10 is below sample median in endline survey.)
    ­ JA12: If not treated, how long can a person sick with AIDS survive? (Exact
      answer is 3 years. Coded as correct if absolute difference between respondent's
      answer and 3 is below sample median in endline survey.)

· Correct Methods of Transmission

    ­ J05: Can HIV be transmitted from one person to another through sex behaviors?
      (Yes)
    ­ JA9: Can HIV be transmitted from one person to another through blood contact?
      (Yes)
    ­ J21: Can HIV be transmitted from a mother to her baby during pregnancy?
      (Yes)
    ­ J22: Can HIV be transmitted from a mother to her baby during delivery? (Yes)
    ­ J23: Can HIV be transmitted from a mother to her baby by breastfeeding? (Yes)

· Transmission Myths

    ­ J07: Can people get HIV from mosquito bites? (No)
    ­ J07a: Can people get HIV from shaking hands with an infected person? (No)
    ­ J07b: Can people get HIV from kissing an infected person? (No)
    ­ J14: Can people get HIV from sharing food with a person who has HIV? (No)
    ­ J15: Can people get HIV via witchcraft or other supernatural means? (No)

· Protection Methods

    ­ J06: Can people reduce their chance of getting HIV by having just one uninfected
      sexual partner who has had no other sexual partners? (Yes)
    ­ J06a: Can people reduce their chance of getting HIV by not having sexual inter-
      course at all? (Yes)
    ­ J08: Have you ever heard of a condom? (Yes)
    ­ J09: Do you know where to buy condoms? (Yes)

                                        12
    ­ J10: Do you know where to obtain free condoms? (Yes)
    ­ J11: Do you think people can reduce the risk of transmission of HIV if they use
      condoms whenever they have sex? (Yes)

· Knowledge about HIV Treatment

    ­ Indicator for knowing where one can get tested for HIV. Coded from question
      J24: Do you know of a place where people can go to get tested for HIV? (and
      answering Yes), and J25: If yes, where can people get tested for HIV? (correctly
      naming a nearby ART site).
    ­ JA1: Do you know if there are any special medicines that a doctor or nurse can
      give a woman infected with HIV, to reduce the risk of mother-to-baby transmis-
      sion? (Yes)
    ­ J26: Is there an effective treatment for HIV? (Yes)
    ­ J26a: If yes, do you know what the treatment is called? (Antiretroviral therapy,
      or ART)
    ­ J27: Do you know of a place where people can receive treatment for HIV? (Yes)
    ­ JA5: Do you think treatment for HIV will be expensive at the local health center?
      (No)
    ­ JA6: Do you think treatment for HIV at the local health center can help patients
      stay healthy? (Yes)
    ­ JA7: Do you think treatment for HIV at the local health center can help patients
      live for as long as uninfected people? (Yes)
    ­ JA8: Do you think treatment for HIV at the local health center can prevent HIV
      transmission? (Yes)
    ­ JA13: For people infected with HIV, should they take medication even if they
      don't feel sick? (Yes)




                                        13
E      Details of Minitreatments
In this section, we provide details of the minitreatments randomly assigned in Random-
ization Stage 3: (1) Anti-Stigma, (2) HIV/AIDS Information, (3) ART Information, (4)
Combined HIV/AIDS and ART Information, and (5) High Incentive for HIV Testing.


E.1      Anti-Stigma Treatment
In this treatment, the household is given information intended to reduce their concerns about
HIV-related stigma in their community. Households are asked in the endline survey about
the fraction of households in their community they think hold specific stigmatizing attitudes
related to HIV. For questions on which they overestimate the fraction of households with
stigmatizing attitudes, they are then told the true (lower) rate in their community.
    We provide below the implementation details for this treatment. This treatment focuses
on following three questions on HIV-related stigma that were asked in the baseline survey.8

    · J17: Would you buy fresh vegetables from a shopkeeper or vendor if you knew that
      this person had HIV?

    · J19: If a member of your family became sick with AIDS would you be willing to care
      for them in your own household?

    · J20: In your opinion, if a teacher has HIV but is not sick, should they be allowed to
      continue teaching at school?

    Let x17, x19, and x20 be the shares of respondents answering "yes" to question J17, J18,
and J19, respectively, in the baseline survey.9 Appendix Table D.2 below shows the values
of x17, x18, and x19 in each study community. For each of these questions, very high shares
of respondents answered "yes", indicating relatively low rates of HIV-related stigma. The
anti-stigma treatment reveals these very low rates of stigmatizing attitudes to respondents,
potentially reducing stigma concerns and thereby raising HIV testing rates.
    In the endline survey, respondents are asked to guess the share of people in their com-
munity answering "yes" to each of the three questions above (i.e., we ask them to guess the
values of x17, x19, and x20). Specifically, in the endline survey, the respondent is asked the
following three questions:
   8 Our pre-specified measure of stigmatizing attitudes includes four questions, as described in Appendix

Section D, but for the anti-stigma treatment we focused on the subset of three questions that have been
improving over time and for which we can report that majorities of households express non-stigmatizing
attitudes. The fourth question, on keeping an HIV-infected relative's HIV status secret, is not answered
in a non-stigmatizing manner by majorities of households, and so we measure it in the surveys but do not
include it in the anti-stigma treatment.
   9 As described in Appendix Section C.1, the baseline was administered to a randomly-selected subset of

households enrolled in the study, and so their responses can be taken as representative of study communities.




                                                     14
    · J17a: If I ask the question, "Would you buy fresh vegetables from a shopkeeper or
      vendor if you knew that this person had HIV?", to 10 people in your neighborhood,
      how many of them would you expect to say "Yes"? (guess the value of x17)

    · J19a: If I ask the question, "If a member of your family became sick with AIDS
      would you be willing to care for them in your own household?", to 10 people in your
      neighborhood, how many of them would you expect to say "Yes"? (guess the value of
      x19)

    · J20a: If I ask the question, "In your opinion, if a teacher has HIV but is not sick, should
      they be allowed to continue teaching at school?", to 10 people in your neighborhood,
      how many of them would you expect to say "Yes"? (guess the value of x20)

    Let the answers of the respondent to question J17a, J19a, and J20a in the endline survey
be y17, y19, and y20,10 respectively. If y17 < x17, the respondent has overestimated HIV-
related stigma in their community. In this case, we reveal to the respondent the true value
of x17 in the respondent's community. If y17  x17, we do not reveal x17. The same rule
applies to pairs (y19, x19) and (y20, x20).
    If a respondent answered the survey in such a way that y17  x17, y19  x19, and y20
 x20, then, the anti-stigma treatment is not implemented for this respondent.
    The enumerator for administering this treatment was as follows. Survey software au-
tomatically implemented these rules and inserted the bracketed items. ("Rounded value"
means the relevant value from Table A.2, rounded to the nearest 10 percentage points, and
expressed as an integer value out of 10.)
    In the baseline survey, we asked people in your neighborhood questions about their atti-
tudes towards HIV/AIDS. We would like to share with you how people responded to these
questions.
    If y17  x17 for this respondent, the next two paragraphs are skipped. Otherwise, the
enumerator says:
    In the survey we just finished, you guessed that [insert respondent's answer to question
J17a] out of 10 people in your community would answer "yes" to the question, "Would you
buy fresh vegetables from a shopkeeper or vendor if you knew that this person had HIV?".
    We did ask this question to people in your community in the baseline survey. They
answered "yes" to this question more often than you thought they would. Our data show that
[insert rounded value of x17 for the respondent's community from table below] out of 10 of
the people answered "yes", indicating that most respondents are supportive of people living
with HIV.
  10 y17 = 100% if, when answering question J17a, the respondent guesses that "10 out of 10" people will

say "yes"; y17 = 90% if, when answering question J17a, the respondent guesses that "9 out of 10" people will
say "yes"; and so on. The same rules apply for y19 and y20.




                                                    15
    If y19  x19 for this respondent, the next two paragraphs are skipped. Otherwise, the
enumerator says:
    In the survey we just finished, you guessed that [insert respondent's answer to question
J19a] out of 10 people in your community would answer "yes" to the question, "If a member
of your family became sick with AIDS would you be willing to care for them in your own
household?".
    We did ask this question to people in your community in the baseline survey. They
answered "yes" to this question more often than you thought they would. Our data show that
[insert rounded value of x19 for the respondent's community from table below] of the people
answered "yes", indicating that most respondents are supportive of people living with HIV.
    If y20  x20 for this respondent, the next two paragraphs are skipped. Otherwise, the
enumerator says:
    In the survey we just finished, you guessed that [insert respondent's answer to question
J20a] out of 10 people in your community would answer "yes" to the question, "In your
opinion, if a teacher has HIV but is not sick, should they be allowed to continue teaching at
school?".
    We did ask this question to people in your community in the baseline survey. They
answered "yes" to this question more often than you thought they would. Our data show that
(insert rounded value of x20 for the respondent's community from table below) of the people
answered "yes", indicating that most of the respondents are supportive of people living with
HIV.




                                             16
        Table A.2: Rates of Non-Stigmatizing Attitudes Related to HIV

Community Name                        Share of respondents   Share of respondents   Share of respondents
                                       answering "yes" to     answering "yes" to     answering "yes" to
                                         question J17           question J19           question J20
                                           (i.e. x17)             (i.e. x19)             (i.e. x20)
EPC de Chipinde                              92.5%                  96.8%                  92.3%
EPC de Munhonha                              93.6%                  99.1%                  96.3%
ES do Dondo                                  86.8%                  96.2%                  91.4%
ES de Macharote                              75.0%                  94.3%                  85.4%
EPC 25 de Setembro CFM                       81.3%                  98.9%                  95.4%
EPC 7 de Abril - Matadouro                   87.5%                  99.0%                  93.8%
EPC de Centro de Acomodação - Mach           75.0%                  91.8%                  87.5%
EPC C.A.de Cheringoma - Dondo                68.4%                  85.4%                  75.0%
EPC Samora M. Machel                         72.6%                  84.3%                  76.3%
EPC de Mussassa                              67.5%                  85.7%                  71.4%
EPC de Monte Siluvo                          87.1%                 100.0%                  87.5%
EPC de Nharuchonga                           79.2%                  98.6%                  89.7%
EPC de 3 de Fevereiro                        88.9%                  95.5%                  85.7%
EPC 25 de Setembro                           91.5%                  96.7%                  94.2%
EPC 12 de Outubro                            89.3%                  98.2%                  91.1%
EPC Acordos de Lusaka                        81.8%                 100.0%                  89.5%
ES de Tica                                   93.3%                  96.8%                  93.7%
ES de Metuchira                              79.0%                  98.5%                  84.9%
EPC de Muda - Gondola                        71.6%                  89.7%                  87.0%
EPC 1 de Maio - Gondola                      81.1%                  96.1%                  94.7%
EPC de Eduardo Mondlane - Mucorodzi          72.6%                  82.8%                  88.9%
EPC de Cafumpe                               75.0%                  95.9%                  90.4%
ES Josina Machel                             88.1%                  95.3%                  93.8%
ES de Macombe                                72.8%                  94.1%                  91.7%
EPC de Mussiquir                             64.5%                  87.5%                  87.1%
EPC de Bela Vista - Gondola                  72.4%                  93.2%                  86.0%
EPC de Cabeça do Velho                       83.6%                  80.9%                  86.8%
EPC da Fepom                                 89.2%                  97.3%                  93.2%
EPC de Nhamaonha                             79.7%                  89.4%                  87.9%
EPC 25 de Setembro                           86.9%                 100.0%                  96.6%
EPC do Centro Hípico                         78.7%                  95.2%                  91.9%
EPC de Nhamadjessa                           74.3%                  90.3%                  91.5%
EPC 7 de Setembro                            81.2%                  97.1%                  88.4%
EPC 7 de Abril                               89.2%                  95.5%                  98.4%
EPC 1 de Junho                               80.3%                  92.4%                  88.3%
EPC de Mudzingadzi                           92.8%                  94.5%                  93.2%
ES da Soalpo                                 73.1%                  94.2%                  86.8%
ES Eduardo Mondlane                          83.3%                  84.6%                  83.3%
ES da Vila Nova                              72.2%                  91.3%                  86.1%
ES 7 de Abril                                73.5%                  95.7%                  95.4%
ES de Messica                                62.9%                  88.2%                  79.4%
EPC Eduardo Mondlane                         77.3%                  80.3%                  81.5%
EPC de Vumba                                 82.0%                  86.0%                  84.0%
EPC Messica Aldeia                           78.9%                  89.5%                  84.2%
EPC de Manhate                               72.2%                  79.2%                  83.3%
EPC Estevao Dimaka                           75.0%                  72.9%                  71.4%
EPC de Manica                                71.7%                  87.0%                  92.5%




                                                17
E.2    HIV/AIDS Information Treatment
Enumerators showed a video about HIV/AIDS after the conclusion of the endline survey.
This video was two minutes and nine seconds in length. Respondents were asked to choose
the language for the audio track of the video (Portuguese, Sena, Tewe, Echuabo, or Chi-
mankya). The videos for each language can be found on our research website at the following
link: https://fordschool.umich.edu/mozambique-research/fcc-hiv-aids. The English trans-
lation of the transcript of the HIV/AIDS video is as follows:
    HIV stands for Human Immunodeficiency Virus. When this virus infects someone, it
attacks and eventually destroys the immune system over several years. The immune system
is the part of your body that protects you from diseases. Most people with HIV look and feel
normal at first until their immune system is destroyed and they develop severe infections
and cancers that may be fatal.
    HIV is not caused by witchcraft or supernatural power. HIV is a viral infection trans-
mitted from one person to another through semen, vaginal fluid or, blood. It can also be
transmitted from a mother to a baby during pregnancy, delivery or breastfeeding. HIV is not
transmitted through mosquito bites, kissing, shaking hands or sharing dishes.
    If a person with HIV does not receive treatment, HIV will multiply in the body very
quickly. As the viruses multiply, they can damage the body's defenses against infections and
cancers and eventually cause AIDS. Without treatment, an infected person develops AIDS
in ten years on average. Common symptoms of AIDS include rapid weight loss; recurring
fever; extreme tiredness; long-lasting diarrhea; swelling of the lymph glands; blotches on or
under the skin or inside the mouth, nose, or eyelids; and memory loss. Without treatment,
someone with AIDS typically survives about three years before they die.

    The Portuguese version of the transcript of the HIV/AIDS video is as follows:
    HIV significa Vírus da Imunodeficiência Humana. Quando esse vírus infecta alguém, ele
ataca e, eventualmente, destrói o sistema imunológico ao longo de vários anos. O sistema
imunológico é a parte do corpo que o protege de doenças. A maioria das pessoas com HIV
parece e se sente normal no início, até que seu sistema imunológico seja destruído e elas
desenvolvam infecções graves e cânceres que podem ser fatais.
    O HIV não é causado por bruxaria ou poder sobrenatural. O HIV é uma infecção viral
transmitida de uma pessoa para outra através do sêmen, fluido vaginal ou sangue. Tam-
bém pode ser transmitido de mãe para bebê durante a gravidez, parto ou amamentação. O
HIV não é transmitido por picadas de mosquito, beijos, apertos de mão ou compartilhando
pratos.
    Se uma pessoa com HIV não recebe tratamento, o HIV se multiplica no corpo muito
rapidamente. À medida que os vírus se multiplicam, eles podem danificar as defesas do
corpo contra infecções e cânceres e, eventualmente, causar AIDS. Sem tratamento, uma



                                             18
pessoa infectada desenvolve AIDS em dez anos, em média. Os sintomas comuns da AIDS
incluem rápida perda de peso; febre recorrente; Cansaço extremo; diarreia de longa duração;
inchaço das glândulas linfáticas; manchas na pele ou dentro da boca, nariz ou pálpebras; e
perda de memória. Sem tratamento, uma pessoa com AIDS geralmente sobrevive cerca de
três anos antes de morrer.


E.3    ART Information Treatment
Enumerators showed a video about ART after the conclusion of the endline survey. This
video was one minute and thirty nine seconds in length. Respondents were asked to choose
the language for the audio track of the video (Portuguese, Sena, Tewe, Echuabo, or Chi-
mankya). The videos for each language can be found on our research website at the following
link: https://fordschool.umich.edu/mozambique-research/fcc-hiv-aids. The English trans-
lation of the transcript of the ART video is as follows:
    HIV is no longer considered to be a death sentence. We now have a free and very effective
treatment for HIV.
    Antiretroviral therapy (also known as ART) is medication that stops HIV dead in its
tracks. It keeps an infected person healthy by preventing HIV from destroying their immune
system. It does not eliminate the virus from the body but prevents it from harming the
infected person and making it less likely for them to transmit the virus to others.
    Starting medication at an earlier stage of infection will greatly improve an infected per-
son's survival rate. So, it is important for people who are at risk to take an HIV test even if
they still feel healthy and start ART treatment immediately if the test result is positive. Peo-
ple who are diagnosed with HIV early and who start medication quickly have a better chance
of staying healthy and can live as long as uninfected people. Also, the earlier someone is
diagnosed and starts treatment, the less likely they are to spread HIV to loved ones.

    The Portuguese version of the transcript of the ART video is as follows:
    O HIV não é mais considerado uma sentença de morte. Agora temos um tratamento
gratuito e muito eficaz para o HIV.
    A terapia anti-retroviral (também conhecida como ART) é um medicamento que impede
o HIV em seu caminho. Ele mantém uma pessoa infectada saudável ao impedir que o HIV
destrua seu sistema imunológico. Não elimina o vírus do corpo, mas evita que ele prejudique
a pessoa infectada, tornando menos provável que ela transmita o vírus a outras pessoas.
    Iniciar a medicação em um estágio inicial da infecção melhorará muito a taxa de sobre-
vivência de uma pessoa infectada. Portanto, é importante que as pessoas em risco façam um
teste de HIV, mesmo que ainda se sintam saudáveis, e iniciem o tratamento ART imediata-
mente se o resultado do teste for positivo. Pessoas que são diagnosticadas com HIV precoce-
mente e que iniciam a medicação rapidamente têm mais chances de permanecer saudáveis e



                                              19
podem viver tanto quanto as pessoas não infectadas. Além disso, quanto mais cedo alguém
for diagnosticado e começar o tratamento, menor será a probabilidade de transmitir o HIV
a seus entes queridos.


E.4    Combined HIV/AIDS and ART Information Treatment
Enumerators showed two videos after the conclusion of the endline survey. The two videos
are the HIV/AIDS video used for the "HIV/AIDS Information Treatment" group and the
ART video used for the "ART Information Treatment" group, and were shown in this order.


E.5    High Incentive for HIV Testing
Each HIV testing coupon offered to the household provided a financial incentive of 100 MZN
(instead of the 50 MZN per coupon offered to all other households).


F     Geographic Locations of Study Communities
This study operated in central and northern Mozambique in Sofala, Manica, and Zambezia
provinces. Study communities were in Manica, Chimoio, and Gondola districts in Manica
province; Dondo and Nhamatanda districts in Sofala province; and Namacurra and Nicoad-
ala districts in Zambezia province. Figure A.2 shows the locations of the study districts
in a map of central Mozambique. Figures A.3, A.4, and A.5 show study communities by
province in greater detail. Maps display assignment of communities to FCC treatment or
control status (Randomization Stage 1).




                                           20
Figure A.2: All Study Communities




               21
Figure A.3: Study Communities in Sofala Province




                       22
Figure A.4: Study Communities in Manica Province




                       23
Figure A.5: Study Communities in Zambezia Province




                        24
G     Control for Cyclone Idai Affectedness
In March 2019, Cyclone Idai struck Sofala and Manica provinces, two of our three provincial
study areas. The cyclone occurred just prior to the start of the endline survey. Because the
FCC program was randomized across communities within matched community pairs (Ran-
domization Stage 1), FCC-enrolled households were assigned randomly within communities
(Randomization Stage 2), and minitreatments were also assigned randomly within commu-
nities (Randomization Stage 3), there is no a priori reason to worry that Cyclone Idai's
occurrence confounds our treatment effect estimates. However, to absorb residual variation
and to deal with any chance imbalances, we include a control variable on the right hand side
of our regression equations estimating treatment effects. We use a community-level measure
of estimated maximum wind speed experienced during the cyclone. We use the methodology
of Mahajan and Yang (2020). Using the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) best track for Cyclone Idai, the community level predicted maximum wind speed
is captured by Cyclonej for community j by the formula:

                                                                   dj
                     Cyclonej = {wj > 33}[33 + (wj - 33)(1 -           )]                (G.1)
                                                                 pradj
    Here, Cyclonej is the predicted wind speed (in knots) felt at community j , wj is the
actual wind speed recorded at the beginning of the storm segment from the best track, dj is
the distance between the community's geolocated center and the storm segment, and pradj
is the predicated radius of the hurricane segment, where we only calculate Cyclonej for
communities for which dj < pradj .
    In practice, inclusion of the control variable for Cyclone Idai affectedness has negligible
impact on any of our treatment effect coefficient estimates.




                                              25
H      Balance with Respect to Treatments
In this section we test whether our randomized treatments of primary interest are balanced
with respect to respondent household characterstics and attrition from the survey.11 We first
check whether characteristics of households are balanced with respect to Treatment (FCC-
enrolled status). We examine eleven variables that were collected in the course of enrollment
of households into the study from May-Nov 2017 (see Appendix Section C.1). These are
dependent variables in estimation of Equation 8. We report the results in Appendix Table
A.3. None of the coefficients on the treatment coefficient are large or statistically significant
at conventional levels.
    Second, we check for the possibility of bias due to selective in-migration to study commu-
nities (say, if households moved to treatment communities due to initiation of the program
there). In column 12, we examine whether treatment was associated with any recent (last
12 months) in-migration into the study communities, and find no evidence of this either.12
In sum, there is no indication of selection biases stemming from an impact of treatment on
the characteristics of sample households or on in-migration into study communities.
    Another key question is whether success in locating households in the endline survey
(which determines inclusion in the analysis sample) is affected by treatment status. If so,
this raises concerns about selection bias due to differential attrition. We examine this by
estimating equation 8 where the outcome variable is an indicator for being included in the
endline survey. Coefficient estimates are in column (13) of the table. The mean of the
dependent variable in the control communities is 0.800. The coefficient on the indicator for
treatment in the FCC program is very small in magnitude and not statistically significantly
different from zero at conventional levels. These results indicate no concern with selection
bias due to differential attrition for our pre-specified primary coefficient of interest.
    We also conduct analogous tests for balance with respect to the Randomization Stage
3 minitreatments and interaction terms with Treatment (FCC-enrolled) status. In Table
A.4, each regression uses the specification of Equation 10, while in Table A.5 we use the
interaction-term specification of Equation 11.13 In both sets of tables the share of statis-
tically significant coefficients on randomized right-hand-side variables is not substantially
different from the number we would expect to occur by chance. In Table A.4, nine out
of 72 coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% level or higher. In Table A.5, the
corresponding number is 14 out of 132. Neither set of regressions suggests concerns about
  11 We focus here on Treatment (FCC-enrolled) status as well as its interactions with minitreatments. For

balance tests with respect FCC-ambient status, please see the Populated PAP.
  12 This regression has a smaller sample size because the in-migration variable was collected only for the

subset of study households who were randomly selected to be administered a comprehensive baseline survey,
running from May 2017 to Mar 2018.
  13 Compared to Appendix Table A.3, these tables exclude the attrition outcome variable. Randomization

Stage 3 (the minitreatments) was implemented only once households successfully completed the endline
survey, it is not possible to examine the impacts of minitreatments on attrition: minitreatment status is not
defined for households that attrited from the sample.


                                                     26
imbalance of baseline characteristics or differential attrition with respect to the randomized
treatments.




                                             27
                                                         Table A.3: Balance and Attrition by Treatment Status

                                                                                               Balance Tests                                                                       Migration       Attrition
                                  (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)             (7)           (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)           (12)            (13)
                                 Child or    Ratio of    School Aged   Household   Household     Primary            Have        HIV +        Have a      Have      Adult Died       Baseline       Followup
                              Grandparent    Children      Children     Eats <      go some       Income        Chronically    Household   Household   Orphaned     of Chronic    In-Migration   Survey Success
                              as Household   to Adult       not in      2 Meals    Days w/o      Illegal or    Ill Household    Member      Member     Children      Illness in
                                  Head         4            School       a Day       Food           None           Member                   on ART                 Past 5 Years


     Treatment                  -0.00132      0.0236       0.0237      -0.000642    0.0223        -0.00515        -0.0109      -0.00312    0.00836      0.0176      -0.000987       -0.00336        -0.00481
                                (0.0150)     (0.0142)     (0.0172)     (0.00345)   (0.0271)      (0.00658)       (0.0192)      (0.0152)    (0.0152)    (0.0200)      (0.0112)      (0.00834)        (0.0122)

     Observations                3,658         3,658       3,658         3,658       3,658        3,658           3,658          3,658       3,658       3,658        3,658          2,370           4,546
     R-squared                   0.041         0.049       0.077         0.013       0.062        0.031           0.035          0.038       0.036       0.047        0.023          0.015           0.062
     Obs level                 Household     Household   Household     Household   Household    Household       Household      Household   Household   Household    Household      Household       Household
     Control Mean Dep. Var.      0.297        0.0706       0.300        0.0149       0.601       0.0215           0.227          0.155       0.121       0.268       0.0911         0.0303           0.800


     Notes: Dependent variables in columns 1-11 are indicators for household characteristics reported during enrollment of household in the study
     (May to Nov 2017). Dependent variable in column 12 is indicator that household migrated into the community within the last 12 months
28




     (available only for randomly selected subset of households asked more extensive set of baseline survey questions, administered May 2017 to
     March 2018). Dependent variable in column 13 is an indicator that a household was successfully surveyed in the endline survey and included
     in this paper's analyses (see Appendix section C.2 for details). "Treatment" is indicator equal to one if household randomly assigned to
     "Treatment" status in Randomization Stage 2, and zero otherwise. Coefficient on Treatment was pre-specified as of primary interest in this
     study. All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient" status, matched pair fixed effects and for a community-level index of affectedness
     by Cyclone Idai. Standard errors clustered at the community level in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                                  Table A.4: Balance with Respect to Minitreatment Status

                                   (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)           (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)           (12)
                                  Child or    Ratio of    School Aged   Household   Household   Primary           Have        HIV +        Have a      Have      Adult Died       Baseline
                               Grandparent    Children      Children     Eats <      go some     Income       Chronically    Household   Household   Orphaned     of Chronic    In-Migration
                               as Household   to Adult       not in      2 Meals    Days w/o    Illegal or   Ill Household    Member      Member     Children      Illness in
                                   Head         4            School       a Day       Food         None          Member                   on ART                 Past 5 Years


      Treatment                  -0.00159     0.0243*         0.0241    -0.000631    0.0216      -0.00531       -0.0108      -0.00307    0.00811      0.0169      -0.00137        -0.00373
                                 (0.0150)     (0.0143)      (0.0172)    (0.00347)   (0.0272)    (0.00657)      (0.0192)      (0.0151)    (0.0152)    (0.0200)     (0.0112)       (0.00825)
      Anti-Stigma                -0.00676     0.00737        -0.0223     0.00630    -0.00958     -0.00283       -0.0295       -0.0112    -0.00940    0.00682       0.0299*        -0.00234
                                 (0.0226)     (0.0136)      (0.0254)    (0.00597)   (0.0249)    (0.00917)      (0.0247)      (0.0181)    (0.0170)    (0.0305)     (0.0160)        (0.0151)
      HIV Info.                   -0.0155      0.0183        -0.0162      0.00876    -0.0191     -0.0146*      -0.00644        0.0180     0.00469     -0.0198     0.000912        -0.00617
                                 (0.0241)     (0.0152)      (0.0265)    (0.00628)   (0.0264)    (0.00793)      (0.0255)      (0.0174)    (0.0159)    (0.0269)     (0.0147)        (0.0135)
      ART Info.                   0.00275      -0.0190     -0.0476**     0.0108**     0.0223     -0.00791       -0.0127        0.0220      0.0234     0.0227        0.0230         0.0128
                                 (0.0236)     (0.0124)      (0.0228)    (0.00493)   (0.0242)    (0.00841)      (0.0238)      (0.0188)    (0.0180)    (0.0250)     (0.0146)        (0.0148)
      High Value Coupon           0.00435      0.0261        -0.0121      0.0111*     0.0259     -0.00513        0.0276       0.00887    -0.00977     0.0251        0.0237       -0.0267**
                                 (0.0218)     (0.0159)      (0.0276)    (0.00637)   (0.0283)    (0.00953)      (0.0265)      (0.0216)    (0.0217)    (0.0295)     (0.0171)        (0.0132)
      HIV and ART Info.            0.0359      0.0221        -0.0161     0.0131**    -0.0175     -0.00174       -0.0162        0.0150     0.00203     0.0133       0.00739       -0.0272**
                                 (0.0275)     (0.0166)      (0.0261)    (0.00514)   (0.0261)    (0.00932)      (0.0283)      (0.0188)    (0.0177)    (0.0282)     (0.0172)        (0.0133)

      Observations                3,658         3,658       3,658         3,658       3,658       3,658         3,658          3,658       3,658       3,658        3,658          2,370
      R-squared                   0.042         0.052       0.078         0.015       0.063       0.032         0.036          0.039       0.037       0.048        0.025          0.021
      Obs level                 Household     Household   Household     Household   Household   Household     Household      Household   Household   Household    Household      Household
      Control Mean Dep. Var.      0.297        0.0706       0.300        0.0149       0.601      0.0215         0.227          0.155       0.121       0.268       0.0911         0.0370
29




     Notes: Dependent variables in columns 1-11 are indicator variables for household characteristics reported during enrollment of household in
     the study (May to Nov 2017). Dependent variable in column 12 is indicator that household migrated into the community within the last 12
     months (available only for randomly selected subset of households asked more extensive set of baseline survey questions, administered May 2017
     to March 2018). "Treatment" is indicator equal to one if household randomly assigned to "Treatment" status in Randomization Stage 2, and
     zero otherwise. Coefficient on Treatment was pre-specified as of primary interest in this study. See Section 5.2 for definition of minitreatments.
     All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient" status, matched pair fixed effects, and for a community-level index of affectedness by
     Cyclone Idai. Standard errors clustered at the community level in parentheses. Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
                                     Table A.5: Balance with Respect to Minitreatment Status and Interactions

                                         (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)            (7)           (8)         (9)        (10)          (11)           (12)
                                        Child or    Ratio of    School Aged   Household   Household   Primary           Have        HIV +        Have a      Have      Adult Died       Baseline
                                     Grandparent    Children      Children     Eats <      go some     Income       Chronically    Household   Household   Orphaned     of Chronic    In-Migration
                                     as Household   to Adult       not in      2 Meals    Days w/o    Illegal or   Ill Household    Member      Member     Children      Illness in
                                         Head         4            School       a Day       Food         None          Member                   on ART                 Past 5 Years


     Treatment                          -0.0378      0.0396        -0.0114     -0.00444   0.111**     -0.00888         0.0118       -0.0335     -0.0243     0.0530        -0.0160       -0.00732
                                       (0.0377)     (0.0254)      (0.0394)    (0.00528)   (0.0448)    (0.0150)       (0.0431)      (0.0283)    (0.0268)    (0.0415)      (0.0224)       (0.0186)
     Anti-Stigma                        -0.0330     0.00551        -0.0262      0.00656   0.00943     0.00265         -0.0222       -0.0298     -0.0347    0.0638*        0.0245          0.0154
                                       (0.0308)     (0.0155)      (0.0342)    (0.00973)   (0.0400)    (0.0150)       (0.0287)      (0.0264)    (0.0249)    (0.0371)      (0.0226)       (0.0218)
     HIV Info.                          -0.0448       0.0214       -0.0268       0.0142     0.0389     -0.0144         0.0120        0.0242    -0.00262      0.0180      -0.00670       -0.00137
                                       (0.0321)     (0.0175)      (0.0321)     (0.0104)   (0.0386)    (0.0138)       (0.0350)      (0.0268)    (0.0239)    (0.0294)      (0.0205)       (0.0190)
     ART Info.                         -0.00403     -0.00221     -0.0587**      0.00628     0.0434     -0.0137        0.00766      -0.00508    -0.00680      0.0257        0.0104        0.0349*
                                       (0.0326)     (0.0136)      (0.0277)    (0.00619)   (0.0328)    (0.0131)       (0.0300)      (0.0260)    (0.0252)    (0.0341)      (0.0179)       (0.0209)
     High Value Coupon                  -0.0105       0.0304       -0.0479      0.0144      0.0425     -0.0170         0.0336      0.00296      -0.0181     0.0651        0.0399        -0.00404
                                       (0.0315)     (0.0207)      (0.0365)    (0.00999)   (0.0416)    (0.0140)       (0.0421)      (0.0322)    (0.0331)    (0.0439)      (0.0253)       (0.0201)
     HIV and ART Info.                   0.0191     0.0427**       -0.0454      0.0150*     0.0111    -0.00368        -0.0252       0.00627     -0.0158      0.0236        0.0257      -0.0361***
                                       (0.0379)     (0.0211)      (0.0389)    (0.00767)   (0.0380)    (0.0149)       (0.0384)      (0.0272)    (0.0267)    (0.0386)      (0.0255)       (0.0117)
     Treatment * Anti-Stigma             0.0735     0.00740       -0.00992     0.00418     -0.0842     -0.0177       -0.00290        0.0282     0.0335      -0.0582       0.0133         -0.0122
                                       (0.0586)     (0.0300)      (0.0548)     (0.0123)   (0.0537)    (0.0186)       (0.0592)      (0.0411)    (0.0382)    (0.0665)      (0.0339)       (0.0326)
     Treatment *HIV Info.                0.0946      -0.0125        0.0502     -0.00285    -0.108*    -0.00636        -0.0342       -0.0258    -0.00119    -0.0974*        0.0456         0.0200
                                       (0.0578)     (0.0364)      (0.0599)     (0.0130)   (0.0583)    (0.0165)       (0.0633)      (0.0375)    (0.0356)    (0.0516)      (0.0316)       (0.0340)
     Treatment * ART Info.             -0.00211      -0.0229        0.0323       0.0133    -0.106*      0.0125        -0.0564      0.105**     0.0936**     0.00948        0.0418        0.00228
                                       (0.0565)     (0.0323)      (0.0546)     (0.0113)   (0.0561)    (0.0164)       (0.0582)      (0.0425)    (0.0422)    (0.0560)      (0.0309)       (0.0359)
30




     Treatment * High Value Coupon      0.00918      -0.0460         0.102     -0.00586   -0.145**      0.0328        -0.0396        0.0364      0.0285     -0.0624       -0.0200        -0.0177
                                       (0.0515)     (0.0312)      (0.0662)     (0.0120)   (0.0626)    (0.0213)       (0.0680)      (0.0474)    (0.0464)    (0.0593)      (0.0382)       (0.0241)
     Treatment * HIV and ART Info.       0.0444      -0.0295        0.0646       0.0138    -0.111*     0.00726      -0.000313        0.0333      0.0351     -0.0181      -0.00482         0.0313
                                       (0.0633)     (0.0384)      (0.0577)     (0.0144)   (0.0569)    (0.0200)       (0.0690)      (0.0434)    (0.0408)    (0.0608)      (0.0394)       (0.0240)

     Observations                       3,658         3,658       3,658         3,658       3,658       3,658         3,658          3,658       3,658       3,658        3,658          2,370
     R-squared                          0.044         0.055       0.080         0.017       0.069       0.035         0.037          0.043       0.041       0.052        0.027          0.027
     Obs level                        Household     Household   Household     Household   Household   Household     Household      Household   Household   Household    Household      Household
     Control Mean Dep. Var.             0.297        0.0706       0.300        0.0149       0.601      0.0215         0.227          0.155       0.121       0.268       0.0911         0.0370


     Notes: Dependent variables in columns 1-11 are indicator variables for household characteristics reported during enrollment of household in
     the study (May to Nov 2017). Dependent variable in column 12 is indicator that household migrated into the community within the last 12
     months (available only for randomly selected subset of households asked more extensive set of baseline survey questions, administered May 2017
     to March 2018). "Treatment" is indicator equal to one if household randomly assigned to "Treatment" status in Randomization Stage 2, and
     zero otherwise. Coefficient on Treatment was pre-specified as of primary interest in this study. See Section 5.2 for definition of minitreatments.
     All regressions control for indicator for "FCC ambient" status, "FCC ambient" interacted with each minitreatment indicator, matched pair fixed
     effects, and for a community-level index of affectedness by Cyclone Idai. Standard errors clustered at the community level in parentheses.
     Significance levels: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
