                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 THE FORGING OF A REBEL

                                       Gauthier Marchais
                                     Christian M. Mugaruka
                                    Raúl Sanchez de la Sierra
                                       David Qihang Wu

                                      Working Paper 28714
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28714


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




The data collection was funded by Private Enterprise Development in Low-income countries
(PEDL), the National Science Foundation, and the International Center for Taxation and
Development (ICTD). We are thankful to Aimable Amani Lameke, Desire Basibuhe, Lewis
Dunia Butinda, Emmanuel Til Kandate, Freddy Koleramungu, Eustache Kuliumbwa, Simeon
Lukeno, and Christian Polepole Bazuzi for oustanding field research. Soeren Henn, Matthew
Pecenco, and Carlos Schmidt-Padilla provided extraordinary research support. We thank James
Robinson, Soeren Henn, Laura Montenegro, Jean Decety, and participants of Workshop on
Conflict 2019 at the Paris School of Economics for comments. The title is a reference to Arturo
Barea's autobiography during the Spanish Civil War (Barea, 1984). Marchais, Mugaruka, and
Sanchez de la Sierra are co-founders of Marakuja Kivu Research, whose activities helped collect
one third of the data (in the province of North Kivu). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Gauthier Marchais, Christian M. Mugaruka, Raúl Sanchez de la Sierra, and David
Qihang Wu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Forging of a Rebel
Gauthier Marchais, Christian M. Mugaruka, Raúl Sanchez de la Sierra, and David Qihang
Wu
NBER Working Paper No. 28714
April 2021
JEL No. D15,D72,D74,Z13

                                          ABSTRACT

We use variation in exposure to victimization of 1,537 households of eastern Congo for each year
of 1990­2013 to examine the formation of preferences to participate in armed groups. In this
context, most armed groups are Congolese militia, whose objective is fighting foreign armed
groups. We find that foreign armed group attacks on household members are associated with a
larger propensity that individuals join a Congolese militia in subsequent years. The results are
consistent with the formation of preferences arising from parochial altruism towards the family to
fight foreign perpetrators. Specifically, we find that the effect is driven by the most gruesome of
those attacks, by those that take place at a young age, and persists for several years. Consistent
with parochial altruism, we find that the effect is largest when the victim is a household member
or the village chief, smaller when the victim is another household in the village, and insignificant
if the victim is in a nearby village. To examine the external validity of our result, we analyze
heterogeneous effects by weakness of the state. We find that the response is concentrated in
village-year observations in which state forces are absent. Finally, we show that, to undo this
effect, the yearly per capita income outside armed groups would have to permanently increase
18.2-fold. These results suggest that intrinsic preferences are important for armed group
participation relative to economic incentives, and emphasize their interaction with state weakness.

Gauthier Marchais                                Raúl Sanchez de la Sierra
Institute of Development Studies                 Harris School of Public Policy
University of Sussex                             University of Chicago
United Kingdom                                   1307 E. 60th Street
g.marchais@ids.ac.uk                             Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
Christian M. Mugaruka Marakuja                   raul@uchicago.edu
Kivu Research
Goma                                             David Qihang Wu
Democratic Republic of the Congo                 Department of Economics
christian999mastaki@gmail.com                    University of California, Berkeley
                                                 qihangwu@berkeley.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28714
1        Introduction

War and violence are often socially costly.1 Armed groups, of which popular militias, transna-
tional violent organizations, and national armies are predominant forms, constitute a threat
to existing states and societies across the world, both now and historically. These organiza-
tions are typically labor intensive, hence their success hinges on their ability to recruit.
    In this paper, we study why individuals join armed groups. A predominant form of
recruitment today is through voluntary entry. Yet, participation in these organizations
entails life-threatening activities and violence against others. A puzzle to their success,
then, is the following: why do individuals choose to join armed groups in the first place?
    One possibility is that individuals join armed groups because they expect to receive a
high income in the armed group. For this to be the dominant motive--given the high risk
it entails and possible disutility of exercising violence--armed groups would probably need
to offer high compensating differentials. Some scholars have shown that expectations of
income matter in the context of gangs (Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000). Others have argued
that economic incentives could play a role in civil conflict, although observing transitions
into armed groups has been impossible (Collier and Hoeffler, 1998; Dube and Vargas, 2013).
Despite some evidence that economic incentives have a significant effect on violent events,
there is no evidence that they have much power to explain armed group recruitment.
    Another possibility is that individuals join armed groups for nonmaterial motives. Armed
groups, especially popular militia, typically have clear objectives, which may align with in-
dividuals' intrinsic motivations. Jos´
                                     e Manuel Mireles Valverde, one of the leaders of the
Autodefensas movement in Michoac´
                                an, Mexico, explained that every single one of the mem-
bers of his armed self-defence militia has lost a relative or close friend to the drug cartels.
That experience, he explains, is the foundation of their commitment to the movement.2
Many scholars in other social sciences have emphasized the importance of intrinsic motiva-
    1
        On the social costs of war, see Fearon (1995), Collier (1999), Hoeffler (2017).
    2
        See Heineman (2015).



                                                         1
tion to explain armed group recruitment, and specifically militia recruitment. Economists
have recognized that nonmaterial motives could be important for civil conflict (Collier and
Hoeffler, 2004). However, there is no empirical evidence in economics about the importance
of intrinsic motivation for armed group recruitment, except through self-reported narratives.
This paper attempts to settle this debate and demonstrate how nonmaterial motives form.
   In this paper, we provide evidence for the formation, and effects, of intrinsic preferences
to join armed groups, in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). A number of
characteristics of eastern DRC make the setting well suited for identifying the formation of
preferences to join armed groups. First, today, around 120 nonstate armed groups operate
in eastern DRC (Vogel et al., 2021). Second, some of these armed groups are perceived as
foreigners. Indeed, several of these groups have origins in neighboring countries (henceforth,
foreign armed groups). For instance, the Front de Liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) was estab-
lished by former Rwandan military officers and militias involved in the Rwandan genocide
(Stys, 2014; Johnson et al., 2016). The FDLR has engaged in considerable violence against
civilian populations in eastern DRC. On the other side of the divide, numerous local militias
have emerged to oppose foreign armed groups, often designated as Mai-Mai (henceforth,
Congolese militia). Qualitative research has suggested that victimization of the individuals'
family by foreign armed groups may be a leading explanation for why individuals join a
Congolese militia (Marchais, 2016).
   As a foundation for this study, we assembled a yearly panel dataset on the occupational
choices and household histories of 1,537 households from 239 municipalities in North and
South Kivu provinces, and the violence perpetrated by armed actors on those households,
dating back to 1990. We measure exposure to attacks on the household using a cross-
validation of various sources, which we constructed through one week of fieldwork by a
team of two field researchers in each village. We measure participation into armed groups
using household histories reported by each respondent. At the time of the data gathering,
episodes of participation were either complete or in a district (Shabunda) controlled by a


                                              2
local militia. Thus, everywhere in our context, with appropriate care that we describe in
this paper, participation could be reconstructed. Our main analysis exploits variation in
exposure to foreign armed group attacks across and within households over time.
   We first compare the mean characteristics of individuals at the time when they join armed
groups vs. the rest of individuals and years in the sample. We analyze 296 episodes in which
an individual participates in an armed group. The mean duration is 2.34 years. We find
that 78% of those correspond to participation in a Congolese militia. The other episodes
are in either the Congolese army or in foreign armed groups. Yet, mean socioeconomic
characteristics of participants and nonparticipants are almost identical, with one exception:
the household of individuals who have participated in an armed group is 2.5 times more
likely to have been attacked in the past by a foreign armed group. This could indicate that
foreign armed group attacks on the family lead to joining, possibly a Congolese militia.
   To isolate the causal effect of an attack by foreign armed groups, our analysis then
compares individuals at years in which their households have not previously been attacked
to years in which their households have previously been attacked, within year, individual,
village, and cohort. Specifically, we regress an indicator for participation in a Congolese
militia on an indicator for whether the household had previously been attacked by a foreign
armed group, and include individual, year, village, and age fixed effects. We find that if the
household has been attacked by a foreign armed group, the probability that the individual
participates in a Congolese militia is 2.55 pp (2.36 times) larger in each subsequent year.
This effect is so large that it drives the effect of attacks by any armed group on participation
into any armed group. It is consistent with the formation of intrinsic motivation.
   We then examine potential threats to inference: endogeneity of foreign armed group
attack, nonclassical measurement error, selection bias through migration, persistence of par-
ticipation, coincidental aggregate shocks, and whether foreign armed group attack captures
coincidental conflict activity. Using the timing of historical events that affected a sub-set of
households, observable characteristics of households attacked and not attacked, the individ-


                                               3
uals' migration histories, the reports of attacks by other households in the same village, and
analyzing bias in reporting, we find no evidence of confounding.
   Our analysis then turns to the underlying mechanism. We examine three hypotheses that
provide support to the formation of preferences to fight arising from parochial altruism.
   First, if the finding reflects the formation of preferences, then it should arise from attacks
that are more traumatic. We find that the effect is driven by the attacks that are the most
gruesome and by attacks that took place when the respondent was at a young age.
   Second, if the effect reflects the formation of preferences, it should be stable, and hence
persist. We find that the effect persists beyond five years after the attack.
   Third, we examine whether such preferences reflect empathic concern for one's group
(henceforth, parochial altruism). Indeed, we find that, while attacks on the village chief,
on other households, and on other villages cannot explain our result, the effect of a foreign
armed group attack has an independent, but monotonically decreasing effect in the social
distance of the victim to the respondent -- i.e., it is largest when the victim is a household
member or the village chief, it is smaller when the victim is another household in the village,
and insignificant if the victim is another household of the Chiefdom outside the village.
   Our analysis then turns to leading alternative causal channels that may explain our main
effect. Guided by a household dynamic optimization model, we analyze whether our baseline
estimate could reflect each of the following three alternative mechanisms. First, attacks on
the household may have depleted the household's capital stock, altering the incentives for
occupational choice and potentially causing participation into armed groups. Second, attacks
on the household may increase the household members' concern for security, potentially
leading them to join armed groups expecting to obtain private protection. Third, attacks on
the household could have led the respondents to join armed groups because the respondent
may be directly victimized, which could have reduced the productivity of their labor in
the labor market. Using detailed household asset histories, the cross-validation of reported
attacks in the village, and the details of who is victimized, we rule out these channels.


                                               4
    To assess the conditions for external validity of our result, we then examine whether our
baseline estimate depends on the ability of the state to repress armed group participation.
Specifically, we analyze the interaction between past victimization of the household and the
current presence of state forces. Exploiting changes in the presence of state forces over time
and across villages, and also using the timing of military redeployments an an instrument,
we find that the entire behavioral response to foreign armed group attacks is driven by
participation in a Congolese militia during years in which the state forces are absent--often
those take place various years after the attack. This suggests that, while victimization
creates persistent preferences to fight back foreign armed groups, those are channeled into
participation in a Congolese militia if, and only if, the state is weak.
    Our analysis then turns to benchmarking the magnitude of our estimate to the effect of
the withdrawal of state forces, and to the effect of income fluctuations. First, we find that
the magnitude of our effect is comparable to the effect of the withdrawal of state forces.
This suggests that state efforts to repress armed groups could be replaced by state efforts
to protect civilians. Second, we find that to undo the effect of an attack, the yearly revenue
outside armed groups would need to increase, each year, 18.2 fold. To establish this result,
we exploit a large shock to the world price for gold. Gold is mined by individuals in some
locations of our sample, but not others. Gold is very easy to conceal. Thus, its price increases
income in mining more than it does that that can be obtained by joining armed group.
    Our study complements a burgeoning literature in economics that examines the motives
for violence (Blattman and Miguel, 2010). Social scientists have long discussed the role
of nonmaterial motives (Kalyvas, 2006; Wood, 2006; Arjona, 2008; Balcells, 2012).3 While
economists recognize the possibility of nonmaterial motivations (Collier and Hoeffler, 2004),
   3
     The literature in political science, sociology and anthropology identifies several factors that explain
participation in violence. These include grievances resulting from relative deprivation (Gurr, 1970), selective
monetary incentives (Popkin, 1979; Weinstein, 2007), social networks that mediate recruitment (Gould,
1993; Parkinson, 2013; Staniland, 2014; Scacco, 2016), coercion and the cost of nonparticipation (Kalyvas
and Kocher, 2007), and ideology (Guti´ errez San´in and Wood, 2014; Atran, 2016; Schubiger and Zelina, 2017).
A consensus is that various factors are relevant (Humphreys and Weinstein, 2008; Marchais, 2016; Viterna,
2006, 2013; Parkinson, 2013). However, recent contributions in political science emphasize the role of moral
beliefs and emotions (Wood, 2003) and of victimization and revenge (Balcells, 2017).


                                                      5
to date, the study of civil war in economics remains focused on its economic logic (Fearon,
1995; Jackson and Morelli, 2011; Dube and Vargas, 2013; S´
                                                         anchez de la Sierra, 2020).
   The findings also contribute to the study of the effects of war on pro-social behavior
(Bauer et al., 2016). Due to the difficulty of observing data on war, war exposure remains
a "black box," and pro-social behavior is typically measured in the lab or in the form of
peaceful political participation. Complementing this literature, we micro-found the channels
through which war leads to altruistic behavior that is privately costly in a real context, and
characterize how it forms, and how the institutional environment mediates its expression.
When the state is "weak," its expression is notably through joining Congolese militia.
   Our study also complements the study of the effect of coercion and violence on devel-
opment. Seminal research has examined the effects of coercion motivated by extraction of
resources on wealth, education, health, social cohesion, and institutions (Lowes and Mon-
tero, 2021). Violent practices by the colonial state are of similar degrading nature to those
perpetrated by the foreign armed groups in our context.4 Complementing the findings in
this literature, we show that individuals have agency despite these experiences, and use it
to combat the causes of oppression. Our findings suggest that individuals use the channels
that are available in their context to express their newly seeded preferences for rebellion.
   Finally, this paper also complements the literature on intrinsic motivation (B´
                                                                                 enabou
and Tirole, 2003). Seminal studies have analyzed the margin of selection of workers with
intrinsic motivation into organizations with a public good-oriented mission (Dal B´
                                                                                  o et al.,
2013; Ashraf et al., 2014a,b; Dal B´
                                   o et al., 2017; Deserranno, 2019; Karing, 2021). Due
to the difficulty to measure its origin, intrinsic motivation is often taken as exogenous, or
experimentally re-activated (Khan, 2021). We provide evidence for how it can form at an
early age, and show that it plays a role at a high-stakes developmental outcome.
   We now turn to a discussion of the Congolese militia in our analysis.
   4
     For instance, Lowes and Montero (2021) quote: "My father was murdered: they tied him to a tree and
shot and killed him, and when the sentries untied him they gave him to their boys, who ate him. My mother
and I were taken prisoner. The sentries cut off my mother's hands while she was still alive."



                                                   6
2       Context

Three characteristics make the provinces of North and South Kivu in the last 30 years well
suited to study the formation of intrinsic motivation to fight.
    First, since the First (1996­97) and Second (1998­2003) Congolese Wars, rebel factions
from Rwanda and Burundi have consolidated bases in rural areas of North and South Kivu
(henceforth, foreign armed groups). The narratives of the population suggest that the vio-
lence of foreign rebel factions have motivated many Congolese to take up arms.
    Second, this conflict taps onto preexisting divisions and distrust between so-called "au-
tochtonous" communities and "foreigners," in particular Rwandophone armed actors (Vlassen-
root, 2002; Jackson, 2006; Vogel and Stearns, 2018; S´
                                                     anchez de la Sierra, 2021). These divi-
sions date back to the 19th century and have been reinforced by the violent conflicts of the
1960's and 1990's (Hoffmann and Vlassenroot, 2014; Hoffmann et al., 2017).
    Third, the 1990's have seen a proliferation of armed factions in the region, from village
self-defence militia to larger armed groups. Their proliferation is the result of international
military confrontations, conflicts over land, resources and customary authority, integration
and defection from the Congolese national army, and protection of civilians.5 Today, there
are around 120 of them in the eastern provinces of the DRC (Vogel et al., 2021). Among
these, many are so-called Mai-Mai militia. The Mai-Mai are a constellation of armed groups,
originally formed during the Congolese wars as part of a large-scale armed resistance move-
ment, which splintered into many smaller groups. Mai-Mai factions typically have a strong
social basis in the rural areas of South Kivu (Hoffmann and Verweijen, 2018). In rural areas,
joining the Mai-Mai has become part of life for many Congolese, often young men. Qualita-
tive research suggests that, among various reasons for joining, motives include the desire to
fight foreign armed groups who have abused relatives or the community.6
    5
      For an in depth analysis of the causes of armed mobilization in eastern DRC, see The Rift Valley
Institute's Usalama Project I: Understanding Congolese Armed Groups and II: Governance in Conflict, in
particular Stearns (2012b); Stearns et al. (2013); Vlassenroot (2013); Verweijen (2016).
    6
      Other motives include revenge, social exclusion, income, protection, ideology, and, in some cases, coer-
cion (Vlassenroot and Van Acker, 2001; Jourdan, 2004, 2011; Brabant, 2016; Marchais, 2016).


                                                      7
   The case of the Raia Mutomboki ("outraged citizens") illustrates the role of parochial
altruism to create intrinsic motivation to join militia. At the end of the Second Congolese
War (1998-2003), most of the armed factions who had been operating in the rural areas of
South Kivu were incorporated into the new Congolese National Army, the Forces Armees
de la Republique Democratique du Congo (FARDC). Their withdrawal created a security
vacuum in the territory of Shabunda, South Kivu: indeed, factions of the Front de Lib-
eration du Rwanda (FDLR), a Rwandan armed group with origins in the Rwandan Civil
War, increased human rights violations against civilians in Shabunda. In response, a local
Kimbanguist Minister, Jean Musumbu, mobilized the population to fight the FDLR aided by
spiritual powers and magical amulets known as dawa. This was the emergence of the Raia
Mutomboki, which garnered wide popular support and drove the FDLR out of southern
Shabunda (Stearns, 2013; Vogel, 2014). It reemerged in 2011 under similar circumstances,
and acquired a larger scale (Stearns, 2013; Hoffmann and Vlassenroot, 2014; Vogel, 2014).
   The Raia Mutomboki tapped onto grievances created by the FDLR's violence against
the population. In the initial stages of the 2004­05 and 2011 mobilizations, the move-
ment enjoyed considerable popular support, displaying the characteristics of a social move-
ment (Stearns and Botiveau, 2013). The decentralized character of the movement allowed
franchise-like local chapters to emerge in villages and towns of Shabunda (Stearns, 2013).
Participants were typically free to enter and leave. The movement's message also articulated
grievances of the population against neglect by the Congolese state and their suffering at the
hands of the FDLR with a call to action to rid the area of the FDLR.7
   Qualitative interviews carried out for this project provide evidence of widespread abuses
by the FDLR, and of these abuses being a driver of Congolese militia mobilization. Consider
the following account by three notables in the village of Nyambembe:

       [The FDLR] acted as mercenaries, pillaging and carrying out massacres on the
       population . . . They became more and more harmful until the population
   7
      Like many other armed groups in the DRC (Hoffmann, 2015), the movement's use of the mystico-
religious beliefs of the Rega further strengthened its popular appeal (Stearns, 2013).

                                                8
  organized themselves, given that the national army was incapable of stopping
  the attacks of the FDLR . . . The Raia Mutomboki emerged in this village in
  2011, and was essentially composed of autochtones, with the objective of chasing
  away the [FDLR] . . . At first, they reacted when they learned that the FDLR
  were in the village, but with the increase in FDLR violence they started attacking
  them directly, and thanks to their fetiches, they were able to get some weapons
  from the FDLR and chased the FDLR out of Shabunda. (Interview carried out
  in September 2013 in Nyambembe).

Consider the following account from a trader of Misau village, in Walikale district:

  [The FDLR] forced me to leave the bed and asked me to hand over everything I
  had as money, they emptied my shop. They even forced my wife to sleep with
  them in my presence, and after pillaging our shop, they shot bullets in the air,
  pillaged the whole village, and burnt some households before leaving. A day after
  these events, the national army came to secure the village upon the request of
  the population. They organized patrols regularly to eradicate the FDLR, and
  the youth of the village joined the army to help them fight the FDLR, including
  myself (phone interview, March 2021 in Walikale).

Consider the following account from a trader of Pinga village, in Walikale district:

  From afar, I saw the body of my father and two of my brothers already with their
  throats slit, and I saw the [FDLR], I ran to the village to inform the Mai-Mai
  NDC. They gave me the grigri to protect me against bullets, and upon returning
  to the scene, the FDLR had left, I fainted when I saw the bodies of my family.
  We had to bury them in the village. After this experience, the NDC began to
  organize patrols to track the FDLR and, since I knew the area, I helped their
  operations and later joined the NDC (phone interview, March 2021 in Walikale).

Section B provides additional background on the FDLR and Congolese militia.

                                          9
3       Data

Our sample comprises 1,537 households living in a random sample of villages of South Kivu
and North Kivu, eastern provinces of the DRC.8 For each household, we observe the history
of exposure to violence and asset ownership and investment for the household, and the history
of participation in armed milita for one of its members.
    Participation in militia is commonplace in eastern DRC, hence discussing episodes of par-
ticipation is conceivable. Many armed groups such as the Mai-Mai or Raia Mutomboki have
enjoyed support from the population. As a result, it is possible to discuss past and current
episodes of participation and with appropriate measures, do so without fear of retribution
or social desirability bias. Thus, we are confident that motives for concealing participation
were sufficiently contained that they do not affect the validity of our exercise.
    Prior to gathering information, we obtained authorizations from provincial, territory, and
village state authorities, as well as customary authorities to whom the project was presented
in detail. Ethical guidelines were followed to ensure that respondents did not feel obliged to
participate in the study and that their participation didn't expose them or the researchers
to any risk. Field researchers spent at least a week in each village or entity, during which
they built relationships with respondents and local communities, and gathered information
on the histories of the entities.
    The section that follows describes the data collection.


3.1     Data collection

The data were collected between June 2012 and September 2013 in South Kivu, and between
June 2015 and June 2016 in North Kivu. Because no census has been conducted in recent
years, in a first data-gathering round, members of the research team spent weeks in the dis-
tricts' (so-called Chiefdoms) capitals and in the lower-level districts (so-called groupements)
    8
     We exclude villages without valuable resources from the sampling frame, as those see typically lower
levels of armed group activity. SeeS´
                                    anchez de la Sierra (2020) for more details on data collection.



                                                   10
to draw lists of all villages in each district by consulting state and customary authorities. In
those lists, we identified the villages that had a natural resource--the rest typically had less
armed group activity. From that list, we randomly sampled 133 villages in South Kivu and
106 villages in North Kivu.
    Once we had consolidated the sample of villages, teams of two researchers visited each
village. In each village, the assigned team worked for one week, reconstructing the history
of the village, and of a random sample of households. Since there was no census, they first
drew a village list with the village chief, and implemented random selection using pre-selected
random numbers generated through a computer. In South Kivu, we randomly sampled eight
households in each village. In North Kivu, we randomly sampled six households per village.9
    At the same time, the researchers conducted a day-long household survey in each sampled
household. In each household, they randomly sampled one available male adult to work with
the researcher during one full day, with appropriate compensation and food. The survey
comprised breaks for lunch, informal conversations, ethnographic in-depth data gathering,
and reconstructed the household's and the respondent's history, dating back to at least 1995.
    Our sample comprised 1,537 households (1,041 in South Kivu and 496 in North Kivu).
The survey gathered yearly information about the respondents' history of participation in
armed groups, detailed information of the nature and the dates of all violent attacks experi-
enced by the household and any of its members, as well as a history of occupational choice,
migration, and acquisition and liquidation of assets (cattle), but also about the village his-
tory of attacks and armed groups' presence. This allows us to cross-validate the respondent
reports with the information provided by other households and by the village history.
    Reconstructing a household's history based on recall is subject to classic measurement
error of magnitudes, of event dates, and to nonclassical error due to sensitive information.
To address these challenges, we used established methods in recall studies from eyewitnesses
   9
     The field researchers lived with the community during one week. They built ties with the community,
collected qualitative information about the history of the conflict in the village, worked with the history
experts of the village to reconstruct, and verify the village history.



                                                    11
and, based on three months of piloting, tailored them to the cultural context.10 Specifically,
we implemented the following measures.
    First, in each province and for each year, we identified time cues that respondents would
remember from their experience of the regional history. When asking a question about a
historical event, such as an attack or the acquisition of cattle, to identify the year in which
the event took place, the field researchers first examined whether the event was before or
after the time cues in that area. Respondents sometimes did not know the exact year, but
they recalled with certainty whether it was after or before a given time cue. Since we know
the year of the time cues, this allowed the field researchers to pin down the exact years.
    Second, built-in in the surveys was a strategy for auto-generation of person-specific rel-
evant time-cues, anchored to common knowledge historical time cues. For instance, at the
start of each survey, the field researcher asked about the easiest information to recall: when
they were born, when they got married, when they migrated (if applicable), using the histor-
ical common knowledge time cues. These life events provided respondent-specific time cues
that field researchers then were trained to use for the remainder of the survey. This made it
straightforward to determine the years at which the following events discussed in the survey
took place, even when respondents were not sure a priory about the year.11
    Third, we also administered working memory measurements. This allows us to weight
observations by the ability of the respondent to memorize numbers, for robustness.


3.2      Description of survey measures

Based on our own qualitative interviews (Marchais, 2016; S´
                                                          anchez de la Sierra, 2020) and
extensive discussions with specialists of the survey regions, we classify all the armed groups
into: (1) Congolese militia, (2) Foreign armed groups, (3) Congolese army.12
   10
       S´
        anchez de la Sierra (2020) presents additional information about the method for this data collection.
   11
       For instance, it was always easy for the respondent to answer whether they had acquired a cow before
or after their marriage, or before or after the Second Congo War started.
    12
       We built this classification on the basis of existing literature on the eastern Congolese conflict, qualitative
fieldwork, and our quantitative data. For each armed group reported in the survey, we collected information


                                                         12
    Victimization. The sources are a household attack history module and a household roster.
    In the household attack history module, each respondent is asked to report up to nine
attacks by armed actors that happened in the village where they live in. Each respondent on
average reports 2.08 attack events; the 99%th percentile is seven events. Thus, reporting limit
did not lead to loss of data. For each event, we obtain perpetrators' identity, the perceived
intention behind the attack, whether respondent was physically victimized, whether the
household was pillaged, the number of fatalities in the village, the number of persons who
suffered sexual violence in the village, and whether the village chief was victimized.13
    The household roster contains information on all the members of the household at the
time of the survey. For each household member, each respondent reported (1) up to three
events in which armed actors victimized the household member directly, and (2) of these,
up to three events in which the armed actor perpetrated sexual violence on the household
member. For each of those events, we identify the year in which they took place.14 Based
on this information, we construct an indicator for whether respondent reported an attack on
the household members for each year. We link the attack information in both modules.15
    In the analysis that follows, to isolate parochially altruistic motivations, we focus on
whether any household member other than the respondent was victimized, henceforth house-
hold victimization. This includes episodes in which the respondent was also victimized.
    Participation in armed groups. We obtain information on whether the respondent par-
ticipated in militias or armed groups.16 The information comes from the security module in
on the name of the group, whether the group had been formed in the survey entity, the nationality of
the leaders of the group and whether the group was perceived as local to the entity. Given the franchise
character of armed movements such as the Mai-Mai or Raia Mutomboki, composed of numerous subgroups,
the questions were geared toward the group that was present in the entity and not the movement as a whole.
Furthermore, we triangulate the classifications of the household survey with those of the village survey.
   13
      We only ask whether village chief is victimized in the South Kivu survey.
   14
      Since the household information module also elicits whether respondents themselves are attacked, this
information overlaps with respondent attack module where respondents are asked whether they suffer from
physical assault during attacks on village. We clean the latter information using the former.
   15
      We use the attack information from both modules for each household member attack. See Appendix A.
   16
      For measurement purposes, we define participation as the active involvement in the security-related
activities of an armed group. There are other forms of involvement: civilians can work as informants, covert
supporters, tax collectors, enforcers, business partners, and other roles. Our definition of participation does
not include these other forms of involvement. In Petersen (2001)'s classification, our definition corresponds to


                                                      13
the household survey. To obtain this, we first ask each respondent to list the armed groups
that have been in the village where they lived at the time of the interview. For each armed
group, each respondent is asked whether he had participated in it and if yes, the start date
and end date. In addition, for respondents not born in the village of interview, in a separate
module, we asked the respondent to describe each episode of participation in an armed group
in years preceding the arrival to this village. Based on this information, we construct the
respondent's history of participation in a Congolese militia (henceforth, "participation").
    The information on victimization was gathered prior to that about participation in armed
groups. This design feature was intentional. It helped shield the data gathering against mo-
tivated reasoning biasing the reporting of attacks. For instance, if a respondent reported to
have participated he may then be tempted to overreport or provide more effort to remember
the attack events, as a way to rationalize his decision to participate. By asking about the
attacks well before asking about participation, this source of bias is made impossible.
    Household economic history. We also observe the household's yearly investment and
occupational history.17 For each year since 1995, we observe how many cows, goats, and
pigs the household bought or sold; how many fields the household bought or sold; whether
respondent held a marriage; and whether the respondent worked in any of the following
categories: agriculture, school student, mining, government-related jobs, or unemployment.
    Village history. We obtain the history of armed group presence in the village to construct
an indicator for whether there is a state force present in the village in a given year (henceforth,
"weak state" indicator). Given the context history, we consider as state forces the Congolese
army (for up to 1996 and after 2004) and the Rassemblement Congolais pour la D´
                                                                              emocratie
(RCD) (for 1998­2004), who had taken over the apparatus of the state during the Second
Congo War (Stearns, 2012a). We also use this information to cross-validate household attack
information with village attack information from chief and village specialists (see Section 6.2).
the second and third levels of involvement in insurgent groups, both the active participation in local security
organizations (the second level) and participation in mobile armed factions (third level). Our measure of
participation was extensively discussed with the research team in qualitative fieldwork.
   17
      Information of farm animals is only asked in the South Kivu survey.


                                                      14
4        Characteristics of participation and attacks

There are 25,091 household-year observations in which the respondent is above age 15, span-
ning the years 1995 to 2013. In 3.1% of those, the respondents participates in an armed group,
and in 9.3%, his household members have previously been victimized, reaching 16.14% of
the 1,537 respondents by the end of the sample period. At that point, 14.05% of respondents
have participated in an armed group. Figure I presents the village sample in 2012.
     We first present some basic characteristics of the attacks in the sample. Figure II shows
characteristics of the raw attacks dataset. In total, there are 3,473 individual-year obser-
vations between year 1995 and 2013 in which the respondent reports an attack that takes
place in the village they live in. Of those, 475 are reports of an attack incident in which
household members, other than the respondent, were directly victimized (we call this house-
hold victimization). Panel A shows that 333 of those 475 household victimization attacks
were perpetrated by foreign armed groups (70% of the 475 attacks). Those were mostly
perpetrated by the FDLR and other foreign armed groups. Ninety-five of the 475 household
victimization attacks were perpetrated by Congolese militia. Eighteen of the 475 events were
perpetrated by the Congolese army.18 Panel B shows that the respondents' household mem-
bers are victimized in 1.1% of individual-year observations (475 events), other households
(among the households of the study sample) in the same village are also victimized in 4.3%
of observations (1,836 events), and other villages (among the villages in our sample of survey
villages) of the same Chiefdom are also victimized in 74% of observations (21,732 events).19
Panel C shows the distribution of attacks and crimes perpetrated during those attacks. We
find that perpetrators directly victimize the spouse of the respondent, or his children, in
332 and 106 attacks out of the 475 household victimization attacks, respectively. We find
that out of the 475 household victimization attacks, 185 included sexual violence against a
    18
      Figure D.1 in the online appendix shows the distribution of attack perpetrators in detail. The figure also
includes attacks perpetrated by the Congolese national army. Since the sample of Congolese army attacks is
only 18, in the analysis that follows, we analyze attacks by the Congolese army only in Appendix Table C.1.
   19
      There are 21 Chiefdoms in the sample.



                                                      15
household member. Of those, 126 included sexual violence against the respondent's spouse.
Finally, of the 475 household victimization attacks, 420 included theft of household property.
In sum, the attacks that we consider in the analysis that follows are, on average, gruesome,
often targeted the spouse of the respondent, and almost always included theft.20
   We then present basic characteristics of observations in which an individual participates
in a Congolese militia, which we call participation, and those in which they do not. Baseline
difference between individual-year observations in which respondents participate in an armed
group and those in which they do not are shown in Table I.
   Column "Not Part." shows the characteristics of all individual-year observations in which
the respondent does not participate in any armed group. Column "Start Part." includes
only the characteristics in the first year of participation.21 The table reports, for each
individual-year observation, characteristics of participation episodes (Panel A), respondent
socio-demographic outcomes (Panel B), household economic outcomes (Panel C), and expo-
sure to attacks (Panel D). Symbols *,**,*** indicate whether the difference between the two
columns is statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.
   In Panel A, the unit of observation is the individual participation episode. The panel
presents characteristics of the 296 episodes.22 Of the episodes, 78.4% were in a Congolese
militia, 11.2% in foreign armed groups, and 2.03% (n=6) in the Congolese national army. The
average duration of an episode is 2.34 years. The 296 episodes represent 251 individuals.23
   Panel B presents mean socio-demographic characteristics of the individuals for partici-
pation and nonparticipation episodes. The mean characteristics across these two groups are
fairly balanced: individuals in the first year of participation episodes are not more likely to
be married, to previously work in the mining sector, agriculture, as a civil servant, or to
be unemployed. In the year in which they initiate a participation episode, individuals who
participate tend to be one year younger than the rest of individuals in the sample.
  20
     Figure D.2 shows the distribution of attack perpetrators and motives in detail.
  21
     We exclude 488 observations that are after the first year of the participation episode.
  22
     Figure D.3 presents the average duration of participation by year of episode start.
  23
     Due to its small sample, recruitment by the Congolese army is analyzed in Appendix Table C.1.


                                                  16
     Panel C presents the household economic characteristics. Wealth at birth of individuals
observed in participation episodes is comparable to that in nonparticipation individual-years.
Their asset stock in the year before, and the investment in assets the subsequent year, is
also comparable to that observed in individual-year observations not participating.
     Finally, Panel D compares the exposure to past attacks. While participants tend to be
indistinguishable from nonparticipants in other characteristics, individuals at the first year of
a participation episode are 2.5 times more likely to have experienced a foreign armed group
attack against their household members than the rest. This could indicate that foreign armed
group attacks on the households cause individuals to participate in a Congolese militia.24



5        Baseline estimate

We now turn to formally testing whether attacks by foreign armed groups on the house-
hold are associated with a higher propensity that individuals later join Congolese militia.
Specifically, we estimate the following equation using ordinary least squares (OLS):


                                    V ictim
                     P artijt =  + Iit      + i + j + t + a + Xit  +                 ijt                 (1)


                                                                  V ictim
where i, j, t index, individuals, villages, years, respectively. Iit      is an indicator variable
that equals 1 if other members in the household of individual i have been attacked at any
period t < t, and zero otherwise. i , j , t , a are fixed effects for individual, village,
year, and cohort (age), respectively.25 The vector of individual-year level covariates, Xit , is
included where indicated. To account for serial correlation and village-level shocks, standard
errors are two-way clustered at the individual and at the village*year (respectively, 1,537
and 9,061 clusters). Where indicated, we also estimate standard errors accounting for intra-
Chiefdom correlation over space and time, i.e. clustering at the Chiefdom level (in that case,
    24
     Figure D.4 presents the episodes of participation (in blue) and the foreign armed groups' attacks on the
household (red crosses) against years (x axis). Episodes of participation occur through the entire period.
  25
     All villages contain individuals who are observed in another village in some year.


                                                     17
since there are 21 Chiefdoms, we estimate the standard errors with wild bootstrap).26
    Estimates of equation 1 are reported in Table II. Columns (1)­(3) present separate re-
gressions in which the dependent variable, P artijt , measures participation: in a Congolese
militia, in a foreign armed group, in any armed group, respectively. The rows report the
                      V ictim
regressions in which Iit      measures that the household members have been attacked by:
a foreign armed group (By foreign group), a Congolese militia (By Congolese militia), any
armed group (By any armed group). The table reports estimates (and standard errors) of  .
    The coefficient estimate in column (1), labeled "Congolese militia," and row By foreign
armed group, shows that individuals in households who have previously been attacked by a
foreign armed group are 2.55 pp. more likely to participate in a Congolese militia. Since the
control mean of participation in a Congolese militia is 1.88 pp, a foreign armed group attack
on the household is associated with an average per year 136% larger propensity to participate
in a Congolese militia. We refer to this relationship as the baseline estimate.27 Its magnitude
is so large that it drives entirely the effect of attacks by any armed group on participation
in any armed group. Indeed, Column (3), labeled "Any armed group," at row labeled Any
armed group shows that an attack on the household by any armed group is associated with
1.73 pp. higher propensity to participate in any armed group, also significant.
    In sum, this analysis shows that if the household has previously been victimized by a
foreign armed group, the probability to join a Congolese militia is significantly larger. This
suggests that foreign armed group attacks on the household cause participation into Con-
golese militia. However, various threats to identification challenge this causal interpretation.
We analyze the merit of those threats in the next Section.28
   26
       The number of villages included in the regression is 634, more than the 239 sample villages. It is because
respondents might have lived outside the sample villages at a given year. We collect the migration history
of each respondent which allows us to control for these out-of-sample villages in the regression.
    27
       Figure D.5 shows the main result graphically. This indicator is unchanged by whether the household
members experience any other attack after the first one. However, 67% of the attacks in our sample are the
first attack the household experiences in the household. The number of additional attacks is very small (only
2% of observations), even if an additional attack continues to have an independent, but insignificant, effect.
Figure D.6 shows the baseline estimate broken down by first, second, and third attack. It is only significant
in the first, consistent with the interpretation that it arises from trauma.
    28
       In the sections that follow, the analysis includes the data from both North and South Kivu provinces.


                                                       18
6     Examining potential confounders

In this section, we assess the merits of leading threats to validity of our baseline estimate.


6.1     Endogeneity of foreign armed group attack

A crucial identification assumption for interpreting the baseline estimate as quantifying a
causal relationship is that the switch in victimized status within household across years is
orthogonal to variables that are also associated with the propensity to join Congolese militia.
    Motivated by this possibility, we checked for differences in observable characteristics
between the household-year observations in which the household is attacked and those in
which it is not.29 We find that attacks do not disproportionately affect households with
past participation, nor with different socio-demographic characteristics. However, attacks
disproportionately affect more the wealthiest households. We found that this imbalance
arises exclusively from attacks driven by pillaging. This suggests that victimized households
may be self-selected, mostly due to by attacks motivated by pillaging. Reassuringly, we also
found that richer households are not more likely to participate on average. We now analyze
whether the baseline estimate is robust to selection of households into victimization.30
    Table III, Panel A, presents the analysis of endogeneity of past attacks on the household.
Panel A.1 shows estimates of equation 1 using controls for selection. Column (1) estimates
equation 1 as benchmark. Column (2) uses only foreign armed group attacks in which no
pillage took place in the household as explanatory variable. Since, for attacks not motivated
by pillage, households are balanced on observable characteristics as we show in Table C.2,
estimation using this variable is less likely to be biased due to selection of households. The
baseline estimate is strengthened by focusing on attacks not motivated by pillage.
    Column (3) controls for all imbalanced variables presented in Table C.2. Time-invariant
All results arise from South Kivu respondents.
   29
      Table C.2 in the online appendix presents this balance.
   30
      Columns (1) and (2) of Table C.2 indicate that attack affected wealthier households disproportionately.
Columns (3) and (4) decompose attacks into attacks in which attacks with the intention to pillage took place
and the rest. We find that this imbalance arises exclusively from attacks driven by pillaging.

                                                     19
variables (wealth at birth) are interacted with indicators for years. We find that the coef-
ficient is significantly larger, and statistical significance is strengthened. We also find that
lagged asset stock is uncorrelated with participation, confirming that richer households are
no more likely to participate in a Congolese militia. Accounting for these controls, a foreign
armed group attack in the household is associated to a 178% larger future propensity to par-
ticipate in a Congolese militia. The analysis in columns (2) and (3) suggests that selection
of households cannot explain the baseline estimate, and thus is unlikely to be a confound.
   Panel A.2 implements three different instrumental variable approaches that exploit plau-
sibly exogenous sources of variation for attacks. Column (1) is the benchmark. In column
(2), we instrument whether the household has been attacked in year t with whether the
household lived in Shabunda during 1998­2002 of 2010­11, for two reasons. First, 1998­
2002 is the height of the Second Congo war, the most intense period of the conflict, and the
district of Shabunda, which was particularly affected by the conflict. Second, in 2011, the
Congolese army retreated from rural areas of Shabunda for an army restructuring process
known as Regimentation (Stearns, 2013). This led to a disproportionate rise in violent in-
cursions by the FDLR. These are plausibly exogenous sources of exposure to attacks across
villages and years. The estimated IV coefficient is large and significant, but the first stage
is weak, which explains why the coefficient is very large (F-stat 3.96). Column (3) instru-
ments household victimization by whether the village was controlled by a foreign armed
group in 1998­2002 or 2010­11. The first stage is strong (F-stat 19.79) and the coefficient is
positive and significant. This provides reassurance that selection of villages into household
victimization does not explain the baseline estimate. Column (4) combines this village-year
level variation with within village variation to instrument for household victimization within
village. Specifically, column (4) uses the same instrument as column (3), interacted with an
indicator for whether the household originates from a rich family. The coefficient is large
and significant and the first stage is marginally strong (F-stat 8.34).
   In sum, we find no evidence that selection of attacks can explain the baseline estimate.


                                              20
6.2     Nonclassical measurement error

Another empirical concern is measurement error of participation and of attacks. For instance,
respondents may have imperfect recall about participation, or about household victimization.
The latter would imply that our baseline estimate is an under-estimate of the effect of
household victimization. More severely, respondents could simply have systematically mis-
reported victimization or participation. This could confound the baseline estimate in any
direction. For instance, while the design of our survey makes this unlikely (see Section 3),
past participants may have a tendency to remember better past attack events. We now
formally assess the role of measurement error in explaining our baseline estimate.
    In Table III, Panel B, we examine the role of measurement error. Column (1) presents
the estimates for equation 1 as benchmark.
    Column (2) estimates equation 1 using cross-validated attacks.31 For each attack reported
by the respondent, we cross-validate the attack by looking at whether more than half of the
other respondents who live in the same village in the same year also reported an attack on
the village, or whether the chief reported an attack on the village in the same year: of the 475
attack episodes, 34.5% can be verified in this way.32 The coefficient is larger and significant.
    Columns (3) and (4) estimate equation 1 weighting observations by their accuracy.33
In column (3), for each respondent, we calculate the report precision by looking at the
proportion of all the "true" attacks, defined as attack episodes reported by more than half of
other contemporary respondents in the same village or by the village chief.34 The coefficient
magnitude is larger, and statistical significance above conventional levels remains. In column
(4), we weight observations by the respondents' score in the working memory tasks, assigning
   31
      Figure D.9 shows the distribution of cross-validated attacks.
   32
      Many non-cross validated attacks happen in the same village but in a different year, indicating that
they are measurement error of the year rather than mis-reporting. Among observations where respondents
live in the current village, 126 out of 260 (48%) of the attacks are cross-validated. Only 20 out of 192 attacks
where respondents live elsewhere can be cross-validated, since they report about attacks in other locations.
For attacks in the in-survey villages, 142 out of 332 attacks can be verified in the chief survey.
   33
      Figure D.10 shows the distribution of precision measures.
   34
      For respondents who never experienced any "true" attack, we assign the mean of report precision.




                                                      21
a larger weight to observations from respondents with high scores in the working memory
tasks. This discounts observations from respondents with poor working memory scores, who
are arguably those providing the data with the highest likelihood of containing measurement
error. The coefficient remains significant (and doubles) regardless which weights we use.35
    Column (5) implements an IV strategy to address classical measurement error by the
respondents reports. Specifically, we use our village-level information for whether a foreign
armed group attacked the village as an instrument for the respondents' report that their
households were attacked in the village. With the IV strategy, the coefficient is larger
(36.84%) and remains statistically significant at conventional significance levels.
    The analysis in columns (2)­(5) thus suggests that the true effect is likely to be larger
than the baseline estimate, this analysis thus confirms the validity of our conclusions.36


6.3     Migration

An important assumption of our analysis is that migration is not a confound. We take
advantage of the fact that we observe individuals over multiple years in the period. This
allows us to include individual fixed effects, ruling out selection of individuals as a threat to
internal validity: we estimate the treatment effect of an attack for the households present
today in the sample of villages we interviewed. But migration can affect external validity
of our results if the selection of households present today is not representative of those who
were present in the past. In that case, we estimate the effect for a population subset.
    Motivated by this possibility, we examine migration. Appendix G shows that coefficient
 of equation 1, when estimated in the sample of respondents who never leave the interview
villages, is an unbiased estimator of the mean effect of household victimization in that sample.
  35
       Memory tests were only conducted in South Kivu. We constructed an index for accuracy using two
tests. In a first test, the respondent is asked to repeat a predetermined sequence of randomly drawn digits
multiple times, at increasing length of the sequence. For instance, if the sequence is 5293746, the surveyor
first asks to repeat 5, then 52, then 529, etc., until the respondent fails to remember. The surveyor notes
the first length at which the respondent failed to remember the sequence fully. In a second test, we asked
them to count how many years had passed since Mobutu was no longer president.
    36
       Table C.3 implements an IV strategy using ACLED data.



                                                    22
   Table III, Panel C, shows the analysis. Column (1) shows the baseline estimate as a
benchmark. Column (2) estimates equation 1, but conditions the sample on villagers who
never leave the sample of interview villages. The coefficient is 4.02, almost twice as large than
the baseline estimate, and is significant. Column (3) estimates equation 1 in the full sample,
but controls for whether the respondent lived outside the interview villages for at least one
year in the study period. Similarly, the coefficient is doubled and remains significant.
   In sum, we obtain a similar coefficient estimate with the population of households who
never left the 239 interview villages. This corresponds to 1,086 out of 1,537 respondents in
the sample, suggesting that, for such well-defined population, in addition to being unbiased,
our estimate is also a close estimate for the households living today in the interview villages.
This provides reassurance that migration does not affect the external validity of our analysis.


6.4    Other possible confounds

We now examine additional leading confounds due to mis-specification. Table III, Panel D,
presents this analysis. Column (1), which presents the baseline estimate, is the benchmark.
   We first account for the possibility that, since the average participation episode lasts
2.34 years, persistence of participation may confound the analysis. For instance, once an
individual joins, the cost of leaving could be high. If this were the case, the baseline estimate
may overestimate the effect of household victimization on the probability to join. Column
(2) presents the estimates of equation 1, but in which the dependent variable takes value
1 only if the observation is the first year of a participation episode, zero otherwise. If the
respondent participated twice, the first year for each episode takes value 1, the remaining
years take value 0. The coefficient remains large and statistically significant. This provides
reassuring evidence that persistence of participation cannot explain our result.
   Another possibility is that our estimates capture coincidental aggregate shocks in the
Chiefdom. This could be concerning for Shabunda, the Raia Mutomboki recruited in large
numbers at the end of the period. In column (3), we estimate equation 1 including as controls


                                               23
indicators for Chiefdom interacted with years (the district of Shabunda has two Chiefdoms,
and only one is in our sample). The coefficient remains similar, and p-value is 0.10.
    A remaining possibility is that attacks by foreign armed groups on the household are
simply a proxy for war in the village. Column (4) includes an indicator for whether a
territorial conquest occurs in the village as control. If foreign armed group attacks on
household members simply capture the effect of war through other channels, the coefficient
on foreign attack should vanish. The coefficient is slightly larger, and remains statistically
significant. Thus, recrudescence of violence due to war cannot explain our results.
    In sum, we find no evidence that attack endogeneity, measurement error, migration,
and other leading confounds can explain our main result. With supporting evidence that
the coefficient captures a causal relationship from household victimization to respondent
participation, we now turn to establishing the channels that may explain it.



7     Examining causal channel: altruistic preferences

We now turn to examining our proposed causal channel for our finding that foreign armed
group attack on the household leads to greater propensity to participate in militia.


7.1    Formation of preferences to join a Congolese militia

In this section, we examine whether the baseline estimate reflects preference formation.
    Our analysis first examines whether the effect arises from the events that are most trau-
matic. We do so by examining the actions perpetrators take during the attack, singling
out those that are most gruesome. We isolate whether the attack is especially traumatic by
whether the attackers targeted the respondent's spouse, whether, they perpetrated sexual
violence against a member of the household and, if they did, whether the victim was the
spouse, and whether the attackers expropriated the household. Estimates of equation 1 using
foreign armed group attacks with these characteristics are reported in Table IV, Panel A.


                                             24
   Column (1) is the benchmark. Column (2) shows the effect for foreign armed group
attacks that victimized the respondent's spouse. The coefficient is almost twice as large,
and significant at the 1% level. Table notes also indicate that it is significantly larger
than the baseline estimate ("P-value: severe vs. not severe"). Given the control mean is
2.00, the coefficient implies that foreign armed groups' attacks with sexual violence on the
household lead to a 250% increase in the propensity that the respondent joins a militia in
the future. Column (3) shows the effect for foreign armed group attacks in the household in
which perpetrators committed sexual violence. The effect is again almost twice as large and
significance improves. It is also significantly larger than the baseline estimate. Column (4)
then narrows the analysis on foreign armed group attacks in which the perpetrators engaged
in sexual violence against the respondent's spouse.37 The coefficient is 5.04, implying a
242% increase in the propensity to join a Congolese militia, and table notes indicate it is
significantly larger than the baseline estimate. Finally, column (5) shows that the effect is also
larger if the attack includes theft of household property. In sum, the effect is concentrated
in foreign armed group attacks that are especially traumatic.38
   However, the analysis in Panel A leaves an open puzzle: if the baseline estimate reflects
gruesome attacks by foreign armed groups, would gruesome attacks by other perpetrators
have the same result? If our conjectured mechanism holds and the effect reflects parochial
altruism, more gruesome attacks by Congolese militia should not translate into a higher
propensity to participate in a Congolese militia. We turn to this analysis in Panel B.
   Columns (1)­(5) of Panel B replicate the analysis of Panel A, but use attacks perpe-
trated on the household by Congolese militia as attack indicator. The columns replicate the
categories from Panel A. We find that none of the attacks has a significant effect on the
propensity to join a Congolese militia, and some effects are even negative. This allows us
to confirm that the baseline estimate reflects the formation of preferences to fight against
foreign armed groups, forged through foreign armed groups' gruesome attacks.
  37
       Reports of sexual violence on children are less than 10% of the 106 attacks on children.
  38
       Figure D.6 in the online appendix shows that the first attack has the largest effect.


                                                      25
   We then analyze the role of the respondent's age at the time of victimization. Traumatic
events are more likely to forge the respondent's preferences when he is young. Thus, to pro-
vide supporting evidence that our estimate reflects the formation of preferences, we analyze
whether the effect arises from attacks that take place at an early age. Figure III presents the
estimates of equation 1, decomposing the foreign armed group attacks by cohort. Specifically,
                                V ictim
we estimate the coefficient on Iit      at different 5-year age intervals of the respondent when
                                               V ictim
the attack takes place. To do so, we interact Iit      with different indicators for whether
the attack took place when the age of the respondent belonged to a given age interval. We
find that the effect is the largest (and the only one statistically significant) in the 20­24 age
age range, and the magnitude of the effect monotonically decreases for older ages, even as
the sample size increases. Because the Congolese wars only begin in 1996, victimization at
ages below age 20 is extremely infrequent in the sample (it only affects .7% of observations).
Thus, the effect of victimization at age below 20 is imprecisely estimated. Household vic-
timization at younger ages (20­24), has a larger impact than at 25-29, which has a larger
impact than at 30­34.39 This pattern is consistent with the formation of preferences.
   Finally, our analysis examines effect stability. If our baseline estimate reflects the forma-
tion of preferences, then the effect should persist over time. Figure IV presents the event
study analysis. The figure reports the coefficients for the leads and lags of the attack indica-
tor, using as baseline reference the year before the foreign armed group attack. The brackets
indicate confidence intervals allowing to conclude whether the propensity to participate is
different than in the year preceding the attack. We find that the effect persists more than
five years after the household victimization, consistent with the formation of preferences.
   In sum, this section has shown that the effect of foreign armed group attacks on the
household is consistent with the formation of stable preferences to join a Congolese militia,
formed at young ages. In what follows, we examine their parochially altruistic origins.
  39
     Figure D.7 implements two extensions. In Panel A, we show the results only for respondents who were
18 or older during the Second Congo War, and thus who were at an age where they could participate when
militia began forming. Panel B uses only data from the second attack experienced. The effects are similar.



                                                   26
7.2     Parochial altruism: Household, neighbors, and community

We now examine whether such preferences reflect parochial altruism. In this setting, house-
holds' reference group is often the community. Thus, if the effect reflects parochial altruism,
then attacks that also harm the community's core should have a particularly strong effect.
In eastern DRC, customary chiefs play an important role in village life, and are often con-
sidered as legitimate representatives of the community (Hoffmann et al., 2020). An attack
on the village chief is thus often perceived as an attack on the community's core.
    Table V presents the estimates from equation 1, decomposed by whether the village chief
is victimized during the household victimization event perpetrated by foreign armed groups,
whether other households in the same village, or in the same Chiefdom, are also victimized.
Column (1) presents the baseline estimate as benchmark. Column (2) estimates equation
1, including as control variable an indicator for whether the village chief is attacked.40 We
find that the effect of chief victimization is similar to that of household victimization, yet
the baseline estimate remains large and significant.41 Column (3) includes, in addition,
an indicator for whether other households in the village are also attacked. We find that
the effect of other households also being attacked is 40% smaller than an attack on his
household, and that both the baseline estimate and the coefficient on other households
are statistically significant. Column (4) also includes whether other villages in the same
Chiefdom are attacked. We find that attacks on other villages have no significant effect.
Thus, the effect of a foreign armed group attack is monotonically decreasing if it targets,
respectively: the village chief or household members, other villagers, other villagers of the
Chiefdom. This is consistent with parochial altruism towards family and community.
    In sum, the baseline estimate is consistent with the interpretation that household vic-
timization forges preferences to join anti-foreign armed group militia, and that these reflect
altruistic concern for individuals closest to the respondent, and community symbols.
   40
      Village chief attack includes all civilian attacks by foreign groups in which the chief is victimized, not
confined to attacks that victimize the respondent's household.
   41
      60% of foreign armed group attacks on the household also victimized the village chief (206 vs. 127 did).


                                                      27
8         Assessing the merit of alternative causal channels

We now examine the merit of remaining alternative causal channels. Section E presents a
simple household dynamic optimization model to guide our analysis of causal channels.
     The model developed in Section E illustrates two important alternative channels through
which armed group attacks on the household may influence participation. First, the attacks
may lead to a destruction of household assets, especially if there is theft, and a lower stock
of assets can influence future occupational choices. Specifically, with a lower stock of assets,
the returns to income and to investment are larger, hence the incentives to participate in
occupations that generate incomer, even if those are risky, are stronger. If armed groups
provide high income, this channel could explain our results.42 Second, the attacks may
influence the respondents' attitudes towards attacks by making them more sensitive about
risk of attacks. If this channel operates, respondents from victimized households may be
more likely feel insecure, which could lead them to join a militia to obtain higher security.
     In addition, attacks on other household members may be correlated with attacks on
the respondent himself. This could be an alternative causal channel, since attacks on the
respondent likely affect the respondent's capabilities, directly influencing his choice to join
armed groups independently of their effect on preferences (for instance, through handicap).
     Table VI examines the merits of these alternative causal paths. Column (1) is the bench-
mark. Column (3) includes household investment in year t as a control. Since investment is
only available for South Kivu, Column (2) shows the benchmark in South Kivu. Column (4)
also controls for whether the respondent overreports attacks. Column (5) estimates equation
1 controlling for whether the respondent is physically harmed. Column (6) includes all these
controls. The baseline estimate and significance are preserved across specifications.
     Thus, we find no merit for the possibility that foreign armed group attacks on the house-
hold lead respondents to participate in a Congolese militia because they affect their incentives
to invest, attitudes toward risk, or the respondent's ability to participate in the labor market.
    42
         This is unlikely, since we have shown that the effect is concentrated on militia.


                                                         28
9        External validity: the effect in weak and strong states

We now analyze the role of the state in mediating our baseline estimate. The state, rep-
resented militarily by the state forces, typically aims to maintain a monopoly of violence,
and therefore repress alternative organizations of violence, including Congolese militia. Our
baseline estimate may thus be positive because, on average, the state is relatively weak and
cannot repress Congolese militia to form. This has implications for external validity: if our
result reflects state weakness, then it may not apply in well-functioning states.
     In our study period, there are two episodes in which the state forces withdraw, which we
henceforth call weak state episodes (see Section 2).
     Figure V shows the trends in presence of state forces and of fraction of individuals who join
a militia in the period. We define state forces as the Congolese army or the Rassemblement
Congolais pour la Democratie (RCD), a group who took over the apparatus of the state and
acted as the state forces during all of the Second Congo War, 1998­2004. Panel A shows
the trends for sample of all villages. Since the start of the Congo wars in 1996, there are
two episodes of state weakness, in which the fraction of villages with a state force drops:
2003­5 and 2011­13.43 Participation is more pronounced in weak state episodes. As Section
2 suggested that state weakness episodes affected more the district of Shabunda, Panel B
shows that the state weakness episodes in Shabunda are more pronounced.
     The times-series in Figure V suggest that in years with strong state, participation is likely
to be costlier (i.e., repressed by the state forces).44 We now analyze this possibility formally.
     To separately identify the effect of past attacks in weak and strong state episodes, we
estimate equation 1, and include, in addition to the foreign armed group attack indicator,
    43
      These correspond to the security vacuums previously identified--notably the integration of Mai-Mai
armed groups into the National Army, and the regimentation process of the national army. Before the wars,
the state also had a weak presence. However, even if that made participation easier, the environment was
also less militarized at that time and thus the state weakness episode is less relevant.
   44
      In fact, historical evidence shows how the state forces, both the Congolese army and the RCD, engaged in
drastic counterinsurgency campaigns aimed at eradicating Congolese militia in the areas that they controlled
(Stearns, 2011). While the RCD was extremely violent in repressing militia, the Congolese army continues
to fight many Mai-Mai's groups today to assert their territory.



                                                     29
 V ictim
Iit      , its interaction with an indicator taking value 1 if no state forces are present in the
village in that year ("weak state"), as well as the indicator alone. Table VII presents the
estimates. The dependent variable in columns (1)­(3) is an indicator taking value 1 if the
respondent participates in a Congolese militia. Column (1) is the benchmark.
    Column (2) implements this fully saturated model. We find that the effect of an attack
by a foreign armed group arises exclusively through years in which there is no state force
                                     V ictim
present. Indeed, the coefficient on Iit      is negative and insignificant, indicating that there
is no effect on joining militia in years in which state forces are present. The coefficient on
the interaction term, 7.12 pp., is larger than the baseline estimate, indicating that foreign
armed group attacks cause respondents to join militia only in years in which state forces
are absent. This implies that a foreign armed group attack on the household causes a 766%
increase in the propensity that the respondent joins a militia in a weak state year.
    Columns (3) and (4) exploit plausibly exogenous variation in the weakness of the state to
confirm that the the effect of state presence/absence on our baseline estimate is causal. We
use information on dates and locations of military redeployment episodes in Shabunda, which
created state weakness.45 Column (3) is the reduced form. It replicates the specification
of column (2), but instead of using the indicator "weak state," it uses an indicator for
whether the observation is in Shabunda in the years 2003­05 and 2011­13. We find similar
results. Column (4) instruments for whether the state forces are present using an indicator
for whether the observation is in Shabunda in the years 2003-2005 and 2011-2013 as an
instrument. The first stage is strong (F-stat 19.51), and the main coefficient (Past attack *
weak state) is large and significant. The conclusions are preserved.
    In sum, participation is the byproduct of the interaction between preferences to fight
foreign armed groups, forged past victimizations, and the weakness of the state.
   45
     In particular, we code as 1 individual-year observations in which the respondent lives in Shabunda in
the 2003­05 episode in which the "state force" RCD vacated Shabunda drastically as a result of the Sun
City peace agreement, or in the 2011­13 episode in which the regimentation process led the Congolese army
to vacate Shabunda. These shocks, mandated by arguably exogenous military strategy reasons that were
unrelated to the specific location in which they occurred, are potentially valid instruments for state weakness.



                                                      30
10     Preferences, institutions, or income?

In previous sections, we have shown that foreign armed group attacks on household members
lead to the formation of intrinsic motivation to join a Congolese militia and fight foreign
armed groups. In this section, we benchmark the magnitude of our effect to that of the
effect of state weakness, and to that of the effect of changes in income outside armed groups.


10.1     Preferences to fight vs. state weakness

We now compare the independent role of the state and that of preferences in explaining the
decision to participate in a Congolese militia. Table VII decomposed the main result into
episodes of state presence and state absence in the villages. The same specification allows
to measure the independent effect of state absence on participation in a Congolese militia,
and compare it to the effect of preferences formed through household victimization.
   The coefficient in Column (2) on the indicator "weak state" measures the effect the
absence of state forces on whether the respondent participates in a Congolese militia. The
coefficient, 3.82, is large and significant at the 1% level. Thus, weak state episodes are
associated with a higher propensity to participate in a Congolese militia. The magnitude
suggests that weak state or household victimization have a similar effect on participation.
   Furthermore, the coefficient on "Past attack * Weak state" is 7.12, thus the effect of state
absence if even larger if the preferences for rebellion are already seeded in the population.
It implies that, on average, absence of the state leads to an increase in the propensity that
individuals participate in a Congolese militia by between 3.82 pp. (if they have not been
victimized) and 10.94 pp. (if they have). Columns (3) and (4) reinforce this conclusion.
   In sum, past household victimization by foreign armed groups, and state absence, lead to
a comparable increase in the propensity that respondents participate in a Congolese militia.
Specifically, the effect of withdrawing state forces on whether respondents participate in a
Congolese militia (without victimization) is 149% that of victimization (without withdrawal).



                                              31
10.2      Preferences vs. economic incentives: income fluctuations

In this section, we benchmark the magnitude of the effect of a foreign armed group attack
on the household to the effect of income fluctuations outside armed groups.
    Consider the trade-off of an individual deciding whether to leave the productive sector to
enter an armed group. If the income he can obtain outside the armed group is large, while
the material or nonmaterial benefits he derives from joining remain intact, the decision to
join the armed group entails higher material losses, the opportunity cost of income he could
otherwise obtain. Thus, if economic incentives play any role at influencing this decision,
higher income outside the armed groups would reduce the propensity of individuals who join
armed groups. This is the standard framework in economics for analyzing the decision to
enter armed groups (Dube and Vargas, 2013). We use this as a benchmark.
    To measure the effect of non-armed group income on the decision to join armed groups,
we exploit the presence of large variations in the world price of minerals, for which deposits
are found in some of the villages of the sample and for which DRC is a price taker. Gold
is easy for workers to conceal, making it often difficult for armed groups to tax it. As a
result, in gold mining villages, an increase in the world price of gold translates almost 1-to-1
to an increase in the price received by workers in mining, but changes little the revenues of
armed groups in gold villages.46 We take advantage of this feature, and use a large change
in the price of gold in this period, to quantify the effect of non-armed group income on
the propensity to join an armed group.47 We first estimate the reduced form relationship
between world prices and propensity to participate in an armed group. We estimate equation
1, but include, in addition, an indicator for whether village j is endowed with mineral m,
   46
      Figure D.8 presents the times-series of the world price of gold. The rise in the world price of gold
translates into a rise of the local price of gold, and thus reassures that world price shocks translate into local
price shocks with a high rate of passthrough. See S´    anchez de la Sierra (2020) for a detailed discussion.
   47
      There is also coltan. Coltan is bulky, and thus prone to taxation by armed groups. As a result, an
increase in the price of coltan increases both the income of individuals who work in mining in coltan villages,
and the income of armed groups--hence, potentially, the income obtained by joining the group. Our analysis
confirms this. As a result, the price of coltan does not offer a useful benchmark for economic incentives.




                                                       32
interacted with the world price of mineral m. Specifically, we estimate:


                        V ictim
         P artijt =  + Iit      +  E Ij
                                      m
                                        × log (Ptm ) + i + j + t + a + Xit  +                      ijt ,    (2)


       m
where Ij is an indicator taking value 1 for all years if village j has mineral m deposits and
Ptm is the world price of mineral m in year t. As before, this equation includes year, age,
and village fixed effects and standard errors are clustered two-ways at the individual and
the village-year level. The coefficient on  E measures the reduced form relationship between
the world price of mineral m and the probability that an individual participates in an armed
group. If the world price of mineral m is exogenous and has no spillover effects on villages
not endowed with m,  E also has a causal interpretation: it measures the effect of a 100%
increase in the world price of m on the probability of participation.
    The estimates from Equation 2 are presented in Figure VI. Since the results are similar if
 m
Ij × Ptm and Iit
              V ictim
                      are included separately, we present the results of the equation including
both.48 Figure VI presents the coefficient estimates from equation 2 with, as dependent
variables, respectively, indicators for whether the individual participates in any armed group,
in a Congolese militia, in a foreign armed group, and, since changes in mining sector income
may affect the inter-dependent choice of occupations, we also show whether he works mainly
in agriculture, mining, government agencies, is in school, or is unemployed.49 The reduced
form relationship between the price of gold and participation in militia shown in Figure
VI indicates that the price of gold, in gold villages, draws individuals away from Congolese
militia and into the mining sector. This is the standard opportunity cost channel. The figure
also confirms that our baseline estimate survives the inclusion of the price shocks.50
   48               m
      Inclusion of Ij  × Ptm for m = coltan does not change the results.
   49
      Finally, since the price and experiencing past foreign armed group attacks on the household influence
the decision to choose occupations jointly, this figure presents the result using j as main occupation rather
than works in occupation j. For South Kivu, we observe what occupations an individual works in each year,
and what is his main occupation in that year. For North Kivu, we only observe the latter. In Panel A, we
present the result for the main occupation to elicit occupational transitions, since often individuals otherwise
work in two occupations. Table C.5, Panel A, replicates the figure in format table and Panel B presents, for
robustness, the analysis including indicators for whether the individual works in some occupation.
   50
      Table C.5, Panel B confirms this result, and shows that foreign armed group attacks on the household


                                                      33
    Table VIII presents the analysis of attacks and price shocks conducted simultaneously.
First, we quantify the effect of changes in the local price of gold, using average yearly local
price of gold from our survey, and instrumenting it with the world price of gold. We find
that it would require a US$24.1 per gram in the local price of gold to undo the effect of a
foreign armed group attack. This is equivalent to 2.9 standard deviations, and an increase
in almost 100% of the local price of gold. This implies that one foreign armed group attack
on the household requires an increase in US$24.1 in the local price per gram of gold to be
undone, in gold villages. Second, we estimate the equivalent rise in per capita income outside
the armed groups that would be necessary to undo the effect of household victimization by
foreign armed actors. We use information on the daily production of gold by a gold miner
(Geenen, 2013), our data on the taxation of gold activity by local authorities, the GDP per
capita of the DRC in that period (we take year 2005) and, assuming miners work 300 days
a year, we find that it would take a permanent increase in 18.2 times the yearly per capita
income to undo the magnitude of the effect of a foreign armed group-perpetrated household
victimization. This rise is prohibitive. Its magnitude suggests our baseline estimate presents
the formation of "deontological" preferences to fight--those for which there exists no feasible
price for which economic incentives can undo them. Kant (2019) referred to these as dignity.
    In sum, household victimization by foreign armed groups leads to the formation of prefer-
ences for joining Congolese militia. Those only translate into action when the state is weak.
To undo it requires a permanent increase in 18.2-fold yearly p.c. income outside militia.



11      Conclusion

This paper provides evidence for the forging of rebels. It illustrates that violent popular
movements form as a result of the interaction of intrinsic motivation to take arms and state
weakness. The effect of victimization on participation is so large that it would take a pro-
hibitive increase in income to undo it, consistent with formation of deontological preferences.
takes individuals mostly from agriculture and into Congolese militia, suggesting it is a peasant phenomenon.

                                                    34
   This is a story of community and family victimized by foreign armed groups. Violations
perpetrated by foreign armed groups have generated among the relatives of the victims a
desire and possibly a moral conviction to fight back. It is also a story of peasants who
choose to fight against those who exploited the absence of their protection. It shows the
forging of rebels through the forging of preferences, long studied in novels and in historical
accounts, but for which there is to date no evidence in the field of economics. It shows that
nonmaterial motives can explain a high-stake conflict, a high-stake developmental outcome.
We hope that this settles the debate in economics about the role of nonmaterial motivations.
   Future research should explore the mechanism in more detail. We provided evidence
supporting the formation of intrinsic motivation, but what type of intrinsic motivation is
likely to vary across cultural context, and in implications. For instance, our results are
consistent with the violation of dignity, with honor, but also with revenge (Balcells, 2017),
retaliation, the formation of concern for social image to be seen fighting. The study of
those emotions remains outside the scope of economic analysis, despite their importance in
various other areas of social science inquiry. Economic analysis would greatly benefit from
understanding those emotions and how they relate to preferences, beliefs, and choices.
   Our study also leaves an important aspect unstudied. We have taken the decision to
join armed groups to reflect individual decision-making. However, in reality, the processes
of militia mobilization are largely social. They involve local institutions, social networks,
and the activation of power and often subtle forms of within-community coercion. Future
research would greatly benefit from studying how these intrinsic motivations interact with
the processes of mobilization. We leave those questions for future research.




References

Arjona, Ana, "Local Orders in Warring Times: Armed Groups' and Civilians' Strategies



                                             35
  in Civil War," Qualitative Methods, Spring 2008.

Ashraf, N., O. Bandiera, and S.S Lee, Do-Gooders and Go-Getters: Career Incentives,
  Selection, and Performance in Public Service Delivery Economic organisation and public
  policy discussion papers, STICERD, LSE, 2014.

Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and B. Kelsey Jack, "No Margin, No Mission? A
  field Experiment on Incentives for Public Service Delivery," Journal of Public Economics,
  2014, 120 (C), 1­17.

Atran, Scott, "The Devoted Actor: Unconditional Commitment and Intractable Conflict
  across Cultures," Current Anthropology, 6 2016, 57 (S13), S192­S203.

Balcells, Laia, "The Consequences of Victimization on Political Identities: Evidence from
  Spain," Politics & Society, 2012, 40 (3), 311­347.

  , Rivalry and Revenge The Politics of Violence during Civil War, Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press, 4 2017.

Barea, Arturo, The Forging of a Rebel, London : Fontana, 1984.

Bauer, Michal, Christopher Blattman, Julie Chytilov´
                                                   a, Joseph Henrich, Edward
  Miguel, and Tamar Mitts, "Can War Foster Cooperation?," Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, September 2016, 30 (3), 249­74.

Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel, "Civil War," Journal of Economic Liter-
  ature, March 2010, 48 (1), 3­57.

Brabant, Justine, "Qu'on nous laisse combattre, et la guerre finira": Avec les combattants
  du Kivu, Paris: La D´
                      ecouverte, 2016.

B´
 enabou, Roland and Jean Tirole, "Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (3), 489­520.


                                             36
B´
 o, Ernesto Dal, Frederico Finan, and Mart´
                                          in A. Rossi, "Strengthening State Ca-
  pabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (3), 1169­1218.

  ,     , Olle Folke, Torsten Persson, and Johanna Rickne, "Who Becomes A Politi-
  cian?*," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 06 2017, 132 (4), 1877­1914.

Collier, Paul, "On the Economic Consequences of Civil War," Oxford Economic Papers,
  1999, 51 (1), 168­183.

      and Anke Hoeffler, "On Economic Causes of Civil War," Oxford Economic Papers,
  1998, 50 (4), 563­573.

      and    , "Greed and grievance in civil war," Oxford Economic Papers, 2004, 56 (4),
  563­595.

Deserranno, Erika, "Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from the Re-
  cruitment of Village Promoters in Uganda," American Economic Journal: Applied Eco-
  nomics, 01 2019, 11, 277­317.

Dube, Oeindrila and Juan Vargas, "Commodity Price Shocks and Civil Conflict Evi-
  dence From Colombia," Review of Economic Studies, 2013.

Fearon, James D., "Rationalist Explanations for War," International Organization, 1995,
  49 (3), 379­414.

Geenen, Sara, "Who Seeks, Finds: How Artisanal Miners and Traders Benefit from Gold in
  the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo," European Journal of Development Research,
  June 2013, 25, 197 ­ 212.

Gould, Roger V., "Collective Action and Network Structure," American Sociological Re-
  view, 1993, 58 (2), 182­96.



                                            37
Gurr, Ted Robert, Why Men Rebel 1970.

Heineman, Matthew, "Cartel Land, Documentary," 2015.

Hoeffler, Anke, "What are the costs of violence?," Politics, Philosophy & Economics, 2017,
  16 (4), 422­445.

Hoffmann, Kasper, "Myths Set in Motion: The Moral Economy of Mai Mai Governance,"
  in Ana Arjona, Nelson Kasfir, and Zachariah Mampilly, eds., Rebel Governance in Civil
  War, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015.

      and Judith Verweijen, "Rebel rule: A Governmentality Perspective," African Affairs,
  09 2018, 118 (471), 352­374.

      and Koen Vlassenroot, "Armed Groups and the Exercise of Public Authority: the
  Cases of the Mayi-Mayi and Raya Mutomboki in Kalehe, South Kivu," Peacebuilding,
  2014, 2 (2), 202­220.

  ,     , and Emery Mudinga, "Courses au Pouvoir: the Struggle Over Customary Capital
  in the Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo," Journal of Eastern African Studies, 1
  2020, 14 (1), 125­144.

  ,     , and Gauthier Marchais, "Taxation, Stateness and Armed groups : Public Author-
  ity and Resource Extraction in Eastern Congo," in Christian Lund and Michael Eilenberg,
  eds., Rule and Rupture : State Formation Through the Production of Property and Citi-
  zenship, Wiley-Blackwell, 2017, pp. 235­256.

Humphreys, Macartan and Jeremy M. Weinstein, "Who Fights? The Determinants
  of Participation in Civil War," American Journal of Political Science, 4 2008, 52 (2),
  436­455.




                                            38
Jackson, Matthew O. and Massimo Morelli, "The Reasons for Wars: An Updated
  Survey," in Christopher J. Coyne and Rachel L. Mathers, eds., The Handbook on the
  Political Economy of War, Chapters, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2011, chapter 3.

Jackson, Stephen, "Sons of which soil? The Language and Politics of Autochthony in
  Eastern DR Congo," African studies review, 2006, 49 (2), 95­124.

Johnson, Dominic, Simone Schlindwein, and Bianca Schmolze, Les FDLR, his-
  toire d'une milice rwandaise : des forets du Kivu aux tribunaux de l'Allemagne, Berlin:
  Christoph Links Verlag, 2016.

Jourdan, Luca, "Being at War, Being Young: Violence and Youth in North Kivu," in
  Koen Vlassenroot and Timothy Raeymaekers, eds., Conflict and Social Transformation in
  Eastern DR Congo, Gent, Belgium: Academia Press, 2004.

  , "Mayi-Mayi: Young Rebels in Kivu, DRC," Africa Development, 2011, XXXVI (3-4),
  89­111.

Kalyvas, Stathis N., The Logic of Violence in Civil War Cambridge Studies in Compar-
  ative Politics, Cambridge University Press, 2006.

  and Matthew Adam Kocher, "How "Free" is Free Riding in Civil Wars?: Violence,
  Insurgency, and the Collective Action Problem," World Politics, 1 2007, 59 (2), 177­216.

Kant, Immanuel, Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals, Oxford University Press,
  2019.

Karing, Anne, "Social Signaling and Childhood Immunization," Working paper, 2021.

Khan, Muhammad Yasir, "Mission Motivation and Public Sector Performance: Experi-
  mental Evidence from Pakistan," Job Market Paper, 2021.

Levitt, Steven and Sudhir Alladi Venkatesh, "An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling
  Gang's Finances," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2000, 115 (3), 755­789.

                                            39
Lowes, Sara and Eduardo Montero, "Concessions, Violence, and Indirect Rule: Evi-
  dence from the Congo Free State," with E. Montero," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2021, forthcoming.

Marchais, Gauthier, "He who touches the weapon becomes other: a study of participation
  in armed groups in South Kivu, Democratic Republic of the Congo," PhD thesis, 2016.

Parkinson, Sarah Elizabeth, "Organizing Rebellion: Rethinking High-Risk Mobilization
  and Social Networks in War," American Political Science Review, 2013, 107 (3), 418­432.

Petersen, Roger Dale, Resistance and Rebellion: Lessons from Eastern Europe, New York:
  Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Popkin, Samuel L., The rational peasant : the Political Economy of Rural Society in
  Vietnam, University of California Press, 1979.

S´
 anchez de la Sierra, Ra´
                        ul, "On the Origins of the State: Stationary Bandits and Taxa-
  tion in Eastern Congo," Journal of Political Economy, 2020, 128 (1), 32­74.

  , "Whither formal contracts?," Econometrica, 2021, forthcoming.

San´
   in, Francisco Guti´
                     errez and Elisabeth Jean Wood, "Ideology in Civil War: In-
  strumental Adoption and Beyond," Journal of Peace Research, 2014, 51 (2), 213­226.

Scacco, Alexandra, Anatomy of a Riot Participation in Ethnic Violence in Nigeria 2016.

Schubiger, Livia Isabella and Matthew Zelina, "Ideology in Armed Groups," PS -
  Political Science and Politics, 10 2017, 50 (4), 948­951.

Staniland, Paul, Networks of rebellion : explaining insurgent cohesion and collapse, Ithaca
  and London: Cornell University Press, 2014.

Stearns, Jason, Dancing in the Glory of Monsters, New York, NY: Public Affairs, 2011.



                                             40
  and Raphael Botiveau, "Repenser la crise au Kivu : mobilisation arm´
                                                                     ee et logique du
  gouvernement de transition," Politique Africaine, 2013, 1 (129), 204.

Stearns, Jason K, "From CNDP to M23: The evolution of an armed movement in East-
  ern Congo," Technical Report, Report by the Usalama Project: Understanding Armed
  Groups. Rift Valley Institute, London 2012.

Stearns, Jason K., "North Kivu: The background to conflict in North Kivu province
  of eastern Congo," Technical Report, Report by the Usalama Project: Understanding
  Congolese Armed Groups. Rift Valley Institute, London 2012.

Stearns, Jason K, "Raia Mutomboki: The Flawed Peace Process and the Birth of an
  Armed Franchise," Technical Report, Report of the Usalama Project: Understanding
  Congolese Armed Groups. The Rift Valley Institute, London 2013.

Stearns, Jason K., Judith Verweijen, and Maria Eriksson Baaz, "The National
  Army and Armed Groups in the Eastern Congo: Untangling the Gordian Knot of Insecu-
  rity," Technical Report, Report by the Usalama Project: Understanding Congolese Armed
  Groups. Rift Valley Institute, London 2013.

Stys, Patrycja, "FDLR: Past, Present, and Policies," Technical Report, Social Science
  Research Council, New York 2014.

Verweijen, Judith, "A Microcosm of Militarization: Conflict, governance and armed mo-
  bilization in Uvira, South Kivu," Technical Report, Report by the Usalama Project II:
  Governance in Conflict. Rift Valley Institute, London 2016.

Viterna, Jocelyn, Women in War: The Micro-processes of Mobilization in El Salvador,
  Oxford University Press, 11 2013.

Viterna, Jocelyn S., "Pulled, pushed, and persuaded: Explaining women's mobilization
  into the Salvadoran guerrilla army," American Journal of Sociology, 7 2006, 112 (1), 1­45.


                                            41
Vlassenroot, Koen, "Citizenship, Identity Formation Conflict in South Kivu: The Case
  of the Banyamulenge," Review of African Political Economy, 2002, 29 (93/94), 499­515.

  , "South Kivu: identity, territory, and power in the eastern Congo," Technical Report,
  Report by the Usalama Project: Understanding Congolese Armed Groups. Rift Valley
  Institute, London 2013.

   and Frank Van Acker, "War as Exit from Exclusion? The Formation of Mayi-Mayi
  Militias in Eastern Congo," Afrika Focus, 8 2001, 17 (1-2), 51­77.

Vogel, Christoph, "Contested Statehood, Security Dilemmas and Militia Politics: the
  Rise and Transformation of Raia Mutomboki in Eastern DRC," in Filip Reyntjens, Steph
  Vandeginste, and Marijke Verpoorten, eds., L'Afrique des Grands Lacs. Annuaire., Paris:
  L'Harmattan, 2014.

   and Jason K Stearns, "Kivu's Intractable Security Conundrum, Revisited," African
  Affairs, 08 2018, 117 (469), 695­707.

  , Giovanni Salvaggio, Pierre Boisselet, and Jason K Stearns, "The Landscape of
  Armed Groups in Eastern Congo: Missed Opportunities, P-rotracted Insecurity and Self-
  Fulfilling prophecies," Technical Report, Kivu Security Tracker - Congo Research Group
  - NYU Center on International Cooperation, New York 2021.

Weinstein, Jeremy M., Inside Rebellion: The Politics of Insurgent Violence, Cambridge,
  UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Wood, Elisabeth Jean, Insurgent Collective Action and Civil War in El Salvador, Cam-
  bridge University Press, 2003.

Wood, Elizabeth, "Variation in Sexual Violence during War," Politics and Society,
  September 2006, 34 (3), 1­21.




                                            42
Tables

                          Table I: Characteristics of Non-rebels and Rebels


                                                                                     Not Part.    Start Part.
                                                                                        (1)           (2)
    Obs. (Age  15, 1995  t  2013)                                                      24,307         296

    Panel A: Participation characteristics per participation episode
    Participates in Congolese militia in year t (%)                                                  78.38
    Participates in foreign armed group in year t (%)                                                11.15
    Participates in Congolese army in year t (%)                                                      2.03
    Average duration                                                                                 2.34

    Panel B: Socio-demographic background per individual-year obs
    Age in year t                                                                      32.14       31.28***
    Married in year t (%)                                                              44.79       18.92***
    Works primarily in mining in year t - 1 (%)                                        14.01         16.27
    Works primarily in agriculture in year t - 1 (%)                                   46.81         44.84
    Works primarily as civil servant in year t - 1 (%)                                  6.70         11.51
    Works primarily in school in year t - 1 (%)                                         9.84          6.75
    Unemployed in year t - 1 (%)                                                       22.64         20.63

    Panel C: Economic status per individual-year obs
    Wealth at birth (z-score, only t = 2012)                                           -0.02          0.05
    Asset stock in year t - 1 (z-score)                                                -0.02         -0.20
    Investment in year t + 1 (z-score)                                                 0.09           0.38

    Panel D: Attack history per individual-year obs
    Experienced attack on own HH by foreign armed group before year t (%)               8.91        22.30*
    Experienced attack on own HH by Congolese militia before year t (%)                 2.92         2.36
    Experienced attack on own HH by Congolese army before year t (%)                    0.17         0.34

Notes : This table shows descriptive statistics for observations where respondents start participating in any
armed group versus those where respondents do not participate in year t. We exclude from comparison
488 observations where participants stay in the armed group after the first year. Economic indices are only
computed in South Kivu, where the data are available. We indicate the difference between Column 1 and 2
(P-value: *** 0.01, ** 0.05, * 0.10), computed after including village FE and year FE, and clustered two-way
at the individual respondent and the village*year level. Construction of economic indices is made using
principal component analysis on following variables. For the wealth at birth index, we use stock of cows at
birth, stock of goats at birth, stock of pigs at birth, stock of lands at birth, relation to village chief, number
of father's wives. For the asset stock index, we use stock of cows, stock of goats, stock of pigs, stock of lands.
For the investment index, we use purchase of cows, purchase of goats, purchase of pigs, purchase of lands.




                                                       43
                                      Table II: Baseline Estimate


                                                    Recruiter groups and identities
   Past attack on HH               Congolese militia      Foreign armed group         Any armed group
                                         (1)                       (2)                      (3)
   By foreign armed group                2.55**                      -0.46                   2.51**
                                          (1.04)                    (0.45)                    (1.21)
                                         [0.014]                   [0.430]                   [0.028]
   By Congolese militia                    0.69                      -0.30                     0.97
                                          (1.32)                    (0.41)                    (1.67)
                                         [0.615]                   [0.485]                   [0.609]
   By any armed groups                   1.78**                      -0.38                    1.73*
                                          (0.87)                    (0.39)                    (1.01)
                                         [0.027]                   [0.384]                   [0.100]

   Control mean                           1.88                      0.33                      2.72
   Obs.                                  25,060                    25,060                    25,060

Notes : This table presents OLS estimates of equation 1 for different perpetrators (by foreign armed groups,
by Congolese militia, and by any armed group respectively) and for different recruiters (Congolese militia,
foreign armed group, and any armed group recruiter). The dependent variable in columns (1)­(3) is an
indicator for whether the respondent joins in a given year a foreign armed group, a Congolese militia, or any
armed group, respectively. The explanatory variable in each line is an indicator for whether the respondent's
household has been attacked by foreign armed groups, a Congolese militia, or any armed group, respectively.
Each coefficient is estimated from a separate regression. We include observations between 1995 and 2013
above age 15 at year t. All regressions include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-
way at the individual respondent and the village*year levels. Control mean is computed among observations
where respondents never experienced an attack on household from any armed group before year t. P-value:
*** 0.01, ** 0.05, * 0.10. Figure D.5 shows the graphical representation of the coefficients from Column (1)--
that is, the effect of past attack on the household by different perpetrators on participation in a Congolese
militia.




                                                     44
                                         Table III: Baseline Estimate--Examining Potential Confounders


                                                                              Participation in Congolese militia in year t (%)
                                                                 (1)              (2)               (3)                      (4)
               Panel A1. Endogeneity of armed group attack, controlling confounding factors
               Past attack on HH by foreign armed group 2.55**             4.66**          5.25***                        4.79***
                                                          (1.01)           (2.24)           (1.92)                         (1.76)
               Asset stock t - 1 (z-score)                                                   0.33
                                                                                            (0.23)
               Predicted attack likelihood                                                                               -72.08***
                                                                                                                          (14.80)

               Attack type                                      All   Intention: Not pillage       All                      All
               Control mean                                     1.89           2.19                2.95                     2.81
               Obs.                                            25,060         25,060              15,032                   16,312
45




               Panel A2. Endogeneity of armed group attack, instrumental variable approach
               Past attack on HH by foreign armed group 2.55**           323.60**          26.61*                          30.19*
                                                          (1.01)         (164.63)          (15.45)                         (17.44)

               IV                                               Main      Lived in Shabunda       Lived in village controlled by foreign armed
                                                                          between 1998­2002           group between 1998­2002 or 2010­11
                                                                              or 2010­11                            × From rich family
               F-stat                                                             3.96             19.79                    8.34
               Control mean                                     1.89              2.57              2.51                    2.55
               Obs.                                            25,060           18,135            18,337                   17,909

     Notes : This table estimates equation 1 using different specifications to examine potential confounders of main specification 1, focused on attacks on
     household by foreign armed group and participation in a Congolese militia. We include observations between 1995 and 2013 above age 15 at year
     t. All regressions include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-way at the individual respondent and the village*year levels.
     Control mean is computed among observations where respondents never experienced an attack on household from foreign armed group before year t,
     controlling other variables at mean values. P-value: *** 0.01, ** 0.05, * 0.10.
     a. Panel A1: Column (2) uses only attacks without intention to pillage. Column (3) controls for asset stock index in year t - 1. Column (4) controls
     for predicted attack likelihood using unbalanced variables from Table C.2.
     b. Panel A2: Column (2) uses as instrument whether respondent lived in Shabunda during Second Congo war (1998­2002) or duing Kimia II
     operation (2010­11). Column (3) uses as instrument whether respondent lived in a village controlled by foreign armed group during Second Congo
     war or Kimia II operation. In column (4), we use the same instrument as in Column (3) but interact it with an indicator for whether the household
     originates from a rich family.
                                                                               Participation in Congolese militia in year t (%)
                                                       (1)              (2)                      (3)                  (4)                 (5)
           Panel B. Measurement error
           Past attack on HH by foreign armed group   2.55**           3.29*                    2.96*               5.40***            36.84**
                                                      (1.01)          (1.77)                   (1.70)                (2.08)            (17.08)
           Control mean                                1.89             2.06                     1.53                 2.89               2.52
           Obs.                                       25,060          25,060                   17,401                15,821            17,358
           Robustness test                             Main       Cross-validated           Weighted by          Weighted by   IV: past village attack
                                                                     attacks              attack precision      working memory    by foreign group
           F-stat                                                                                                                       13.09

           Panel C. Selection bias of migration
           Past attack on HH by foreign armed group   2.55**           4.02***                4.12***
                                                      (1.01)            (1.48)                  (1.44)
           Control mean                                1.89              2.28                    1.89
           Obs.                                       25,060            12,710                 25,060
46




           Robustness test                             Main        Villagers who        Control out-of-sample
                                                               never leave the sample        migration

           Panel D. Other threats to inference
           Past attack on HH by foreign armed group   2.55**          1.04**                    2.14                2.68***
                                                      (1.01)          (0.47)                   (1.31)                (1.01)
           Control mean                                1.89            0.83                     1.89                  2.16
           Obs.                                       25,060          25,060                   17,886               25,060
           Robustness test                             Main         Persisting                Control               Control
                                                                   participation        Chiefdom-year trend        conquest

     c. Panel B: Column (2) uses only cross-validated attacks. Column (3) weights observations by precision of attack reporting. Column (4) weights
     observations by working memory test. Column (5) uses village-level information on attacks by foreign armed group as instrument.
     d. Panel C: Column (2) uses only observations where respondent stayed in the sample of interview villages. Column (3) uses the full sample but
     controls for whether the respondents lived outside the interview villages.
     e. Panel D: Column (2) uses only the start of each participation episode as dependent variable. Column (3) controls for Chiefdom-year trend. Column
     (4) controls for territorial conquest.
         Table IV: Formation of Preferences: Traumatic Events--Gruesome Attacks


                                             Participation in Congolese militia in year t (%)
                                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
       Panel A: Attack by foreign armed group
       Past attack on HH by           2.55** 4.54***                4.25***    5.04***      2.98***
          foreign armed group × S     (1.01) (1.30)                  (1.50)     (1.80)       (1.10)
       Attack severity S :
          General attack
          Sexual violence
          On wife
          Theft
       P-value: severe vs. not severe          0.00                  0.07        0.05         0.00
       Control mean                    1.89    2.00                  2.02        2.08         1.87
       Obs.                           25,060 25,060                 25,060      25,060       25,060

       Panel B: Attack by Congolese militia
       Past attack on HH by            0.52                0.62       -0.39      -0.05        0.92
          Congolese militia × S       (1.66)              (1.22)     (0.71)     (0.85)       (1.28)
       Attack severity S :
          General attack
          Sexual violence
          On wife
          Theft
       P-value: severe vs. not severe                      0.91      0.38        0.57         0.05
       Control mean                    2.20                2.21      2.27        2.26         2.20
       Obs.                           25,060              25,060    25,060      25,060       25,060

Notes : This table presents OLS estimates of equation 1 for attacks of different severity. The dependent
variable is an indicator for whether the respondent joins a Congolese militia in a given year. The explanatory
variable is an indicator for whether the respondent's household has been attacked by foreign armed groups
(Panel A) and by Congolese militia (Panel B), respectively. We include observations between 1995 and 2013
above age 15 at year t. Column (2) focuses on attacks where respondent's spouse was attacked. Column (3)
focuses on attacks where perpetrators committed sexual violence in the household. Column (4) focuses on
attacks where sexual violence was against respondent's spouse. Column (5) focuses on attacks involving theft
of household property. All regressions include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-
way at the individual respondent and the village*year levels. Control mean is computed among observations
where respondents never experienced a corresponding type of attack on household before year t. P-value:
*** 0.01, ** 0.05, * 0.10.




                                                     47
   Table V: Parochial Altruism as Origin--Victimization of Household and Community


                                                     Participation in Congolese militia t (%)
        Past attack by foreign armed group             (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
        On own household                             2.55**     1.84*       1.75*         1.73*
                                                     (1.01)     (0.96)      (0.95)        (0.95)
        On village chief                                       2.62***     2.44***       2.45***
                                                                (0.76)      (0.75)        (0.75)
        On other households, same village                                   1.17*         1.14*
                                                                            (0.66)        (0.67)
        On other villages, same Chiefdom                                                   0.37
                                                                                          (0.65)
        Control mean                                  1.89       1.21        0.92          0.76
        Obs.                                         25,060     25,060      25,060       25,060


Notes : This table presents OLS estimates of equation 1 for attacks in different scopes of community. The
dependent variable is an indicator for whether the respondent joins a Congolese militia in a given year.
The explanatory variable is an indicator for whether the respondent's household has been attacked by
foreign armed groups. We include observations between 1995 and 2013 above age 15 at year t. Column
(2) controls for attacks where the village chief was attacked. Column (3) controls for attacks where other
respondents in the village were also attacked. Column (4) controls for whether households from other villages
in the same Chiefdom are attacked (observations with unknown Chiefdom are grouped under one category).
All regressions include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-way at the individual
respondent and the village*year levels. Control mean is computed among observations where respondents
never experienced a corresponding type of attack on household before year t. P-value: *** 0.01, ** 0.05, *
0.10.




                                                     48
                                                  Table VI: Examining Alternative Causal Channels


                                                                               Participation in Congolese militia in year t (%)
                                                                             (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
                     Past attack on HH by foreign armed group              2.55**    4.66***     4.94***     2.58**    2.55**    5.03***
                                                                           (1.01)     (1.75)      (1.80)     (1.01)    (1.01)     (1.80)
                     Investment t (z-score)                                                      0.42**                           0.42**
                                                                                                  (0.16)                          (0.16)
                     Overreport any violent event t                                                           0.67                2.31**
                                                                                                             (0.75)               (1.15)
                     Past attack on self by foreign armed group,                                                        -0.02      0.35
                       not on other HH members                                                                         (0.73)     (1.26)

                     South Kivu only
49




                     Control mean                                           1.89       2.81        2.30       1.80      1.81       1.96
                     Obs                                                   25,060     16,312      14,874     25,060    25,060     14,874

     Notes : This table presents OLS estimates of equation 1 for attacks controlling for alternative mechanisms. The dependent variable is an indicator for
     whether the respondent joins a Congolese militia in a given year. The explanatory variable is an indicator for whether the respondent's household has
     been attacked by foreign armed groups. We include observations between 1995 and 2013 above age 15 at year t. Column (2) shows benchmark results
     only in South Kivu. Column (3) controls for investment and asset stock in current year t (only coefficient of current investment is shown). Column (4)
     controls for whether respondent overreports any violent event on village in year t. Overreporting is defined as whether respondent reports a violent
     event on village in year t, but less than half of the other contemporary villagers observed in the sample report so and there is no corresponding
     record in village chief survey. Column (5) controls for whether respondent experienced an attack in the past on himself but not on other household
     members (more discussion in Appendix F). Column (6) controls for all three alternative channels. All regressions include individual FE, village FE,
     year FE, age FE, and cluster two-way at the individual respondent and the village*year levels. Control mean is computed among observations where
     respondents never experienced a corresponding type of attack on household before year t. P-value: *** 0.01, ** 0.05, * 0.10.
Table VII: Formation of Preferences: Effect Stability--Interaction with Weak State Shocks


                                                         Participation in Congolese militia t (%)
                                                           (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
   Past attack on HH by foreign armed group              2.55**      -0.97       0.79          -16.92
                                                         (1.01)     (1.77)      (0.92)        (10.83)
   Past attack * Weak state                                        7.12***                    31.64**
                                                                    (2.41)                    (17.94)
   Weak state                                                      3.82***                   53.54***
                                                                    (0.75)                     (9.99)
   Past attack * Shabunda shock                                                10.40***
                                                                                (3.75)
   Shabunda shock                                                              12.01***
                                                                                (1.52)

   F-stat                                                                                     19.51
   Control mean                                           1.89       1.58        1.23          1.58
   Obs.                                                  25,060     17,801      17,801        17,801

Notes : This table presents OLS estimates of equation 1 for attacks interacting with weak state indicators.
The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the respondent joins a Congolese militia in a given year.
The explanatory variable is an indicator for whether the respondent's household has been attacked by foreign
armed groups. We include observations between 1995 and 2013 above age 15 at year t. Column (2) uses
as weak state indicator if no state forces are present in the village in year t. Column (3) uses as weak
state indicator whether respondent lived in Shabunda during 2003­05 and 2011­13 when military forces
retreated from the area and created state weakness. Column (4) instruments the first weak state indicator
(and the interaction term) using the second weak state indicator (and the interaction term). All regressions
include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-way at the individual respondent and
the village*year levels. Control mean is computed among observations where respondents never experienced
a corresponding type of attack on household before year t and state force is present. P-value: *** 0.01, **
0.05, * 0.10.




                                                    50
            Table VIII: Summary Table: Parochial Altruism vs. Economic Motives


                                                                                      Participation
                                                                                       Militia (%)
         Control mean:
         Never experienced an attack on HH by foreign armed group                          1.89

         Effect of experienced shock:
         An attack on HH by foreign armed group before year t                         5.07** (2.01)
         Local gold price increased in year t
             (Use world gold price as an IV)
             (a) by $1 per g.                                                         -0.21* (0.11)
             (b) by 1 s.d. of local gold price                                        -1.70* (0.91)
             (c) by 100% (using log Pt )                                              -5.10* (2.72)

          One past attack on HH by foreign armed group has
            an equivalent effect of an decrease in local gold price by:                $24.1 per g.
         Daily production of gold miner (Geenen 2013)                                       1g
         Total number of work days per year (Assumed)                                     300 d
         Tax by local authority (Own data)                                                 45%
             Decrease in yearly income by:                                                $3,977
         GDP per capita in 2005 in DRC (World Bank)                                        $218
             Decrease in yearly income as in GDP per capita:                            18.2 times

Notes : This table compares the effect of past foreign armed group attack on household to the effect of gold
price shock on participation in a Congolese militia. The dependent variable is an indicator for whether the
respondent joins a Congolese militia in a given year, residualized after controlling individual FE, village FE,
year FE, and age FE. The explanatory variable are (i) an indicator for whether the respondent's household has
been attacked by foreign armed groups and (ii) local gold price in a given year, instrumented by international
gold price, all residualized after controlling the same set of fixed effects. The regression clusters two-way at
the individual respondent and the village*year levels. We compute the effect of increase in local gold price
by 1 s.d. (Row (b)) simply by scaling the coefficient in Row (a) by s.d. of local gold price ($8.3 per gram).
We compute the effect of increase in local gold price by 100% (Row (c)) by replacing gold price level with log
of gold price in the regression. Coefficient of past foreign armed group attack on household remains almost
the same in both specifications. Control mean is computed among observations where respondents never
experienced a corresponding type of attack on household before year t and state force is present. P-value:
*** 0.01, ** 0.05, * 0.10.




                                                      51
Figures

               Figure I: Attacks and Participants in Militia, Spacial Distribution


                              Panel A: Attacks on sample households




Notes : This figure shows spacial distribution of sample villages in year 2012. Blue diamonds are villages in
2012 where at least one respondent has experienced an attack on household up to 2012.


                                                     52
                           Panel B: Participants in a Congolese militia




Notes : This figure shows spacial distribution of sample villages in year 2012. Red triangles are villages in
2012 where at least one respondent has participated in any armed group up to 2012.




                                                     53
                                   Figure II: Attack Characteristics


                Panel A: Perpetrator                             Panel B: Targeted victim




                                       Panel C: Type of actions




Notes : This figure shows the distribution of village attack observations with different characteristics. Panel
A uses the sample of 475 reported attacks that targeted the households of the respondents in the sample
and shows their distribution by perpetrator. Panel B uses the whole sample of attacks to have happened
in each village reported by respondents and other households of the sample in the villages in the same
Chiefdom. Based on this information, it shows the fraction of individual-year observations in which the own
household was attacked, other households in the village were attacked, or other villages in the Chiefdom
were attacked. Panel C decomposes all attacks on the household by the type of actions that were conducted
(not mutually exclusive), respectively: attack on the spouse, attack on children, attack with sexual violence,
attack involving sexual violence on respondent's spouse, attack in which household property was stolen. The
figure does not show events of sexual violence directed against children, which amount to 30 cases.




                                                      54
Figure III: Formation of Preferences: Traumatic Events--Attacks Suffered at an Early Age




Notes : This figure estimates equation 1 by different age when attack happened on participation in a Con-
golese militia. All coefficients are estimated in one regression. The bars show the fraction (in percentage) of
individual-year observations in which respondents have experienced a foreign armed group attack on house-
hold in each corresponding age group. We include observations between 1995 and 2013 above age 15 at
year t and exclude individuals with no record of foreign armed group attack on household throughout the
whole period. We do not include in the regression whether respondents experienced an attack before age
15 because this variable has no variation within individual when we only include observations above age 15.
All regressions include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-way at the individual
respondent and the village*year levels. We show 95% and 90% confidence intervals for each coefficient.




                                                      55
        Figure IV: Formation of Preferences: Effect Stability--Event Study Analysis




Notes : This figure shows the event study analysis of equation 1. We group lags after 5 years as an indicator
of foreign armed group attack on household more than 5 years ago, and leads after 3 year as an indicator
of foreign armed group attack on household more than 3 years after. We include observations between 1995
and 2013 above age 15 at year t and exclude individuals with no record of foreign armed group attack on
household throughout the whole period. All regressions include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age
FE, and cluster two-way at the individual respondent and the village*year levels. We show 95% and 90%
confidence intervals for each coefficient.




                                                     56
Figure V: Formation of Preferences: Effect Stability--Interaction with Weak State Shocks

                                         Panel A: Full sample




                                          Panel B: Shabunda




Notes : This figure shows the yearly trend of participation in a Congolese militia (blue solid line) and state
force presence (green dashed line). State force includes Congolese national army and one particular foreign
armed group (RCD) who took control of eastern Congo during Second Congo war. Grey areas refer to
three state vacuum periods: pre-First Congo war (1995­97), post-Second Congo war Sun City agreement
(2003­05), Kimia II military operation (2011­12).


                                                     57
 Figure VI: Reduced Form Coefficient of the World Price of Gold on Occupational Choice




Notes : This figure shows the analysis of equation 2. Blue dots show the coefficient on world gold prices in-
teracted with gold endowment, with different participation indicators and occupational choices as dependent
variables. Red dots show the effect of past attack on household by foreign armed group on the same set of
dependent variables. We include observations between 1995 and 2013 above age 15 at year t. All regressions
include individual FE, village FE, year FE, age FE, and cluster two-way at the individual respondent and
the village*year levels. We show 95% and 90% confidence intervals for each coefficient. Table C.5, Panel A,
presents this result in a table.




                                                     58
