                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHY HAVE COLLEGE COMPLETION RATES INCREASED? AN ANALYSIS
                          OF RISING GRADES

                                       Jeffrey T. Denning
                                           Eric R. Eide
                                        Kevin Mumford
                                      Richard W. Patterson
                                        Merrill Warnick

                                      Working Paper 28710
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Sandra Black, Lars Lefgren, Sarah Turner, and participants at the BYU R Squared
seminar, NBER Education 2019 Spring Meetings, Society of Labor Economists 2019 Meetings,
and Association for Education Finance and Policy 2019 Conference for useful comments on the
draft. Research support was received from the College of Family, Home, and Social Sciences at
Brigham Young University. We would like to thank Daniel Sabey and Michael Jensen for their
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jeffrey T. Denning, Eric R. Eide, Kevin Mumford, Richard W. Patterson, and Merrill
Warnick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Have College Completion Rates Increased? An Analysis of Rising Grades
Jeffrey T. Denning, Eric R. Eide, Kevin Mumford, Richard W. Patterson, and Merrill Warnick
NBER Working Paper No. 28710
April 2021
JEL No. I20,I21,I23

                                          ABSTRACT

College completion rates declined from the 1970s to the 1990s. We document that this trend has
reversed--since the 1990s, college completion rates have increased. We investigate the reasons
for the increase in college graduation rates. Collectively, student characteristics, institutional
resources, and institution attended do not explain much of the change. However, we show that
grade inflation can explain much of the change in graduation rates. We show that GPA is a strong
predictor of graduation rates and that GPAs have been rising since the 1990s. We also find that in
national survey data and rich administrative data from 9 large public universities increases in
college GPAs cannot be explained by student demographics, preparation, and school factors.
Further, we find that at a public liberal arts college, grades have increased over time conditional
on final exam performance.

Jeffrey T. Denning                               Richard W. Patterson
Department of Economics                          United States Military Academy
Brigham Young University                         B107 Lincoln Hall
2135 WVB                                         West Point, NY 10996
Provo, UT 84602                                  richard.patterson@westpoint.edu
and NBER
jeffdenning@byu.edu                              Merrill Warnick
                                                 Stanford University
Eric R. Eide                                     merrill.warnick@gmail.com
Department of Economics
Brigham Young University
2120 WVB
Provo, UT 84602
eide@byu.edu

Kevin Mumford
Department of Economics
Purdue University
403 W State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907
mumford@purdue.edu



A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28710
    1. Introduction

    Students who attend college enjoy many long run benefits (Oreopoulos and

Petronijevic, 2013). Students who complete college have even better outcomes (Jaeger

and Page, 1996; Ost, Pan, and Webber, 2018). Despite the large returns to college

completion, many students who enroll in college do not graduate, leading to what some

have described as a "college completion crisis" (Deming, 2017). In fact, in 2016, the six-

year graduation rate for college completion at four-year schools was 67 percent (Shapiro

et al., 2017). 1 Consequently, policy and research attention has increasingly focused on

college completion. 2

        In influential work, Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2010) (hereafter BLT)

showed that changing institutional characteristics and, to a lesser extent, changing

college preparedness, led to declining college completion rates from the 1970s to the

1990s. 3 Our study asks what has happened to college completion rates after 1990. First,

we document across three national data sources that aggregate trends have changed--

college completion rates increased from 1990 to present. The increase in graduation rates

occurred across institution types including public and private universities as well as

elite and non-elite institutions. College graduation rates increased for both men and

women which is notable because men drove the decline documented in BLT.

        Next, we investigate why college completion rates increased. We discuss relevant

trends that could affect college graduation such as the college wage premium,

enrollment, student preparation, study time, employment during college, price, state


1 Hess and Hatalsky (2018) offer a nice summary of our understanding of the causes of college
completion, policy tools, trends, etc.
2 As examples see Scott-Clayton (2012), Castleman and Long (2016), Bettinger et al. (2019), Denning,

Marx, Turner (2019), and Barr (2019).
3 The overall decline was largely due to the group of institutions that BLT refers to as public "non-top 50."

Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner (2012) also document that time to degree has increased over a similar
timeframe. Many subsequent papers explored the causal effect of institution attended on graduation
(Cohodes and Goodman, 2014; Zimmerman, 2014; Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith, 2017; Bleemer 2018;
Black Denning Rothstein, 2020).

                                                     2
support for higher education, and initial college attended. The trends in these variables

almost uniformly would predict declining college graduation rates. We use two

nationally representative surveys from the National Center for Education Statistics

(NCES): National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (hereafter NELS:88 or

sometimes referred to as 1988) and Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (hereafter

ELS:2002 or sometimes referred to 2002) to decompose the change in graduation rates

into changes in student characteristics and institution-level factors (National Center for

Education Statistics, 1988; 2002). 4 These longitudinal student-level data sets have

information on high school student background, academic preparation, college

enrollment, and graduation outcomes. We find that student characteristics, institutional

resources, and institution attended explain little of the change in graduation rates.

       We then explore alternative hypotheses to explain the increase in graduation

rates. We document that college student grade point averages are higher in ELS:2002

than in NELS:88. This is true after accounting for pre-collegiate math test scores, student

demographics, high school coursework, and institution type attended. The increase in

GPA happens across the distribution and explains a large share of the increase in

college completion: changes in first-year GPA account for 95% of the change in

graduation rates in our decomposition.

       Rising college grades and the subsequent increase in graduation rates could be

caused by improved college preparation (not captured in NELS:88 and ELS:2002),

increased learning in college, or grade inflation. To explore these provocative patterns

in rising GPAs we observe in national data, we turn to administrative student data from

two additional sources. First, in records obtained from the registrars of 9 Large Public

Universities, 5 we document that rising grades persist when including controls for


4NELS:88 is the primary data set used for the later period in BLT.
5These data are obtained through the MIDFIELD partnership. The universities included are Clemson,
Colorado, Colorado State, Florida, Florida State, Georgia Tech, North Carolina State, Purdue, and

                                                 3
student demographics, home zip code, university attended, fixed effects for each SAT

score, major choice, and first-semester courses taken. These results suggest that

improving college preparation explains little of the increase in GPAs over time. Second,

we use microdata from a Public Liberal Arts College that includes performance on

course-level comprehensive final exams that appear to have a constant level of difficulty

over time. We document that grades are not just increasing over time conditional on

student characteristics and course schedules, but also conditional on final exam

performance. Furthermore, in two required science courses that administered identical

final exams across years, we find that grades are rising over time even when controlling

for performance on identical final exams.

        The results from the Large Public Universities and Public Liberal Arts College

data suggest that rising grades cannot be explained by changes in student learning.

Instead, our findings from the nationally-representative data, the sample of large public

universities, and the public liberal arts college in combination with trends in student

time spent studying and labor force participation in college suggest that GPAs have

been rising due to relaxed standards. These relaxed standards account for much of the

increase in college graduation rates.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes trends in college

graduation rate and other related trends. Section 3 outlines potential explanations for

the change in college graduation rates. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 discusses

the empirical strategy. Section 6 contains the results and Section 7 concludes.



    2. Trends in College Graduation Rates




Virginia Tech. Institutions that participate in the MIDFIELD partnership share de-identified longitudinal
student record data for all degree-seeking undergraduate students.

                                                    4
We begin by establishing that college graduation rates have increased since the 1990s.

We use three data sources to document these trends. All three sources have limitations;

however, the evidence is consistent across all sources we consider. 6

        First, we use the decennial census to examine college graduation trends

following BLT (Ruggles et al., 2019). Figure 1 shows the ratio of bachelor's recipients to

those with some college among respondents who are 25 years old. If the college

graduation rate increases, this ratio will increase. The decline from 1970 to 1990 is

visible and is the focus of BLT. However, from 1990 to 2010, the ratio of BA recipients to

those with some college increased--especially for women. 7

        In the period that BLT studies, there were no nationwide institution-level

graduation data available. However, NCES started publishing cohort graduation rates

by college starting with the entering class of 1991. We summarize the trends in these

graduation rates in Figure 2. 8 Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS)

collects graduation rates for all schools who receive Title IV federal financial aid.

However, the graduation rates are calculated only for first-time, full-time students who

begin in the fall. 9 We focus on the six-year graduation rate in Figure 2. Despite this

limitation, the trends in the IPEDs data mirror the ratio of the number of bachelor's

degrees to people with some college found in Figure 1. Long (2018) notes similar trends


6 We also find similar graduation patterns in our Large Public Universities and Public Liberal Arts college
administrative data sources. Table A1 shows that six-year graduation rates in our Large Public
Universities sample increased from 62% to 64% between 1990 and 2000 and Table A2 shows that six-year
graduation rates at our Public Liberal Arts college increased from 83% to 86% between 2001-2013 and
2010-2012 entering cohorts.
7 Archidald, Feldman, and McHenry (2015) document this fact using similar census data.

8For Figure 2, we exclude schools that were predominantly online because online schools are different in

many ways. Online schools are concentrated at for-profit institutions and have lower graduation rates
than traditional schools. Information on online enrollment is first available in 2012 in IPEDS. We follow
the convention of Deming et al. (2015) and label institutions that were predominantly online in 2012 as
online prior to 2012.
9 These graduation rates will not capture students who do not fit this description. For instance, this

measure is likely to do a poor job measuring college completion at for-profit colleges where many
students are "nontraditional."

                                                    5
in graduation rates using the same data starting in the entering class of 1998 and

describes differences in graduation rates across institution type, student demographics,

and the consequences of non-completion. 10

        Throughout this paper, we consider enrollment and graduation separately by

institution type. We follow the convention of BLT with one notable difference--we

separately consider for-profit institutions. 11 With that modification, we categorize

schools as follows: top 50 public, non-top 50 public, highly selective non-profit (private

non-profit + public), non-selective non-profit, and for-profit. We follow BLT in our

definition of Top 50 and Selective for public schools and private schools respectively

and provide complete descriptions of these groups in Section 4.

        Figure 2 shows there is substantial heterogeneity in the graduation rates across

institution types. The graduation rates are highest for highly selective non-profit

universities and top 50 publics. The lowest graduation rates are for for-profit

institutions. Setting aside for-profit schools, graduation rates continuously increase

from 1991-2010. Not all school types had increases of the same size; public schools had

larger increases than non-profit private schools at similar levels of selectivity. However,

the direction of the graduation rates is consistent across institution types. When

combining all schools weighted by enrollment (the black dashed line), the graduation

rate increases from 52.0 percent to 59.7 percent. For-profit schools exhibit a different

pattern. Graduation rates decline for the 20 years we observe which coincides with the

growth in the for-profit sector as seen in Figure A1. The growth in the for-profit sector

suggests some of the decline may be due to changing composition of the sector's

institutions or students.



10 Our contribution relative to Long (2018) is that we document the graduation rate increase over a longer
time frame, across more sources and, most importantly, we investigate the reasons for this increase.
11 For-profit institutions have lower graduation rates and increased enrollments in the 2000s. Further, for-

profits are different in many ways from nonprofit institutions (Deming et al. 2012).

                                                     6
        We also show that the graduation rates for the two nationally representative

samples followed a similar pattern. We define college graduation as graduation within

8 years of expected high school graduation following BLT. 12 In Table 1, we show the

eight-year graduation rate for the two nationally representative surveys used in this

paper, National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88) and the Education

Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS: 2002). We show that the overall graduation rate

increased by 3.77 percentage points. We find statistically significant increases in

graduation rates for top 50 and non-top 50 (at the ten percent level) public schools of

8.57 and 4.89 percentage points respectively. We also see statistically significant

increases at community colleges and all non-profit colleges. Less selective and highly

selective private universities do not have a statistically significant change in their

graduation rates across NELS:88 and ELS:2002. This contrasts with aggregate

graduation trends in IPEDS but may be due to relatively small samples in the

individual-level surveys.

        We verify that the changes in graduation rates in NELS:88 and ELS:2002 are

similar to those observed in IPEDS. NELS:88 and ELS:2002 represent the high school

graduating cohorts of 1992 and 2004, respectively. The change in overall graduation

rates for the entering cohorts of 1992 to 2004 in IPEDS is 5.74 percentage points which is

similar but somewhat larger to what is observed across NELS:88 and ELS:2002 at 3.77.

Hence, using NELS:88 and ELS:2002 should yield insight because the change in

graduation rates is similar to observed aggregate changes.



     3. Potential Explanations for Changes in Graduation Rate




12We know when students actually graduate from high school but we use years from expected high
school graduation to avoid conditioning our outcome on an endogenous variable (actual high school
graduation).

                                                  7
We initially consider two types of explanations for changes in college graduation rates:

student-level characteristics and institution-level characteristics. Student characteristics

that may affect college graduation include student preparation, choice of college major,

work during school, and time spent studying. Institution characteristics that may

explain changes in graduation rates include the quality of instruction, financial aid,

student services, and standards for degree receipt. Some of these explanations we will

later explore directly (e.g. student preparation, major choice, and standards for degree

receipt) while others we consider given the existing evidence (e.g. time spent studying,

employment during school, and returns to education). In the end, we conclude that

standards for degree receipt are most likely to explain increasing graduation rates.



Student-Driven Explanations

In trying to explain the increases in college completion, several trends are worth noting.

One possibility is that changes in student composition could explain changes in college

graduation rates. Table 2 shows that college enrollment rose from 69.3 percent in

NELS:88 to 78.3 percent in ELS:2002. 13 Additionally, Figure A1 shows that college

enrollment has grown steadily since 1975 and that, at least since the 1990s, enrollment

has increased at every type of institution. With a larger fraction of students entering

college, there may be more entrants who are relatively less prepared because as more

students enter college, they likely come from farther down the distribution of student

achievement. Therefore, enrollment sector trends are unlikely to explain increases in

graduation rates.

        Another possibility is that potential college students are more prepared for

college than in the past. Measuring changes in preparation for marginal college entrants


13The equivalent fraction of high school completers enrolling in college in Figure A1 Panel A are 61.9 and
66.7. These two data sources disagree slightly on the level of college enrollment but present very similar
trends in college enrollment over the same years.

                                                    8
could be confounded with the increase in college attendance if the increase in college

attendance coincided with an increase in performance. Instead, we note that

performance of 17-year-old students on the math and reading portions of National

Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) is essentially unchanged since the 1970s

(National Center for Education Statistics, 2013). 14 Hence as college enrollment increases,

the average preparation for college entrants would fall because the distribution of

student ability is constant. We expect college preparation would decrease in the time

period studied given that college enrollment has increased and that performance on the

NAEP is unchanged. 15 Trends in enrollment and student preparation would predict

reduced college completion. 16

        Once students arrive at college, changing major choices could affect college

completion. To explore the role of major choice, we explore what graduation rates

would be if we changed the distribution of majors while holding fixed the graduation

rates of any particular major. We find that students have not moved towards higher

graduation rate majors over time (details provided in Section 6.2).




14 Blagg and Chingos (2016) explore the reason for the stagnating NAEP scores and conclude that
"stagnant achievement among high school students is a real phenomenon." They discuss potential
explanations for this phenomenon including changes in high school persistence, test/subject alignment,
and students taking the test less seriously and conclude that none of these explanations are likely to
explain the change. Notably, the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) also shows no
evidence of achievement gains for 15 year-olds in the United States.
15 Archibald, Feldman, and McHenry (2015) consider the change in preparation among college enrollees.

They document a decline in preparation as measured by math test scores and reading test scores. They
find that student high school GPA matters for college enrollment. However, the increase in high school
GPAs is difficult to interpret because GPAs are growing faster in affluent schools than in less affluent
schools (Gershenson, 2018). They argue that students matched to schools on the basis of high school GPA
reduce the impact of lower average math scores.
16 We assign students their math percentile in the distribution of math test scores. We argue this

represents students' absolute level of preparation because the overall distribution of student preparation
is unchanged as discussed. In Table 3, college entrants' math percentile decreases from the 59th percentile
to the 56th percentile. The decline in math percentile is also present among college graduates where it fell
from the 71st percentile to the 68th percentile.

                                                     9
         Changes in learning could also affect graduation rates. However, students are

spending less time studying and more time employed over the time period we consider.

Babcock and Marks (2011) show a drop in the number of hours studied from 1961 to

2003. Neither student demographics including race, gender, and parent education nor

student SAT scores can explain much of the change in college study habits.

Concurrently, college students increased their labor supply over this period. Scott-

Clayton (2012) shows that average hours worked doubled from 1970 to 2000. However,

student labor supply fell during the Great Recession. All else equal, we would expect

declining graduation rates when students spend more time working for wages during

college due to decreased study time, less full-time enrollment, etc. Trends in student

labor supply and study time would predict declining college graduation rates, except

perhaps during the Great Recession.

         Finally, BLT notes that an increasing college wage premium would predict an

increasing graduation rate. However, the college wage premium has flattened

beginning for cohorts born around 1970 (Ashworth and Ransom, 2019). 17 A stable

college wage premium for young workers contrasts with earlier periods (including the

period studied in BLT) where the college wage premium was growing. Hence, in the

period we study the college wage premium is unlikely to explain increasing graduation

rates.



Institutional explanations

The types of institutions students attend could potentially explain graduation rate

patterns. Table 2 shows the changes in initial college attended across the NELS:88 and

ELS:2002 cohorts. The share of students attending non-top 50 public and for-profit


17Valletta (2016) shows a similar trend starting slightly later with the wage premium flattening starting in
2000. Valletta (2016) considers workers age 25-64 whereas Ashworth and Ransom (2019) consider
workers age 25-34 which may explain some of the discrepancy.

                                                    10
colleges increased. The share of students attending highly selective private, less

selective private, top 50 public and community colleges decreased. The pattern of

enrollment increases in non-top 50 public colleges balanced against the decrease in

community college attendance and increased for-profit attendance leads to an

ambiguous prediction about the overall college completion rate if the average

graduation rate of an institution causally affects college graduation.18

        It is unlikely that changes in college affordability could explain changes in

graduation rates. College has become more expensive since the 1990s. Inflation adjusted

published tuition and fees have increased by over 300 percent since 1987. The net price

of college accounting for financial aid has nearly doubled since 1997 for public four-year

institutions (CollegeBoard, 2017). The price of college has been shown to affect college

completion (Scott-Clayton, 2011; Castleman and Long, 2016; Bettinger et al., 2019;

Denning, 2019). Relatedly, state support for higher education per student has declined

since 1985 (CollegeBoard, 2017), and state funding for higher education has been shown

to affect enrollment and graduation rates (Deming and Walters, 2017). 19 Overall, the

rising price of college would predict declining graduation.

        Another possibility is that the instructional resources, such as student-to-faculty

ratios, have changed. Instructional resources could affect graduation rates through

changes in education quality or the availability of required courses. A change in

instructional resources is a potentially promising explanation, as BLT found changing

student-to-faculty ratios explained approximately 75% of declining graduation rates at

public institutions in earlier cohorts. However, in Table A3, we find that between the


18 This assumption has good empirical support (Cohodes and Goodman, 2014; Zimmerman, 2014;
Goodman, Hurwitz, and Smith, 2017).
19 Bailey and Dynarski (2011) document that there have been increases in the income gap in unconditional

college graduation. That is, graduation without conditioning on college attendance. In contrast, we focus
on graduation rates among those who enter college and document these are increasing. Increasing
unconditional graduation rates could happen with declining graduation rates or increasing graduation
rates.

                                                   11
NELS:88 and ELS:2002 samples student-faculty ratios increased from 39.4 to 40.4 and

instructional expenditures fell from $4,581 to $4,288. 20 As we explain in detail in Section

6, both changes in instructional resources predict a decrease in graduation rates.

           Finally, there has been increased policy attention on college completion during

this period. For example, the number of state policies that tie appropriations for higher

education to college completion via performance funding mechanisms has increased.

The use of these mechanisms grew beginning in the 1990s. Evidence on the effect of

these mechanisms is mixed, with some studies finding that they affect degree

production (Hillman, Tandberg, & Fryer, 2015; Tandberg & Hillman, 2014; Hillman,

Fryar, & Crespín-Trujillo, 2017) and some finding that they do not (Hillman, Tandberg,

& Gross, 2014). Increased attention to graduation and performance-based-funding gives

schools an incentive to increase graduation rates. However, even if performance

funding does affect graduation, it would be an indirect mechanism. For performance

funding to have an effect, it must induce schools to change something about the degree

production process.



Changing standards for degree completion

Trends in the college wage premium, student enrollment, student preparation, student

studying, labor supply in college, time spent studying, and the price of college would

all predict decreasing college graduation rates. The patterns for enrollment by institution

type yields an ambiguous prediction. Despite the bulk of the trends predicting

decreasing graduation, we document that the college graduation rate is increasing.

These trends foreshadow what we find in our analysis and present a puzzle. The trends

in the variables that explained the decline documented in BLT will not be able to

explain the increase in graduation rates observed from 1990 to 2010.


20   We use the Higher Education Price Index to deflate spending.

                                                     12
        We propose, and test for, an additional channel that may change college

completion rates--standards for degree receipt. Instructors, departments, and

institutions may have incentives to inflate grades or increase GPAs for reasons other

than student performance. Instructors who give students higher grades receive better

teaching evaluations (Krautmann and Sander, 1999; Langbein, 2008). Departments that

increase grades see higher student enrollments (Butcher, McEwan, Weerapana, 2014).

Additionally, colleges have strategic incentives to offer less informative grades

(Boleslavsky and Cotton, 2015) and institutional efforts to curb grade inflation can fail

to make transcripts more informative and can instead reduce welfare (Bar, Kadiyali,

Zussman, 2012). 21

        Increasing grades explain, in a statistical sense, a majority of the changes in

graduation rates in our decomposition exercise. To interpret whether the increase in

grades is due to changes in performance or grade inflation, we supplement our analysis

with results from two additional samples. We first document similar trends in

graduation and GPA in our Large Public Universities and Public Liberal Arts College

samples. We then show that grades are increasing while controlling very finely for

student preparation in the Large Public Universities sample. We also show that grades

are increasing in Public Liberal Arts College after controlling for student learning. These

two additional samples present evidence that the increase in grades is consistent with

grade inflation.




21Evidence on patterns in "grade-inflation" is mixed with some studies finding support for grade
inflation (Rojstaczer and Healy, 2012) and others finding none (Pattison, Grodsky, and Muller, 2013). We
will discuss grade inflation in Section 6. Griffith and Sovero (2019) use administrative data from a public
research university and find that grades have increased significantly since 1980. They hypothesize that an
increasing number of instructors with job uncertainty may face pressures to increase grades, which is
borne out empirically. Bar et al. (2009) show that at Cornell University, publishing average course grades
induced students to enroll in classes with historically higher grades.

                                                    13
   4. Data

We use microdata to examine the reasons for the increase in college graduation rates.

We begin with two longitudinal surveys sponsored by the National Center for

Education Statistics: the National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS:88) and

the Education Longitudinal Study of 2002 (ELS:2002). The NELS:88 and ELS:2002

capture college-going behavior of the high school classes of 1992 and 2004, respectively.

The surveys provide information on whether a student attended college, the type of

college attended, whether the student graduated from college, and the timing of college

attendance and graduation.

      The NELS:88 is a nationally representative, longitudinal study of 8th graders in

the U.S. in 1988. The cohort was again surveyed in four follow-ups which occurred in

1990, 1992, 1994, and 2000. Postsecondary transcripts were also collected in 2000. The

ELS:2002 is a nationally representative, longitudinal study of 10th graders in 2002. There

were three follow-up surveys that were administered in 2004, 2006, and 2012, with

postsecondary transcripts collected in 2013. Importantly, both surveys include student

assessments in math (and other areas) taken during high school, and we use the math

assessments as a measure of student preparedness for college. Another strength of these

surveys is they contain a host of individual and family background variables. We use

father's and mother's educational attainment (no high school diploma, high school

diploma, some college, BA, graduate school), parental income (divided into income

level categories), gender (male), and race/ethnicity (Asian, Hispanic, African American,

White). Following BLT, we impute pre-collegiate math test scores, mother's education

and father's education for both surveys because these data are missing for many




                                            14
students. We also impute first-year college GPA for both surveys. For NELS:88, we also

impute parental income. 22

        We follow BLT in how we define college attendance and college completion. We

consider students who attend college within two years of when their high school cohort

would be expected to graduate. The college completion rate is the proportion of

students who attend college within two years of when the high school cohort would be

expected to graduate and obtain a BA within eight years of expected high school

graduation.

        We also follow BLT in assigning institutions to types which is primarily based on

the 2005 U.S. News and World Report college rankings. 23 We assign the highest rated 50

public schools to the top-50 public category. The 65 highest rated private universities,

the 50 highest rated liberal arts colleges, and the armed service academies are

categorized as highly selective private category.24 Other 4-year public schools are

assigned to the non-top 50 public category, and other 4-year not-for-profit private

schools were assigned to the less selective private category. Not-for-profit 2-year

colleges are assigned to the community college category. Due to the recent rise in for-

profit colleges, we created a new category, for-profit colleges, and placed all for-profit

colleges in this category.

        Table 3 presents summary statistics for our two samples. From NELS:88 to

ELS:2002 college enrollees had lower pre-collegiate math percentiles, moving from 58.88

to 55.93. Despite this decline in preparation, first-year college GPA increased from 2.44



22 We follow BLT's imputation strategy by using multiple imputation by chained equation (MICE)
algorithm, implemented by the STATA module "ICE." See the data appendix for more information on
imputation.
23 We deviate from BLT's assignment due to a few cases, which are described in the appendix. We opted

for using the same rankings to aid in comparability and because rankings are quite stable across years.
24 We follow BLT in classifying armed services academies as private rather than public institutions. While

they are publicly funded, in many ways, e.g. academic ability of students, they are more similar to highly
selective private institutions.

                                                    15
to 2.65. Student-faculty ratios increased slightly from 39.35 to 40.43. Parental education

increased from NELS:88 to ELS:2002, where students whose mother had at least a

bachelor's degree increased by 5 percentage points. Underrepresented minorities

constituted a bit larger fraction of college enrollment in ELS:2002 than in NELS:88.

Parental income shifted towards middle incomes. Lastly, the fraction of college students

that are male declined from 49 percent to 46 percent.

        To explain the role of rising GPAs in increasing graduation rates, we incorporate

individual-by-course level administrative data from two sources. The first dataset

combines microdata for all degree-seeking undergraduate students at 9 Large Public

Universities (Clemson, Colorado, Colorado State, Florida, Florida State, Georgia Tech,

North Carolina State, Purdue, and Virginia Tech) for cohorts entering between 1990 and

2000 (Ohland and Long, 2020). The Large Public Universities data includes student

demographic information, admissions information including SAT scores, individual

course grades, and degrees earned for the 530,036 students entering one of these

institutions between 1990 and 2000. 25 Table A1 presents summary statistics for the 1990

entering cohort as well as the 2000 entering cohort and shows that these students are

quite similar to those from the nationally-representative NELS:88 and ELS:2002 in terms

of math quartile, race, and gender. 26 The first-year GPA for all students increases from

2.68 to 2.79 over the decade.

        Second, we analyze trends in GPA using detailed student course performance

microdata from a Public Liberal Arts College (Denning et al., 2021). These data include

student demographic information, graduation rates, individual course grades, and

student scores on final exams for 14,193 students entering the institution between 2001


25 The MIDFIELD partnership under which we obtained the data does not allow us to report any results
separately by institution that would enable readers to identify the institution. Students without a
reported SAT or ACT test score (primarily transfer students) are excluded from the tables.
26 The math test frames are different but tell a similar story of positive selection on the basis of math tests

into college.

                                                      16
and 2012. Table A2 presents summary statistics for early (2001-2003) and late (2010-

2012) entering cohorts. While the population at the Public Liberal Arts College is unique

in some ways, its distribution across race and ethnicity is similar to those in the

NELS:88 and ELS:2002. Further, when comparing Public Liberal Arts College dynamics

to changes between NELS:88 and ELS:2002, there are similar trends in GPA growth

(2.77 to 3.02) and graduation rates (83.1 percent to 85.9 percent) across early and late

cohorts.

       While these additional administrative datasets are not nationally representative,

they offer larger samples with the course grades of every undergraduate student and

more detailed pre-college student ability measures from the college application. In the

case of the Public Liberal Arts College, course-level final exam data separate from the

letter grade provides an additional advantage.



   5. Empirical Strategy for Graduation Rate Decomposition

We wish to decompose the increase in college graduation rates into student factors and

institutional factors. In doing this, we closely follow the method used by BLT which is a

modified Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition (Blinder 1973; Oaxaca 1973). The key challenge

arises because we are interested in college graduation, which is discrete. Throughout

this section both institutional and student factors will be referred to as  .

       First, we use a logit model to predict college completion in both the NELS:88 and

ELS:2002 samples. This allows for nonlinear effects of any  which are likely to be

important in describing changes in graduation rates. If we were using a linear

framework, we could simply take the mean change in observable characteristics

( ) across the two periods and multiply it by the estimated effect of the observable

characteristic. However, using a logit does not allow this simple decomposition because

the effect of changes in a given observable characteristic not only depends on the mean


                                             17
size of the change, but also where in the distribution of the characteristic that change

occurs. To simulate the overall change in graduation rates, we use the estimates from

the ELS:2002 and the covariates in the NELS:88 to generate a predicted probability of

graduation and compare this to the actual graduation rates in ELS:2002. Generating

how much of the overall change is due to changes in all characteristics simply compares

the predicted graduation rates using NELS:88 covariates combined with the estimated

coefficients from the ELS:2002 to the actual graduation rates in the ELS:2002.

        We also wish to examine the effect of a particular  , which is not as

straightforward. In principle, we would like to generate the distribution of a particular

 from the ELS:2002 sample (i.e. the later cohort) in the NELS:88 sample (i.e. the early

cohort) while holding all other variables constant. We follow BLT and do this by

matching observations across samples. We will use an example to illustrate this point--

math test score percentile. For all students in NELS:88 we assign each student a rank in

the distribution of pre-collegiate math test scores; we also do this for all students in

ELS:2002. We then match each student in the ELS:2002 with the student who has the

same rank in the NELS:88 and assign the test score percentile from the NELS:88. We

break ties randomly. This process ensures that we do not assign students with high

math scores with students who we would expect to have low math scores. 27 After

matching, we then apply the estimates from the ELS:2002 model and see how predicted

graduation probabilities change. 28

        To interpret these changes causally, we must assume that the logit model of

graduation on  accurately captures the causal effect and the relationship between the



27 We also reweight the ELS:2002 and NELS:88 samples to have the same number of observations to
facilitate matching. For initial college enrolled there is not a natural ranking of school types and so we use
propensity score matching to predict which college a student would attend. Following BLT, we used
propensity score matching implemented with the STATA module "psmatch2."
28 Alternatively, we could use the estimates from NELS:88 and distribution of the covariates from

ELS:2002. These results are very similar to those presented in the paper.

                                                     18
 and graduation is the same in both time periods. This is a strong assumption that

may not hold. However, even if this strong assumption does not hold, this framework

developed in BLT offers a consistent way to decompose the changes in the graduation

rate into the changes in  .

       The coefficients from the logit for the whole sample and by school type are

presented in Table A4 with ELS:2002 in Panel A and NELS:88 presented in Panel B. We

do not discuss these in detail but do note that the coefficients have the expected sign. In

particular, a higher student-faculty ratio, lower income, being male, and lower parental

educational attainment are associated with reduced probability of graduation.



   6. Results

We first start with our base specification which includes measures of student

preparedness, the log of the student-faculty ratio and initial school type in Table 4. This

is the same specification used in BLT for comparability. It decomposes the change in

graduation rates into two main groups. First, we consider changes due to student

characteristics (demand side) which include pre-collegiate math percentile and other

student characteristics such as parent education, income, and race. Second, we present

changes due to institution-level factors (supply side) which includes student-faculty

ratios and initial school types.

       Focusing on the full sample, there is a 3.77 percentage point increase in the

probability of graduation from the NELS:88 cohort to the ELS:2002 cohort. The total

explained by observable characteristics is -1.92. This suggests that covariates would

predict that graduation rates would decrease by 1.92 percentage points. Hence, the

residual or unexplained change is 5.69 percentage points or 151 percent of the change is

unexplained by covariates. Student preparedness would predict a decline in graduation




                                            19
rates of 1.26 percentage points. Student-faculty ratios explain a 0.28 percentage point

decline and initial school type explains no change in graduation rates.

       Based on the full sample, Table 4 shows that the distribution of student

characteristics and supply side factors cannot explain much of the increase in

graduation rate--in fact, they predict graduation declines. This finding was previewed

in Section 3 where many of the trends that may affect graduation went in the wrong

direction to explain completion rate trends. Hence, we spend the rest of the paper

exploring explanations not considered in BLT.

       One potential reason that previous explanations no longer explain the change in

graduation rates is that the covariates are no longer predictive of graduation. However,

Table A4 reports the coefficients for various covariates. All have the expected sign and

are statistically significant. Further, the coefficients are qualitatively similar across the

samples.



       6.1 Rising College Grades

       In Section 3 we previewed a potential change that could explain increasing

graduation rates despite the apparent changes in student preparation and other

covariates--rising college grades. Both improving preparation for college (in ways not

captured in NELS:88 and ELS:2002) or relaxing grading standards would increase

graduation rates and be evidenced by increases in GPAs.

       We find evidence that the increase in grades is due to grade inflation. We

document several facts about GPA in the NELS:88, ELS:2002, Large Public Universities,

and Public Liberal Arts datasets. First, GPA predicts graduation. Second, GPAs are

increasing over the time frame considered. Third, the growth in GPAs is not well

explained by student observable characteristics, course taking behavior, or performance

on final exams that have a constant level of difficulty over time. These facts combined



                                              20
with trends in student study time and employment suggest that standards for degree

receipt have changed due to grade inflation.



GPA predicts graduation

       First-year college GPA is predictive of graduation in each of our datasets. Table 5

presents the coefficients from a linear probability model where graduation is predicted

using a linear effect of GPA. Panel A presents results based on the NELS:88 and

ELS:2002 samples, and Panel B the Public Liberal Arts College. The relationship

between GPA and graduation rate between the NCES samples in Panel A is very similar

so we focus on NELS:88 in our discussion. Without controlling for any other covariates,

a one point increase in GPA is associated with a 30 percentage point increase in the

probability of graduation. Subsequently controlling for student characteristics,

graduation rate of a student's selected major, and major fixed effects still yields large

and precisely estimated associations between GPA and graduation; in each case a one

point increase in GPA and leads to a 23-24 percentage point increase in graduation

(standard errors are approximately 1 percentage point). Similarly, in Table A5 and

Panel B of Table 5, we find that a one point increase in GPA corresponds to 16-21

percentage point increase in graduation in the Large Public Universities and Public

Liberal Arts samples depending on the dataset and controls included.

       We also show that this relationship is somewhat nonlinear in each dataset. In

both Figures 3 (NELS:88 and ELS:2002) and Figure A2 (Large Public Universities and

Public Liberal Arts) we regress graduation on bins of GPA while controlling for

covariates such as demographics, test scores, and institution type and plot the

coefficients and 95% confidence intervals with GPAs larger than 3.5 being the excluded

category. In each sample and in each cohort the change in the probability of graduation

is largest for GPAs between 1.0 and 2.5. That is, improvements in GPAs in that range



                                             21
correlate with meaningful increases in graduation whereas GPAs above or below that

range do not change the probability of graduation as much.

        GPA likely has a causal effect on graduation for two reasons. First, students

generally must maintain a GPA above certain thresholds to avoid dismissal. 29 This

induces a mechanical, causal relationship between GPA and graduation (Ost, Pan,

Webber 2018). Second, GPA can also act as a signal about a student's schooling ability

(Arcidiacono et al., 2016; Butcher, McEwan, Weerapana, 2014). In either of these cases,

higher GPAs cause more students to graduate.



GPAs are increasing over time

        Table 3 showed that GPAs among enrollees increased from 2.44 to 2.65 between

the NELS:88 and ELS:2002 samples. We explore changes in GPA in more detail--where

did GPAs increase the most? Figure 4, which plots the cumulative density function of

GPAs for each type of institution, shows that GPAs increased throughout the

distribution for every type of school we examine except for-profit schools. The GPA

increases were somewhat larger at public schools than at private schools, perhaps

because the GPAs at private schools were already much higher than at public schools

on average in NELS:88. Overall, we find that 11 percent more students have a GPA

above a 2.0 in ELS:2002 than in NELS:88 (Table A7). This point is notable because many

institutions have rules about academic probation requiring GPAs of around 2.0 to

continue enrollment. 30 Hence, the changes in GPA occurred where GPA is most

predictive of changes in graduation.




29 For example, each institution in our Large Public Universities Sample has a dismissal policy based on
cumulative GPA. These dismissal policies have varying details, but typically require students to
maintain a 2.0 GPA.
30 This can also be true for Satisfactory Academic Progress which is required to maintain financial aid

eligibility (Schudde and Scott-Clayton, 2016).

                                                   22
        This pattern of increasing GPAs is present in every sample we observe. Figure

A3 examines GPAs in two samples of Large Public Universities and shows that GPAs

increased between 1990 and 2000 and again between 2009 and 2014. 31 Figure A4 shows

a large increase in GPAs between the 2001-2003 and 2010-2012 cohorts at the Public

Liberal Arts College and, similar to patterns shown in Figures 4 and A3, the fraction of

students with at least a 2.0 GPA significantly increased.



Higher GPAs are not explained by changes in student characteristics or preparation

        GPAs are increasing over time and cannot be fully explained by changes in

student characteristics. We test this in the NELS:88 and ELS:2002 samples by regressing

GPA on pre-collegiate math score, demographic characteristics, initial school type, and

an indicator for being in the later period (being in ELS:2002) in Table 6. If student

characteristics changed in ways that predicted the change in GPA, the ELS:2002

indicator would become smaller with the additional controls. However, additional

controls including parent education, parent income, race, gender, and math test scores

do not change the effect of GPA substantively and there is a meaningful and statistically

significant coefficient on ELS:2002 ranging from 0.21 to 0.31 indicating that GPA is

higher in ELS:2002.

        We also control for student preparedness using the rich data on high school

course taking in the NCES data sets. We create a set of indicator variables for advanced

coursework that is consistently measured. These include courses in calculus, physics,

chemistry, biology, and US history. We control for these in column 5. We also control



31The lower panel of Figure A3 shows the distribution of first-year GPA in 2009 and 2014 for a different
sample of public schools where we observe course grades in more recent years including Colorado,
Colorado State, North Carolina State, North Carolina ­ Charlotte, Oklahoma, Purdue, South Dakota
School of Mines, and Utah State. First-year GPA continues to increase in the later period, though it is
running out of expansion room in the top right-hand corner of the figure suggesting that the increase in
the distribution of GPAs at these institutions will necessarily slow.

                                                   23
for some courses which did not appear in the earlier period in column 6 (namely AP

Language and Literature courses). Finally, we control for the total number of math and

science courses taken in high school in column 7. In every case, our main result holds:

student preparedness measured through test scores and high school course work does

not explain the increase in college first-year GPA.

        While the patterns observed in the NELS:88 and ELS:2002 nationally

representative data indicate that rising GPAs may be due to decreasing standards,

administrative data from our Large Public Universities allow us to explore the source of

rising GPAs in more detail. An advantage of this data is that it includes additional

information about potential student preparation including home zip code, transfer

status, and U.S. citizenship. Furthermore, the size of the data allows us to flexibly

control for SAT scores with fixed effects for every SAT math and reading score

interacted with the university. 32 Table 7 is a cross-cohort analysis where we examine the

time trend in first-year GPA. Column 1 shows a statistically significant increase of 0.019

per year in first-year GPA between 1990 and 2000. Controlling for demographic

characteristics, school attended, and home zip code leave the coefficient unchanged.

Including very flexible controls for SAT scores reduces the coefficient on year of entry

only slightly to 0.014. We also include fixed effects for major by institution to account

for the potential of changing major composition. Last, we include fixed effects for all

first-semester courses and the coefficient is unchanged. We include these fixed effects to

account for shifts in student course taking that may explain changes in GPA but find

that courses taken cannot explain the change in GPA.




32We restrict our sample to students who have a valid measurement for all of the characteristics. This
largely omits transfer students who often do not have an SAT score. The SAT was recentered beginning
in 1995 and so we use a concordance to make scores comparable before and after this date. Similarly, we
use published concordances to convert ACT scores to SAT equivalents.

                                                   24
       This evidence shows that rising grades cannot be meaningfully explained by

demographics, preparation, courses, major, or school type. Put another way, equally

prepared students in later cohorts from the same zip code, of the same gender and race,

with the same initial courses, the same major, and at the same institution have higher

first-year GPAs than earlier cohorts.



Interpreting these facts about GPA

       We have documented that GPAs are higher at the end of our study period than

they were at the beginning and that the increase is not explained by observable student

characteristics. We interpret this evidence as consistent with grade inflation. However,

other explanations are consistent with higher GPAs. For instance, students could be

studying more. Unfortunately, we do not observe student study time or effort in our

data. However, the trends presented in Babcock and Marks (2011) suggest that time

spent studying declined over this period. Another explanation is that perhaps students

are more efficient at studying. This could be true but is hard to test absent measures of

student study. The gains from efficiency would have to be large enough to exceed the

decline in study time.

       The ideal test for whether rising grades can be explained by student

preparation/effort/learning would be a comprehensive assessment that had constant

difficulty over years given to students that assessed learning occurring in all college

courses. Then, we could see if the grades of students who scored the same on the

assessment were increasing over time. We closely approximate this ideal test with our

Public Liberal Arts College data. These data allow us to control for course-level final

exam scores, which provide potentially objective measures of student knowledge and

learning. Specifically, all freshmen must complete a required liberal arts curriculum that

has common final exams in each course--exams that do not appear to have increased in



                                            25
difficulty over time. 33 Furthermore, these final exams are often graded automatically or

in teams and, in at least one subject, students are given identical exams year-after-year. 34

         In Table 8, we estimate how GPA has changed over time at the individual by

course level at Public Liberal Arts College, successively adding controls for each course,

demographic characteristics, final exam scores, and, in two required science courses, the

exact version of test given. In Column 1 we estimate the correlation between the year of

entry and freshman course grades. We find that a year later entry corresponds to a

statistically significant 0.025 point increase in GPA. In columns 2, 3, and 4 we

successively control for course fixed effects, student characteristics including SAT test

score quartiles, and final exam scores. We find that including these controls has little

effect on the relationship between year of entry and freshman grades, suggesting that

broad changes in the courses students take, characteristics of students, and overall

learning (as measured by final exam performance) are unlikely to explain improving

GPAs over time. To investigate whether student sorting into courses to which they are

better matched could explain these patterns, in column 5 we restrict our analysis to

courses that are part of a required liberal arts curriculum. Our results suggest that

student sorting is unlikely to explain improving GPAs over time, as our estimates are

indistinguishable from those in column 4.

         One potential weakness of this approach is that courses may change or final

exam content could change over time. While course representatives do not think this is


33 We asked course representatives in an email survey the following free response question: "From 2001
(or as early as you are aware) to now, has the difficulty of [final exams] increased, declined, or stayed about the
same? If the [final exams] have changed in difficulty, when did the changes occur? We received responses from
86% of the messaged faculty. No faculty indicated that tests had become more difficult, 58% indicated
that difficulty had remained about the same or become easier over time, and 42% either did not know,
could not tell, or gave an answer that was not responsive to the question.
34 In our email survey to course representatives we asked: "Are [final exams] graded automatically (e.g.

computer, scan, multiple choice), by a student's instructor, or by team?" In response, 42% of faculty indicated
that finals were graded automatically or in teams, 33% indicated that finals were graded part
automatically and part by instructor, and 25% indicated that finals were graded by instructors.

                                                         26
happening in their responses to a survey we distributed, we provide a stronger test of

whether improving grades over time could be explained by increased learning. We

analyze the relationship between year of entry and GPA in two required freshman

science courses--courses where the final exams are comprehensive, are graded by

machine or in teams, and change little or not at all from one year to the next. 35

Specifically, we examined every final exam, question by question, from 2001-2012 and

found that in both required courses 9 out of 12 of the final exams given were identical to

an exam given in another year.36 This setting allows for a very close approximation of

the ideal test for grade inflation.

        In column 6 of Table 8 we control for course fixed effects, demographic

characteristics, and final exam scores in these two science courses and find that a year

later entry corresponds to a large and statistically significant 0.060-point increase in

GPA. In column 7 we additionally control for an exact exam fixed effect and find that a

year later entry corresponds to a 0.053-point increase in GPA. In column 8 our results

are essentially unchanged when we replace the final exam control with a control for

test-specific final exam scores. Students with the exact same score on the exact same

final exam earned better grades in later years. Our findings that grades are increasing

over time, even when student characteristics and performance on identical

comprehensive final exams are accounted for, suggests that standards for degree receipt

are easing over time at the Public Liberal Arts College.




35 Additionally, the structure of these courses have not significantly changed over time, with the final
exams having constant point values over time and accounting for between 20-26% of the total grade
grades in each course.
36 In each year, in both courses, a majority of questions from the final exam were identical to questions

asked in the prior year's final exam. Furthermore, in the first course enrolling cohorts in 2002, 2007, 2009,
2010, and 2012 were given identical tests to the prior cohort. In the second course, enrolling cohorts in
2003, 2005, 2009, 2011, and 2012 were given identical tests to the prior cohort.

                                                     27
       While the evidence at Public Liberal Arts College is specific to that university, we

believe that it is likely informative of broader trends. Public Liberal Arts College has

similar graduation and GPA trends to the NELS:88/ ELS:2002 samples.

       First, in Panel B of Table 5 we find that, after controlling for observable

characteristics, a one grade-point increase is associated with a 21 percentage point

increase in the probability of graduation in both the early (2001-2003) and late (2010-

2012) entering Public Liberal Arts College cohorts. This is nearly identical to the 24 and

22 percentage point increases estimated in the NELS:88 and ELS:2002 samples in Panel

A of Table 5. Second, Figure A2 shows similar non-linear relationships between GPA

and graduation in both early and late Public Liberal Arts College cohorts to the

relationships found in the NELS:88 and ELS:2002 samples (Figure A2): in each of the

four samples, the change in the probability of graduation is largest for GPAs between

1.0 and 2.5. Finally, in Figure A4 we show that increases in GPA between the early and

late Public Liberal Arts College cohorts are similar to those found between NELS:88 and

ELS:2002, as shown in Figures 4 and A3.




Adding GPA to the decomposition

       Given the evidence that GPA is changing over time and that GPA is predictive of

graduation, we show how much of the change in graduation rates can be explained by

changes in GPA. We add GPA to the decomposition exercise since it is increasing over

time and predictive of graduation. We note that this is a "bad control" because it is

endogenous to the type of college a student attends among other things. We include it

in the decomposition analysis in the spirit of looking for a mediator rather than

interpreting the effects of changing GPA causally. Table 9 presents the same

decomposition exercise with one notable change to the specification used by BLT--the



                                             28
inclusion of first-year GPA. 37 The addition of GPA substantially increases the change in

graduation rate due to observables. 38 For the full sample, the change due to observables

(including first-year GPA) is 2.49 percentage points or 66 percent of the total change.

The change explained by GPA alone is 3.57 or 95 percent of the observed change. 39 The

total change due to observables grows substantially with the inclusion of GPA at all

schools. At public non-top 50s (the largest category) observables explain 57 percent of

the change in graduation. First-year GPA is an imperfect proxy for grade inflation but

still explains a substantial portion of the observed change.

        A related explanation is that many schools are more efficient in producing

degrees. For example, improved access to technology (Farlie and London, 2012), the

emergence of residential learning communities (Hotchkiss, Moore, and Pitts, 2006),

expansion of experiential learning approaches (Hawtrey, 2007), and other pedagogical

advancements could have improved educational efficiency over this time. Measuring

efficiency in producing graduates is very difficult, especially if quality is not fixed.

While our evidence suggests that increased learning cannot explain rising grades or

graduation rates at Public Liberal Arts College, it is possible that increased learning

could explain some of the increases in other settings. However, the gains in efficiency



37 Comparing the results from Table 4 and Table 9 directly is difficult because we use different regressions
in each table. As a result, the change in graduation rates explained by each non-GPA factor differs
slightly. However, the change in graduation rates due to non-GPA factors tell a very similar story in both
settings.
38 Although BLT do not include first-year GPA in their decomposition, it is unlikely to have similar

explanatory power in their context due to trends in GPAs during the timeframe they study. Rojstaczer
and Healy (2010) document little change in GPAs between the early 1970s (NLS:72 cohort) and early
1990s (NELS:88 cohort). In contrast, Rojstaczer and Healy document significant increases in GPA in
subsequent years.
39 We also can add GPA nonlinearly. We do this by replacing the linear effect of GPA with indicators for

bins of GPA that are .5 GPA points wide in Table A6. When we do this, the results are substantively
similar with GPA explaining slightly less of the change in graduation rates overall. GPA has less
explanatory power at selective schools when discretizing first-year GPA. However, we do not allow the
coefficients for GPA bins to vary by school type for tractability. This assumes that the same ranges of
GPA are predictive for graduation across school types which may not be true.

                                                    29
would have to overcome the trends we have documented including declining resources,

increasing tuition, stagnant student preparation, increasing student employment,

decreasing study time, etc. Given the steady and large increases in graduation in the

face of these trends predicting graduation declines, we find that grade inflation is likely

to be at least part of the explanation.



       6.2 Major Choice and Other Explanations

       Another possible explanation for increasing college graduation rates is student's

major choice if students have moved to majors with higher graduation rates. Table 3

shows that the graduation rate of majors chosen by students stayed very similar or

slightly declined; that is, students chose majors that had slightly lower graduation rates

in ELS:2002 than they did in NELS:88. To isolate the effect of major choice, we fix major

graduation rates at their NELS:88 levels and apply them to the actual major choices

made in ELS:2002. We find that predicted graduation rates and actual graduation rates

are very similar. In results not presented, we add a student's major graduation rate to

the decomposition and find it does not explain much of the change in graduation rates.

       Another potential explanation for our results is that colleges may have increased

their focus on graduation rates by increasing programs and funding for student success

initiatives. This is a difficult mechanism to test. First, we look at staff expenditures using

data from IPEDS. Institutions report the spending of "other professional staff" "for the

primary purpose of performing academic support, student service, and institutional

support." This measure likely includes staff working on student success initiatives but

also includes things that are unlikely to be related to student success. Trends in this

variable can be seen in Table A3. Overall, spending on support programs cannot

explain much of the increase in graduation rates because they are largely the same

across cohorts. However, there are some increases at more selective schools in measures

of "other professional staff" suggesting that these increases have scope to explain some
                                             30
of the increase in graduation rates at these schools. Similarly, we see an overall decrease

in instructional expenditures which represents an alternative way to measure

investment (relative to student/faculty ratios). Private schools did see some increase in

instructional spending which could explain some of the increase in graduation.

However, when we use this measure instead of student to faculty ratios, we find

qualitatively similar results.

       We are interested in heterogeneity by school type but are somewhat limited by

the size of the sample for some school types. As we noted, the increase in graduation

rates across NELS:88 and ELS:2002 is statistically significant overall, for public top 50s,

public non-top 50s (at the ten percent level), and community colleges. We are limited in

our ability to assess the relative importance of various factors across school types

because there are not statistically significant changes in graduation rates for all school

types. That said, if anything, GPA has larger explanatory power for public universities

than for private universities.




   7. Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper we carefully document that college graduation rates have increased from

the 1990s to 2010. This represents a change in the pattern documented by BLT. In

contrast to BLT, we do not find that traditional measures of student characteristics or

colleges explain much of the change in graduation rates. Rather, we show that student

GPAs increased over this time period and that this change can explain much of the

increase in graduation rates.

       We present evidence from national survey data and detailed administrative data

from 9 large public universities that the increase in GPA is not explained by observable

student or institution characteristics. In our Public Liberal Arts College sample, we find

that grades are increasing after controlling for comprehensive final exam performance.
                                             31
Furthermore, in two required science courses, we find that grades are rising over time

even when comparing students who receive the same score on identical exams.

Combined with existing work on trends in student study, college preparation, labor

supply, the price of college, and resources per student, our evidence suggests that grade

inflation is contributing to increasing grades and graduation rates.

        Why did grade point averages increase from the 1990s to 2010? One likely

candidate is the recent policy focus on college completion rates. As schools face

increased scrutiny and, in some cases, increased funding incentives, they may respond

by taking action to increase graduation rates. Changing standards for degree receipt is a

low-cost way to increase graduation rates. In support of this interpretation, the increase

in graduation rates is concentrated at public schools that have seen more of their

funding tied to graduation. However, we find that grades have risen at all school types

aside from for-profit colleges.

        Further, spending per student declined suggesting that colleges did not increase

spending to help students graduate. Additionally, instructors and departments have

incentives to raise grades to improve their student evaluations and enrollments

respectively.

        While many are likely to decry the trend in rising grades, the welfare

implications of this rise are ambiguous. In either a human capital or signaling model of

education, declining standards of degree receipt as indicated by rising college grades

would predict that the reduced average skill of graduates would lead to a declining

college wage premium. 40 However, there is evidence that there has been increasing



40It is not clear how grade inflation would affect the earnings return to GPA for college graduates. If
grade inflation were uniform with every student's GPA increased by the same amount, GPAs would
become more compressed as high GPAs are censored. This would imply that a 1 point increase in GPA
represents a larger change in performance which would drive up the returns to GPA. However, if the
grade inflation is not uniform, it could reduce the signaling value of GPA in the labor market which
would reduce the earnings return to GPA.

                                                   32
demand for college-educated workers (Autor, Katz, and Kearney, 2008) and decreased

standards to degree receipt could act to meet this demand and increase economic

growth, even if new college graduates have less skill on average than prior cohorts.

       Further complicating the interpretation of grade inflation, rising grades may

affect major choice and the subsequent earnings returns to education. Majors that see

greater levels of grade inflation are likely to attract more students (Butcher, McEwan,

Weerapana, 2014). Because majors with traditionally low GPAs, such as those in STEM

fields, may have the most room to increase grades, rising grades may lead to an increase

in the number of students in these majors.

       Finally, if student effort is not fixed, declining standards have ambiguous

predictions for overall student effort and subsequent learning. For example, if the

objective of most students is to avoid the risk of failure and academic probation, then

decreasing standards are likely to reduce effort and learning for all students except

those on the margin of passing. However, if students seek to maximize their GPA,

decreasing standards may increase learning as decreasing standards increase the GPA

returns to effort for all but the top-performing (A or A+) students. Given the ambiguous

implications of grade inflation in higher education and social welfare, future work

should consider the effects of grade inflation on learning, major choice, the decision to

enroll in graduate school, the skill composition of the workforce, and the college wage

premium.




                                             33
References

Archibald, R. B., Feldman, D. H., & McHenry, P. (2015). A quality-preserving increase in
four-year college attendance. Journal of Human Capital, 9(3), 265-297.

Arcidiacono, P., Aucejo, E., Maurel, A., & Ransom, T. (2016). College attrition and the
dynamics of information revelation (No. w22325). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Ashworth, J., & Ransom, T. (2019). Has the College Wage Premium Continued to Rise?
Evidence from Multiple US Surveys. Economics of Education Review, 69, 149-154.

Autor, D. H., Katz, L. F., & Kearney, M. S. (2008). Trends in US wage inequality:
Revising the revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300-323.

Babcock, Philip, and Mindy Marks. "The falling time cost of college: Evidence from half
a century of time use data." Review of Economics and Statistics 93, no. 2 (2011): 468-478.

Bailey, Martha J., and Susan M. Dynarski. "Inequality in Postsecondary Education" In
G.J. Duncan and R.J. Murnane (eds.), Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality, Schools,
and Children's Life Chances. (Russell Sage: New York, New York, September 2011).

Bar, T., Kadiyali, V., & Zussman, A. (2009). Grade information and grade inflation: The
Cornell experiment. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(3), 93-108.

Bar, T., Kadiyali, V., & Zussman, A. (2012). Putting grades in context. Journal of Labor
Economics, 30(2), 445-478.

Barr, Andrew. "Fighting for Education: Veterans and Financial Aid" (2019). Journal of
Labor Economics, 37(2), 509-544.

Bettinger, Eric, Oded Gurantz, Laura Kawano, and Bruce Sacerdote. The long run
impacts of merit aid: Evidence from California's Cal Grant. (2019) American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy.

Black, S. E., Denning, J. T., & Rothstein, J. (2020). Winners and Losers? The Effect of Gaining
and Losing Access to Selective Colleges on Education and Labor Market Outcomes (No.
w26821). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Blagg, K., & Chingos, M. M. (2016). Varsity Blues. Research Report, Urban Institute.



                                              34
Bleemer, Z. (2018). Top percent policies and the return to postsecondary
selectivity. Available at SSRN 3272618.

Blinder, A. S. (1973). Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural
estimates. Journal of Human resources, 436-455.

Boleslavsky, R., & Cotton, C. (2015). Grading standards and education quality.
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 7(2), 248-79.

Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. "Why have college completion
rates declined? An analysis of changing student preparation and collegiate resources."
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2.3 (2010): 129-57.

Bound, John, Michael F. Lovenheim, and Sarah Turner. "Increasing time to
baccalaureate degree in the United States." Education Finance and Policy 7.4 (2012): 375-
424.

Butcher, K. F., McEwan, P. J., & Weerapana, A. (2014). The effects of an anti-grade-
inflation policy at Wellesley College. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 189-204.

Castleman, Benjamin L., and Bridget Terry Long. "Looking beyond enrollment: The
causal effect of need-based grants on college access, persistence, and graduation."
Journal of Labor Economics 34, no. 4 (2016): 1023-1073.

Cohodes, S. R., & Goodman, J. S. (2014). Merit aid, college quality, and college
completion: Massachusetts' Adams scholarship as an in-kind subsidy. American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(4), 251-85.

CollegeBoard. "Trends in College Pricing 2017" Trends in Higher Education Series (2017).

Deming, David J. "Increasing college completion with a federal higher education
matching grant." The Hamilton Project, Policy Proposal 3 (2017).

Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz. "The for-profit postsecondary
school sector: Nimble critters or agile predators?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, no.
1 (2012): 139-64.

Deming, David J., Claudia Goldin, Lawrence F. Katz, and Noam Yuchtman. "Can online
learning bend the higher education cost curve?" American Economic Review 105, no. 5
(2015): 496-501.

                                             35
Deming, David J., and Christopher R. Walters. "The Impact of State Budget Cuts on US
Postsecondary Attainment." (2017) NBER Working Paper No 2373.

Denning, Jeffrey T. (2019) "Born Under a Lucky Star: Financial Aid, College
Completion, and Credit Constraints." Journal of Human Resources 54(3).

Denning, Jeffrey T., Benjamin M. Marx, and Lesley J. Turner. (2019) "ProPelled: The
Effects of Grants on Graduation, Earnings, and Welfare." American Economic Journal:
Applied Economics 11(3), 193-224.

Denning, Jeffrey T., Eric R. Eide, Kevin J. Mumford, Richard W. Patterson, and Merrill
Warnick. 2021. "Public Liberal Arts Administrative Student Data for: Why Have
College Completion Rates Increased? An Analysis of Rising Grades."

Fairlie, R. W., & London, R. A. (2012). The effects of home computers on educational
outcomes: Evidence from a field experiment with community college students. The
Economic Journal, 122(561), 727-753.

Gershenson, S. (2018). Grade Inflation in High Schools (2005­2016).

Goodman, Joshua, Michael Hurwitz, and Jonathan Smith. (2017). College Access, Initial
College Choice and Degree Completion. Journal of Labor Economics 35(3), 829-867.

Griffith, A., Sovero V. (2019) "Under Pressure: Grade Inflation by Academics" Working
Paper.

Hawtrey, K. (2007). Using experiential learning techniques. The Journal of Economic
Education, 38(2), 143-152.

Hess, F. M., & Hatalsky, L. E. (2018). Elevating College Completion. American Enterprise
Institute.

Hillman, N. W., Hicklin Fryar, A., & Crespín-Trujillo, V. (2018). Evaluating the impact
of performance funding in Ohio and Tennessee. American Educational Research Journal,
55(1), 144-170.

Hillman, N. W., Tandberg, D. A., & Fryar, A. H. (2015). Evaluating the impacts of
"new" performance funding in higher education. Educational Evaluation and Policy
Analysis, 37(4), 501-519.

Hillman, N. W., Tandberg, D. A., & Gross, J. P. (2014). Performance funding in higher
education: Do financial incentives impact college completions?. The Journal of Higher
Education, 85(6), 826-857.

Hotchkiss, J. L., Moore, R. E., & Pitts, M. M. (2006). Freshman learning communities,
college performance, and retention. Education economics, 14(2), 197-210.

                                           36
Jaeger, David A. and Marianne E. Page. (1996). "Degrees Matter: New Evidence on
Sheepskin Effects in the Returns to Education." The Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 78, No. 4, pp. 733-740.

Long, B.T. (2018) "The College Completion Landscape: Trends, Challenges, and Why it
Matters" Third Way. May 25, 2018.

Krautmann, A. C., & Sander, W. (1999). Grades and student evaluations of teachers.
Economics of Education Review, 18(1), 59-63.

Langbein, L. (2008). Management by results: Student evaluation of faculty teaching and
the mis-measurement of performance. Economics of Education Review, 27(4), 417-428.

National Center for Education Statistics (2013). "The Nation's Report Card: Trends in
Academic Progress 2012."

National Center for Education Statistics (2018). "Digest of Education Statistics, 2016."

National Center for Education Statistics (2002) "Educational Longitudinal Study of 2002
(ELS:2002)."

National Center for Education Statistics (1988) "National Education Longitudinal Study
of 1988 (NELS:88)."

National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data
System (IPEDS), .

Oaxaca, R. (1973). Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets. International
Economic Review, 693-709.

Ohland, Matthew and Russell Long. 2020. "MIDFIELD Data" Multiple-Institution
Database for Investigating Engineering Longitudinal Development, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN. https://engineering.purdue.edu/MIDFIELD/index.html (version:
2020-03-16-fix9).

Oreopoulos, Philip and Petronijevic, Uros. (2013). Making College Worth it: A Review
of the Returns to Higher Education. The Future of Children. Vol. 23, No. 1.

Ost, Ben, Pan, Victor, and Douglas A. Webber. (2018). "The Returns to College
Persistence for Marginal Students: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from University
Dismissal Policies." Journal of Labor Economics.


                                            37
Pattison, E., Grodsky, E., & Muller, C. (2013). Is the sky falling? Grade inflation and the
signaling power of grades. Educational Researcher, 42(5), 259-265.

Rojstaczer, S., & Healy, C. (2010). Grading in American colleges and universities.
Teachers College Record, 4, 1-6.

Rojstaczer, S., & Healy, C. (2012). Where A is ordinary: The evolution of American
college and university grading, 1940­2009. Teachers College Record, 114(7), 1-23.

Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas,
and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,
2019. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0

Schudde, L., & Scott-Clayton, J. (2016). Pell grants as performance-based scholarships?
An examination of satisfactory academic progress requirements in the nation's largest
need-based aid program. Research in Higher Education, 57(8), 943-967.

Scott-Clayton, Judith. "On money and motivation a quasi-experimental analysis of
financial incentives for college achievement." Journal of Human Resources 46, no. 3 (2011):
614-646.

Scott-Clayton, Judith. "What explains trends in labor supply among US
undergraduates?" National Tax Journal 65, no. 1 (2012): 181.

Shapiro, D., Dundar, A., Huie, F., Wakhungu, P.K., Yuan, X., Nathan, A. & Bhimdiwali,
A. (2017, December). "Completing College: A National View of Student Completion
Rates ­ Fall 2011 Cohort" (Signature Report No.14)". Herndon, VA: National Student
Clearinghouse Research Center.

Tandberg, D. A., & Hillman, N. W. (2014). State higher education performance funding:
Data, outcomes, and policy implications. Journal of Education Finance, 222-243.
Valletta, R. G. (2016). Recent flattening in the higher education wage premium:
polarization, skill downgrading, or both? (No. w22935). National Bureau of Economic
Research.

Zimmerman, Seth D. (2014). The Returns to College Admission for Academically
Marginal Students. Journal of Labor Economics 32(4), 711-754.




                                             38
Figures and Tables

                Figure 1: Ratio of BA / Some College among 25 year-olds




Notes: Data come from the decennial census downloaded from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata series database at IPUMS USA. Following BLT, we calculated the ratio of 25-year-olds
having a bachelor's degree to 25-year-olds with at least some college completed.




                                             39
                         Figure 2: Graduate Rates by College Sector




Note: Source: IPEDS. This figure plots the average six-year graduation rate for different
institution types. Cohort enrollment year refers to the year that students were first enrolled. See
Section 4 in the text for a detailed description of how institutions are assigned to a type. Schools
that were predominantly online are excluded for all cohorts. These rates were calculated using only
students who were full-time, first-time degree seekers in their respective entry years.




                                                40
      Figure 3: Nonlinear Relationship between First-Year GPA and Graduation

                                                  A. 2002




                                                    B. 1988




Note: This shows the relationship between GPA and graduation. Each point represents the coefficient on
an indicator for GPA window (0 to .5, .5 to 1, ...). The top bin is calculated using the constant in that
regression. Student characteristics including gender, race, family income, and pre-collegiate math test
scores are controlled for in these regressions.




                                                   41
  Figure 4: Smoothed CDF of First-Year GPA for 1988 and 2002 by Institution Type

                A. Public Top 50                                   D. Private Less Selective




             B. Public Non Top 50                                   E. Community College




              C. Private Selective                                        F. For Profit




Notes: This plots a smoothed cdf of GPAs from NELS:88 and ELS:2002 separately by institution type. 1988
refers to NELS:88 and 2002 refers to ELS:2002.




                                                  42
                       Table 1: Changes in College Graduation Rates

                          Sample                   1988        2002     Difference
                        Full Sample                48.7        52.5        3.77
                                                                          (1.71)
                  Initial Institution Type
                  Total Four-year Public           63.3        67.7          4.49
                                                                           (2.38)
                     Non-top 50 Public             56.1        61.0          4.89
                                                                           (2.59)
                       Top 50 Public               82.1        90.7          8.57
                                                                           (2.57)
                  Total Four-year Private          78.4        77.2         -1.14
                                                                           (2.30)
                   Less Selective Private          72.3        71.2         -1.05
                                                                           (2.96)
                 Highly Selective Private          90.5        92.2          1.66
                                                                           (2.76)
                Total Community College            19.6        24.3          4.77
                                                                           (1.71)
                     For-Profit College            25.2        24.7         -0.42
                                                                           (8.92)
                  All Non-Profit Colleges          48.8        53.0          4.18
                                                                           (1.72)
                  All Four-Year Colleges           68.3        70.6          2.31
                                                                           (1.85)

Note: 1988 refers to NELS:88 and 2002 refers to ELS:2002.This table describes the graduation
rates for college enrollees by school type for the 1988 and 2002. The row for All Non-Profit Colleges
includes private and public colleges and excludes for-profit colleges.




                                                 43
                                      Table 2: Changes in Initial College Attended
                                                                Total              Men                        Women
                                                           1988      2002    1988     2002                 1988   2002
            Percent of HS grads Attending College          69.3      78.3     66.9     74.2                71.8   84.1

            Distribution of Enrollment by Type of Institution
                     Total 4-year Public                           39.9      42.2      39.7      42.7      40.1      41.7
                     Non-top 50 Public                             28.9      32.6      28.3      33.2      29.6      32.1
                     Top 50 Public                                 10.9       9.6      11.4       9.4      10.5       9.6
                     Total 4-year Private                          20.0      18.4      18.0      18.0      21.8      18.8
                     Less Selective Private                        13.3      13.2      11.4      12.2      15.1      14.0
                     Highly Selective Private                       6.7       5.2       6.7       5.8       6.7       4.7
                     Total Community College                       39.8      37.2      41.8      36.6      37.9      37.6
                     For Profit Colleges                            0.4       2.3       0.5       2.7       0.3       1.9

Note: This table describes the change in the fraction of students attending college within two years of expected high school graduation
and initial college attended for the 1988 and 2002 Educational Longitudinal Study cohorts.




                                                                  44
                    Table 3: Summary Statistics 1988 and 2002
                                          All College
                                          Attendees            BA Recipients
Variable                               1988        2002      1988        2002
Bottom Math Quartile                    0.14        0.18      0.04        0.06
Second Math Quartile                    0.23        0.24      0.16        0.18
Third Math
Quartile                                0.29        0.27      0.29        0.31
Top Math Quartile                       0.33        0.30      0.51        0.45
Math Test
Percentile                             58.88       55.93     71.12       67.69
Student-Faculty
Ratio                                  39.35       40.43     29.70       32.10
ln(S/F ratio)                           3.52        3.55      3.28        3.55
Missing S/F Ratio                       0.03        0.02      0.01        0.01
Student-Staff Ratio                   199.55      197.33    105.72      120.13
First-year GPA                          2.44        2.65      2.88        3.05
Major Graduation Rate (4-year
schools)                                0.77        0.75      0.77        0.77
Father's
Education:
                     No HS              0.11        0.10      0.06        0.06
                     HS Diploma         0.29        0.28      0.21        0.22
                     Some College       0.22        0.22      0.22        0.21
                     BA                 0.19        0.23      0.25        0.28
                     Grad School        0.18        0.17      0.27        0.24
Mother's
Education:

                                      45
                                            No HS                 0.10       0.09        0.05         0.05
                                            HS Diploma            0.34       0.28        0.26         0.23
                                            Some College          0.25       0.26        0.27         0.25
                                            BA                    0.18       0.23        0.25         0.28
                                            Grad School           0.12       0.15        0.17         0.19
                     Parental Income:
                                            <10000/15000          0.06       0.06        0.03         0.04
                                            <20000/25000          0.10       0.09        0.06         0.06
                                            <25000/35000          0.07       0.11        0.06         0.07
                                            <35000/50000          0.13       0.18        0.10         0.16
                                            <50000/75000          0.22       0.23        0.20         0.23
                                            >50000/75000          0.42       0.33        0.55         0.44
                     Race/Ethnicity:
                                            Asian                 0.05       0.04        0.06         0.06
                                            Hispanic              0.10       0.12        0.06         0.07
                                            African
                                            American             0.11        0.11        0.07         0.08
                                            White                0.75        0.73        0.81         0.79
                     Male                                        0.49        0.46        0.45         0.44
                     Number of Observations                      7770        8640        4110         4970

Note: 1988 refers to NELS:88 and 2002 refers to ELS:2002. This table presents summary statistics from 1988 and 2002 for college
enrollees and graduates. Math test Quartiles come from pre-collegiate assessment tests. The number of observations is rounded to the
nearest 10 to comply with the data use agreement.




                                                                46
                   Table 4: Decomposition Exercise, Changes in College Graduation, BLT Specification
                                                  Public                Private   Private                                      For-
                                        Full     non-top     Public      Less     Highly Community                            Profit
                                      Sample         50      top 50    Selective Selective    College                        Schools
 NELS:88                               48.73       56.12      82.15      72.26     90.50       19.56                          25.15
 ELS:2002                              52.50       61.01      90.71      71.21     92.16       24.33                          24.73
 Total Change                           3.77        4.89       8.57      -1.05      1.66        4.77                          -0.42

 Change due to Observables                   -1.92        -4.45         -0.42       -0.61         3.60          -0.81          9.43

 Change due to Student
 Characteristics                             -1.64        -2.64         -0.43       -0.63         2.68          -0.84          9.43
           Math Test Percentile              -1.26        -2.04          0.15       -0.78         0.26          -0.96          0.26
           Other Student
           Characteristics                   -0.39        -0.60         -0.58        0.15         2.42          0.12           9.17

 Change due to Supply-Side
 Factors                                     -0.28        -1.82         0.00         0.02         0.92          0.03           0.00
          Student/Faculty Ratios             -0.28        -1.82         0.00         0.02         0.92          0.03           0.00
          Initial School Types                0.00

 Residual                                    5.69          9.35         8.99        -0.44        -1.94          5.58          -9.86

Notes: These differences were created by finding the difference between observed ELS:2002 graduation rates and simulated ELS:2002
graduation rates using distributions of NELS:88 variables. Math test percentiles come from pre-collegiate assessment tests. Change due
to observables uses the NELS:88 distribution for all observable variables, that is, how much do all observed variable predict the change
in graduation. Change due to math test percentile uses the NELS:88 distribution for only math test percentile, and observed ELS:2002
distributions for all other observable variables. Similarly, change due to student-faculty ratios and initial school types use the NELS:88
distribution for only student-faculty ratios and initial school types, respectively. The change due to supply-side factors is the sum of


                                                                   47
change due to student-faculty ratios and change due to initial school types. The change due to student characteristics is the difference
between change due to observables and change due to supply side factors. The change due to other characteristics is the difference between
change due to student characteristics and the change due to math test percentile. The residual is the difference between the total change
and the difference due to observables.




                                                                   48
                                             Table 5: Relationship between Graduation and GPA


 A. NCES
                                                   1988       2002         1988        2002         1988        2002        1988         2002
 GPA                                                0.30       0.27         0.24        0.22         0.24        0.22        0.23         0.20
                                                  (0.010)    (0.007)      (0.011)     (0.009)      (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.012)      (0.012)

 Student Characteristics                                                     X           X            X           X            X           X
 Major Graduation Rates                                                                               X           X
 Major Fixed Effects                                                                                                           X           X


                                                   2001-      2010-        2001-       2010-
 B. Public Liberal Arts College                    2003       2012         2003        2012
 GPA                                               0.176      0.164        0.208       0.209
                                                  (0.012)    (0.011)      (0.014)     (0.013)

 Controls                                                                    X           X

 Observations                                      3,367      3,646        3,367       3,646
Note: This table reports the effect of an increase in first-year GPA on graduation. Panel A considers NELS:88 and ELS:2002. The regressions are
run separately in NELS:88 and ELS:2002. 1988 refers to NELS:88 and 2002 refers to ELS:2002. Student characteristics include indicators for
parent education, parent income, race, and gender as well as the percentile of math test scores. Math test percentiles come from pre-collegiate
assessment tests. Graduation rates controls for the graduation rate of a student's major and major fixed effects are fixed effects for a student's choice
of major. Panel B uses data from Public Liberal Arts College and has robust standard errors in parentheses. Control variables include: age, sex,
race, SAT math composite quartile, and SAT verbal composite quartile.



                                                                           49
                                                                Table 6: GPA Differences

                                                                                          First-year GPA
                                                               (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)      (6)       (7)
                         Coefficient on 2002 Indicator        0.21        0.28        0.28     0.32      0.31     0.29    0.31
                                                             (0.029)    (0.025)     (0.025)   (0.025)   (0.026) (0.028) (0.026)

                         Student Characteristics                           X          X          X         X                   X
                         Major Graduation Rate                                        X
                         Major Fixed Effects                                                     X
                         Course Indicators                                                                 X         X
                         Inconsistent Course
                         Indicators                                                                                  X
                         Total Math and Science Credits                                                                        X


Notes: 1988 refers to NELS:88 and 2002 refers to ELS:2002. This table shows the coefficient on an indicator for an observation being 2002. Student
characteristics include indicators for parent education, parent income, race, and gender as well as the percentile of math test scores. Math test percentiles
come from pre-collegiate assessment tests. Graduation rates controls for the graduation rate of a student's major and major fixed effects are fixed effects
for a student's choice of major. Course indicators include indicators for taking advanced calculus, physics, biology, chemistry, and Advanced Placement
United States history. Inconsistent course indicators add controls for AP English Literature and Composition which did not appear in the 1988. Total
Math and science credits controls for the total number of credits in Math and Science.




                                                                               50
                                        Table 7: Changes in GPA Over Time, Large Public Universities

                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
           Year of Entry                          0.019      0.019       0.018      0.018       0.014      0.015      0.014
                                                 (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.001)

            Student Characteristics                              X          X          X            X          X         X
            Home Zip Code Fixed Effects                                     X          X            X          X         X
            University Fixed Effects                                                   X            X          X         X
            SAT Math and Verbal Fixed Effects                                                       X          X         X
            Major Fixed Effects                                                                                X         X
            First-Semester Course Fixed Effects                                                                          X
                     Observations                411,951 411,951 411,951 411,951 411,951 411,951 411,951
Note: This table reports the time trend in first-year GPA from 1990 to 2000 at Clemson, Colorado, Colorado State, Florida, Florida State, Georgia
Tech, North Carolina State, Purdue, and Virginia Tech. Student characteristics include age and indicators for race and ethnicity, gender, transfer
student, and US citizenship. Home zip code fixed effects include a catch-all category for students without a reported US zip code. Indicators for each
SAT math and SAT verbal score are interacted with indicators for the university. Institution-specific major fixed effects (defined at the end of the
student's first year of college) and course fixed effects for every course in the student's first semester at the university are included in the final two
specifications. Each observation is a unique student.




                                                                           51
                                            Table 8: Changes in GPA Over Time, Public Liberal Arts
                                                 All Freshman Courses               Required                                    Science

                                            (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)                (5)               (6)         (7)         (8)
Year of Entry                              0.025       0.023        0.024       0.021              0.021             0.060       0.053       0.060
                                          (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.001)     (0.001)            (0.001)           (0.001)     (0.002)     (0.002)

Course Fixed Effects                                      X           X           X                   X                  X            X          X
Student Characteristics                                               X           X                   X                  X            X          X
Final Exam Scores                                                                 X                   X                  X            X
Exact Test Version Fixed Effect                                                                                                       X          X
Test-Specific Final Exam Scores                                                                                                                  X
N                                         139,190 139,190          139,190 139,190               127,184               26,697      20,773     20,773
Note: Observations are at the student-course level. Standard errors clustered at the student level. Samples in each column include students from 2001-
2012 enrolling cohorts. Freshmen take a required liberal arts curriculum that includes courses in Math, Science, Social Science, English, and History.
Demographic variables include: age, sex, race, SAT math composite quartile, and SAT verbal composite quartile. Between 2001-2012, tests in two
required science courses had similar structures, content, and point values year after year. In the first course, enrolling cohorts in 2002, 2007, 2009, 2010,
and 2012 were given identical tests to the prior cohort. In the second course, enrolling cohorts in 2003, 2005, 2009, 2011, and 2012 were given identical
tests to the prior cohort. Columns 1-4 include observations from all courses taken during freshman year. Column 5 includes student-course observations
from all required freshman courses. Column 6 includes all student-course observations from a required science sequence. Columns 7-8 include
estimates for students who took an identical test to at least one other cohort within the required science sequence. Column 7 controls for the exact test
version students receive while column 8 controls for the interaction between test version and score--essentially creating a comparison of students with
the same score on the same test.




                                                                             52
              Table 9: Decomposition Exercise, Changes in College Graduation, BLT + First-Year Grades
                                                  Public               Private    Private
                                       Full      non-top    Public      Less      Highly     Community For-Profit
                                     Sample         50      top 50    selective Selective      College  Schools
 NELS:88                              48.73       56.12      82.15      72.26      90.50        19.56    25.15
 ELS:2002                             52.50       61.01      90.71      71.21      92.16        24.33    24.73
 Total Change                          3.77        4.89       8.57      -1.05       1.66         4.77    -0.42

 Change due to Observables                      2.49          2.77          2.44          2.73          5.75           2.57           3.31

 Change due to Student
 Characteristics                                -0.92         -1.65        -0.85         -0.01          2.27          -0.41           7.13
           Math Test Percentile                 -0.75         -1.12        0.08          -0.30          0.06          -0.65           0.32
           Other Student
           Characteristics                      -0.17         -0.53        -0.93          0.29          2.21           0.24           6.81

 Change due to Supply-Side Factors              -0.16         -1.68         0.00          0.00          0.69           0.09           -0.13
          Student/Faculty Ratios                -0.20         -1.68         0.00          0.00          0.69           0.09           -0.13
          Initial School Types                  0.04

 Change due to GPA                              3.57          6.09          3.29          2.74          2.78           2.89           -3.69

 Residual                                       1.27          2.13          6.13         -3.78         -4.08           2.20           -3.73

Notes: These differences were found in the same way as the differences in Table 4, but adding another counterfactual ELS:2002 graduation rate
using the NELS:88 distribution for GPA and using all other ELS:2002 observables. Furthermore, the change due to other characteristics is found
by subtracting change due to GPA and change due to supply-side factors from change due to observables.




                                                                      53
                                                                Appendix

                                         Figure A1: College Enrollment over Time
                   A. College Enrollment Rates, Recent High School Completers

                                         0.8



                       Enrollment Rate
                                         0.7

                                         0.6

                                         0.5

                                         0.4
                                               1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
                                                                   Year

                                                 B. Total Number of Enrollees by Sector




Note: In Panel A data come from NCES Digest of Education Statistics Table 302.30 (National
Center for Education Statistics 2018). Panel A shows the fraction of individuals age 16-24 enrolled
in college as of October who recently graduated from high school or completed a GED. Enrollment
is defined as enrollment in college as of October. Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Census
Bureau, Current Population Survey (CPS), October, 1975 through 2015. Panel B Source: IPEDS.
Panel B plots the total number of students enrolled by institution type. It shows the average six-
year graduation rate for different institution types. Cohort enrollment year refers to the year that
students were first enrolled. See Section 4 in the text for a detailed description of how institutions
are assigned to a type. Schools that were predominantly online are excluded for all cohorts. These
totals were calculated only using students who were first-time, full-time degree seeking students
in their respective entry years.



                                                                 54
  Figure A2: Non-linear Relationship between GPA and graduation, Large Public and
                             Public Liberal Arts Samples
                  A. Large Public, Early                                  B. Large Public, Late




          C. Public Liberal Arts, Early                           D. Public Liberal Arts, Late




Notes: Panels A and B shows the relationship between GPA and graduation at the sample of Large
Public Universities which includes: Clemson, Colorado, Colorado State, Florida, Florida State,
Georgia Tech, North Carolina State, Purdue, and Virginia Tech. Each point in Panels A and B
represents the coefficient on an indicator for a GPA range (0 to .5, .5 to 1, ...) relative to students
in the top GPA bin in a regression that includes controls for student SAT math score fixed effects
as well as indicators for student race, gender, and transfer student status. The top bin is calculated
from the same regression without controls. Panels C and D show the relationship between GPA
and graduation at the Public Liberal Arts College. Each point in Panels C and D represents the
coefficient on an indicator for GPA window (0 to .5, .5 to 1, ...) relative to students in the top GPA
bin in a regression that includes controls for age, race, sex, and quartiles of SAT math and verbal
scores. The top bin is calculated using the constant from the same regression without controls.




                                                  55
  Figure A3: Cumulative Distribution of First-Year GPA, Large Public Universities
                                          A. 1990 & 2000




                                          B. 2009 & 2014




Notes: This plots a smoothed CDF of first-year GPA for the entering cohort of the given year.
Panel A includes: Clemson, Colorado, Colorado State, Florida, Florida State, Georgia Tech, North
Carolina State, Purdue, and Viginia Tech. Panel B includes: Colorado, Colorado State, North
Carolina State, North Carolina ­ Charlotte, Oklahoma, Purdue, South Dakota School of Mines,
and Utah State.




                                              56
                                       Figure A4:
                       CDF Distribution of GPA- Public Liberal Arts




Notes: Figure A4 plots smoothed cdfs of first-year GPA.




                                               57
                Table A1: Summary Statistics, Large Public Universities

                                                    All Students          BA Recipients
      Variable                                      1990      2000        1990      2000
      Bottom SAT Math Quartile                      0.05      0.05        0.04      0.04
      Second SAT Math Quartile                      0.20      0.19        0.19      0.17
      Third SAT Math Quartile                       0.41      0.35        0.41      0.35
      Top SAT Math Quartile                         0.34      0.40        0.39      0.43
      SAT Math                                      574.5     582.0       580.8     589.7
      Six-Year Graduation                           0.62      0.64        1.00      1.00
      GPA                                           2.68      2.79        2.85      2.99
      Transfer Student                              0.15      0.15        0.17      0.16
      Major Graduation Rate                         0.61      0.61        0.70      0.69
      Race/Ethnicity:
                Asian                               0.04       0.05       0.04        0.05
                Hispanic                            0.03       0.05       0.03        0.05
                African American                    0.06       0.06       0.05        0.06
                White                               0.79       0.78       0.80        0.79
      Male                                          0.55       0.53       0.54        0.52
      Number of Observations                        32,417     41,414     19,998      26,398

Note: This table presents summary statistics from degree-seeking enrolled students at Clemson,
Colorado, Colorado State, Florida, Florida State, Georgia Tech, North Carolina State, Purdue, and
Virginia Tech. Each observation is a unique student. Students with no reported SAT or ACT score
(nearly all are transfer students) are excluded.




                                               58
                   Table A2: Summary Statistics, Public Liberal Arts

                Variable                                  2001-2003 2010-2012
                Bottom SAT Math Quartile                     554       549
                Second SAT Math Quartile                     621       621
                Third SAT Math Quartile                      669       669
                Top SAT Math Quartile                        732       737
                SAT Math                                     638       642
                Six-Year Graduation                         0.831     0.859
                GPA                                         2.773     3.023
                Race/Ethnicity:
                                               Asian         0.066      0.069
                                               Hispanic      0.075      0.094
                                               African       0.065      0.095
                                               American
                                               White         0.764      0.707
                Number of Observations                       3,367      3,646

Note: This table presents summary statistics for students in the 2001-2003 and 2010-2012
enrolling cohorts from a public liberal arts college.




                                             59
                         Table A3: College Resources
                    Panel A: Full Sample
               Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                           Percentile         Mean Instructional      Service
                                               Expenditures per    Expenditures
Survey     Mean 25th 50th 75th 90th                 Student         per Student
NELS:88    39.4    22.7 30.3 50.5 76.4               $4,581             $796
ELS:2002   40.4    23.6 31.7 52.6 77.8               $4,288             $806
             Panel B: Public 4-Year Non-top 50
               Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                           Percentile         Mean Instructional      Service
                                               Expenditures per    Expenditures
Survey     Mean 25th 50th 75th 90th                 Student         per Student
NELS:88    29.0    24.1 27.9 33.2 38.7               $5,185             $828
ELS:2002   32.9    24.9 28.8 34.5 46.5               $4,728             $822
                Panel C: Public 4-year Top 50
               Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                           Percentile         Mean Instructional      Service
                                               Expenditures per    Expenditures
Survey     Mean 25th 50th 75th 90th                 Student         per Student
NELS:88    22.7    20.7 22.2 25.2 26.3               $9,716             $922
ELS:2002   22.7    20.0 22.2 25.3 28.5               $9,681            $1,093
            Panel D: Private 4-year Less Selective
               Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                           Percentile         Mean Instructional      Service
                                               Expenditures per    Expenditures
Survey     Mean 25th 50th 75th 90th                 Student         per Student
NELS:88    24.0    17.1 20.7 26.5 35.6               $5,763            $1,820
ELS:2002   23.8    16.9 21.5 27.4 35.6               $6,681            $2,365
           Panel E: Private 4-year Highly Selective
               Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                           Percentile         Mean Instructional      Service
                                               Expenditures per    Expenditures
Survey     Mean 25th 50th 75th 90th                 Student         per Student
NELS:88    19.6    13.8 19.1 23.6 27.3              $14,747            $2,245
ELS:2002   18.3    12.3 18.1 23.5 26.3              $15,900            $2,815
                        Panel F: 2-Year

                                     60
                     Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                               Percentile              Mean Instructional   Service
                                                       Expenditures per Expenditures
 Survey         Mean    25th 50th 75th 90th                Student        per Student
 NELS:88        60.6    41.0 59.3 76.4 91.1                 $2,683            $552
 ELS:2002       61.0    43.5 59.4 76.3 90.1                 $2,467            $555
                          Panel G: For-Profit
                     Student-Faculty Ratios                                  Mean
                               Percentile              Mean Instructional   Service
                                                       Expenditures per Expenditures
 Survey         Mean     25th    50th   75th    90th       Student        per Student
 NELS:88        42.0     31.6    42.2   44.4    62.2        $3,319            N/A
 ELS:2002       43.9     31.3    36.7   59.1    74.8        $3,417            N/A

Note: This table describes the school resources by college type in the NELS:88 and ELS:2002.




                                               61
                                   Table A4: Predicting College Graduation
                                              Panel A: ELS:2002

                                             Public            Private   Private
                                   Full     non-top    Public    less    highly Community
                                 Sample        50      top 50 selective selective College
First-Year College GPA            1.081      1.255      1.435   1.441     1.813    0.801
                                  (0.06)     (0.09)    (0.27)   (0.17)    (0.43)   (0.08)
Ln(student/faculty)               -0.390     -1.122     0.026  -0.568     -1.776   0.272
                                  (0.12)     (0.21)    (0.93)   (0.38)    (0.81)   (0.18)
Missing(student/faculty)          -3.008     -3.248     0.000  -3.365     0.000    -1.284
                                  (0.78)     (1.73)       (.)   (1.73)      (.)    (1.30)
Math percentile                   0.016      0.014      0.020   0.012     0.004    0.017
                                  (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.01)   (0.00)    (0.01)   (0.00)
Missing(student/faculty)x(math
percentile)                      0.027       0.007      0.000   -0.001   0.000    0.047
                                 (0.01)      (0.04)       (.)   (0.02)     (.)    (0.02)
Income 20,000/25,000             0.102       0.146     -1.444   -0.621   0.309    0.410
                                 (0.18)      (0.31)    (0.79)   (0.58)   (1.76)   (0.29)
Income 25,000/35,000             -0.293      -0.231    -1.139   -0.725   1.199    -0.232
                                 (0.18)      (0.30)    (0.75)   (0.55)   (0.96)   (0.32)
Income 35,000/50,000             0.034       -0.022    -0.796   -0.569   0.961    0.304
                                 (0.17)      (0.28)    (0.60)   (0.52)   (1.00)   (0.28)
Income 50,000/75,000             0.112       0.091     -0.893   -0.929   0.229    0.501
                                 (0.17)      (0.28)    (0.77)   (0.53)   (0.65)   (0.28)
Income 50,000+/75,000+           0.443       0.487     -0.495   -0.096    N/A     0.599
                                 (0.17)      (0.27)    (0.71)   (0.53)    N/A     (0.28)
Father HS diploma                -0.015      0.064      0.138   -0.179   2.014    -0.088

                                                      62
                           (0.16)   (0.27)    (1.05)   (0.47)   (2.25)   (0.29)
Father some college        0.134    0.045      0.533   0.402    1.798    0.054
                           (0.16)   (0.29)    (1.09)   (0.47)   (2.70)   (0.26)
Father BA                  0.340    0.410      0.987   0.211    2.839    0.194
                           (0.18)   (0.27)    (1.20)   (0.53)   (2.42)   (0.29)
Father graduate school     0.437    0.264      1.258   0.475    2.814    0.388
                           (0.18)   (0.32)    (1.19)   (0.55)   (2.45)   (0.28)
Mother HS diploma          0.225    0.051     -0.081   0.989    -0.669   0.202
                           (0.17)   (0.28)    (0.86)   (0.50)   (2.36)   (0.27)
Mother some college        0.376    0.190     -0.525   0.854    -0.206   0.502
                           (0.16)   (0.27)    (0.84)   (0.53)   (2.10)   (0.25)
Mother BA                  0.459    0.180     -0.708   1.484    -0.997   0.602
                           (0.18)   (0.29)    (1.06)   (0.54)   (2.11)   (0.29)
Mother graduate school     0.380    0.180     -1.384   1.411    -0.160   0.406
                           (0.19)   (0.29)    (1.00)   (0.54)   (2.23)   (0.31)
Asian                      0.633    0.713     -0.192   0.337    0.648    0.642
                           (0.13)   (0.19)    (0.35)   (0.42)   (1.02)   (0.20)
Hispanic                   -0.023   0.004      1.017   -0.043   1.511    -0.224
                           (0.12)   (0.21)    (0.81)   (0.36)   (1.37)   (0.17)
Black                      0.026    -0.033     1.508   -0.548   -1.668   0.162
                           (0.12)   (0.18)    (0.49)   (0.31)   (0.81)   (0.22)
Male                       -0.242   -0.122    -0.519   -0.341   -0.222   -0.250
                           (0.08)   (0.13)    (0.46)   (0.25)   (0.48)   (0.12)
Public top 50              1.138
                           (0.20)
Private less selective     0.089
                           (0.13)
Private highly selective   0.846

                                             63
                                 (0.25)
Community college                -1.223
                                 (0.12)
For-profit                       -1.039
                                 (0.27)
Income <20,000/<25,000            N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A        0.000        N/A
                                  N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A          (.)        N/A
Constant                         -2.488      -0.208      -2.177      -2.467      0.356       -5.811
                                 (0.50)      (0.85)      (3.09)      (1.63)      (2.86)      (0.80)

                                               Panel B: NELS:88
                                          Public             Private Private
                                    Full    non-    Public     less  highly Community
                                  Sample top 50 top 50 selective selective    College
First-Year College GPA             1.344    1.734    1.887    1.365   1.657    1.044
                                   (0.08)  (0.14)    (0.27)   (0.18)  (0.41)   (0.11)
Ln(student/faculty)                -0.571  -1.616 -1.962      -0.799  -0.151   -0.340
                                   (0.15)  (0.42)    (0.96)   (0.25)  (0.58)   (0.20)
Missing(student/faculty)           -3.957 -21.465 0.000       -5.787  0.000    -0.942
                                   (1.06)  (9.44)      (.)    (2.16)    (.)    (1.20)
Math percentile                    0.013    0.005    0.019    0.010   0.004    0.020
                                   (0.00)  (0.00)    (0.01)   (0.01)  (0.01)   (0.00)
Missing(student/faculty)x(math
percentile)                        0.010    0.184     0.000       0.046       0.000       -0.039
                                   (0.01)   (0.12)      (.)       (0.03)        (.)       (0.02)
Income 20,000/25,000               0.025    0.418     -0.536      -0.500      -0.904      -0.099
                                   (0.26)   (0.41)    (1.10)      (0.64)      (0.98)      (0.49)
Income 25,000/35,000               0.295    0.242     -0.552      -0.281      -0.921      0.686

                                                       64
                         (0.34)   (0.46)   (0.93)   (0.71)   (1.18)   (0.61)
Income 35,000/50,000     0.242     0.459   -1.521   -0.077   -0.452   0.496
                         (0.24)   (0.42)   (0.91)   (0.57)   (0.77)   (0.42)
Income 50,000/75,000     0.278     0.552   -0.511   0.021    -1.616   0.419
                         (0.25)   (0.41)   (0.97)   (0.54)   (0.63)   (0.44)
Income 50,000+/75,000+   0.780     0.969   -0.678   0.403     N/A     1.021
                         (0.23)   (0.41)   (0.88)   (0.55)    N/A     (0.43)
Father HS diploma        0.109    -0.030   0.376    0.290    -0.544   0.206
                         (0.26)   (0.39)   (0.71)   (0.47)   (1.29)   (0.41)
Father some college      0.340     0.175   0.160    0.861    -1.404   0.430
                         (0.24)   (0.40)   (0.70)   (0.54)   (1.22)   (0.38)
Father BA                0.420     0.591   0.467    0.424    -1.396   0.390
                         (0.24)   (0.40)   (0.74)   (0.58)   (1.31)   (0.48)
Father graduate school   0.745     0.500   1.662    0.752    -1.284   1.001
                         (0.23)   (0.40)   (0.84)   (0.65)   (1.40)   (0.40)
Mother HS diploma        0.031     0.181   -1.562   0.532    0.639    -0.024
                         (0.27)   (0.39)   (1.42)   (0.61)   (1.55)   (0.44)
Mother some college      0.214     0.416   -1.249   0.144    2.864    0.160
                         (0.21)   (0.37)   (1.46)   (0.64)   (1.56)   (0.44)
Mother BA                0.243     0.252   -1.107   0.514    2.455    0.215
                         (0.22)   (0.42)   (1.51)   (0.62)   (1.39)   (0.50)
Mother graduate school   0.176     0.190   -1.065   0.411    2.769    0.105
                         (0.28)   (0.45)   (1.47)   (0.70)   (1.56)   (0.45)
Asian                    0.450    -0.015   0.369    -0.402   3.238    0.982
                         (0.31)   (0.38)   (0.50)   (0.51)   (1.20)   (0.39)
Hispanic                 -0.198    0.228   -0.334   -0.301   0.639    -0.416
                         (0.17)   (0.33)   (0.51)   (0.51)   (0.99)   (0.25)
Black                    0.013    -0.372   0.209    0.378    -0.885   0.236

                                            65
                                                (0.22)     (0.29)     (0.46)      (0.36)      (1.01)         (0.46)
 Male                                           -0.288     -0.501     -0.648      0.062       0.059          -0.199
                                                (0.10)     (0.16)     (0.30)      (0.22)      (0.53)         (0.16)
 Public top 50                                  0.758
                                                (0.15)
 Private less selective                         0.318
                                                (0.15)
 Private highly selective                       0.869
                                                (0.30)
 Community college                              -1.202
                                                (0.17)
 For-profit                                     -1.008
                                                (0.56)
 Income <20,000/<25,000                          N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A         1.593           N/A
                                                 N/A        N/A        N/A        N/A         (1.44)          N/A
 Constant                                       -2.596     0.403      3.463      -1.685       -2.574         -4.553
                                                (0.59)     (1.52)     (3.37)     (1.14)       (2.63)         (0.95)




Notes: This reports the coefficients on various predictors of college graduation for the entire sample and separately by school type. Panel A shows
ELS:2002 and Panel B shows NELS:88.




                                                                        66
     Table A5: Relationship between Graduation and GPA, Large Public Universities Sample

                         (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)
First-Year GPA            0.22      0.22     0.21       0.21      0.21      0.19      0.18
                        (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)

  GPA x 1991             -0.01     -0.01       0.00     -0.00     -0.00     -0.00      0.00
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1992             -0.00     -0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.01
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1993             -0.00     -0.00       0.00     -0.00      0.00      0.00      0.01
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1994             -0.01     -0.01      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00      0.00      0.00
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1995             -0.00     -0.01      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00      0.00      0.00
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1996             -0.00     -0.01       0.00      0.00     -0.00      0.00      0.01
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1997              0.00     -0.00       0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00      0.01
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)
  GPA x 1998             -0.00     -0.00      -0.00     -0.00     -0.00      0.00      0.01
                        (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)    (0.00)     (0.00)

Student Characteristics           X          X          X         X         X          X
Home Zip Code Fixed Effects                  X          X         X         X          X
University Fixed Effects                                X         X         X          X
SAT Math and Verbal Fixed Effects                                 X         X          X
Major Fixed Effects                                                         X          X


                                             67
                        First-Semester Course Fixed Effects                                                                                           X

                             Observations                325,523       325,523        325,523        325,523       325,523        325,523        325,523
Note: This table reports the effect of an increase in first-year GPA on graduation for the entering cohorts from 1990 to 1998 at Clemson, Colorado, Colorado State, Florida,
Florida State, Georgia Tech, North Carolina State, Purdue, and Virginia Tech. An interaction between first-year GPA and entering cohort year is included for each year.
Student characteristics include age and indicators for race and ethnicity, gender, transfer student, and US citizenship. Home zip code fixed effects include a catch-all category
for students without a reported US zip code. Indicators for each SAT math and SAT verbal score are interacted with indicators for the university. Institution-specific major
fixed effects (defined at the end of the student's first year of college) and course fixed effects for every course in the student's first semester at the university are included in the
final two specifications. Each observation is a unique student.




                                                                                         68
                     Table A6: Decomposition Exercise, Changes in College Graduation, BLT + First-Year Grades

                                                                     Public                      Private        Private
                                                        Full        non-top        Public         Less          Highly       Community         For-Profit
                                                      Sample           50          top 50       selective      Selective       College          Schools
 NELS:88                                               48.73         56.12          82.15         72.26          90.50          19.56            25.15
 ELS:2002                                              52.50         61.01          90.71         71.21          92.16          24.33            24.73
 Total Change                                           3.77          4.89           8.57         -1.05           1.66           4.77            -0.42

 Change due to Observables                               2.22          2.60         0.63           1.64           3.45            2.54             3.78

 Change due to Student Characteristics                  -0.98         -1.64         -0.94         0.19           3.62             -0.23            15.94
          Math Test Percentile                          -0.79         -1.18         0.05          -0.53          -1.04            -0.65            -5.77
          Other Student Characteristics                 -0.19         -0.45         -0.99         0.73           4.66             0.42             21.71

 Change due to Supply-Side Factors                      -0.17         -1.61         -0.02         -0.14          -0.48            0.10             -6.72
          Student/Faculty Ratios                        -0.19         -1.61         -0.02         -0.14          -0.48            0.10             -6.72
          Initial School Types                           0.03

 Change due to Nonlinear GPA                             3.37          5.85         1.59           1.58           0.31            2.67             -5.44

 Residual                                                1.54          2.29         7.94          -2.69          -1.79            2.22             -4.20

Note: This table is similar to Table 7 except this specification measures GPA nonlinearly with indicators for bins of GPA that are .5 GPA points
wide.




                                                                       69
                                                           Table A7: CDF of GPA


                                                                       GPA Thresholds
                     Sample               0.5       1.0        1.5      2.0     2.5            3.0        3.5       4.0

                     1988                0.07       0.14      0.26         0.47     0.70      0.89       0.99       1.00
                     2002                0.06       0.12      0.20         0.36     0.56      0.81       0.96       1.00

Notes: This shows the fraction of students with a GPA below each of the following thresholds separately by 1988 and 2002. 1988 refers to NELS:88
and 2002 refers to ELS:2002.




                                                                      70
