                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  PRODUCT VARIETY, THE COST OF LIVING AND WELFARE ACROSS COUNTRIES

                                      Alberto Cavallo
                                     Robert C. Feenstra
                                      Robert Inklaar

                                     Working Paper 28711
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28711


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank seminar participants at the NBER, Georgetown University, the University of
Groningen and Yale University for helpful comments. We also thank Ninghui Li, Anna Ignatenko
and Mingzhi Xu for their excellent research assistance. This research is supported by the NSF
(US), SSHRC (Canada), and NWO (Netherlands) under a Digging into Data grant of the Trans-
Atlantic Platform (NSF Award #1724649). The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Alberto Cavallo, Robert C. Feenstra, and Robert Inklaar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Product Variety, the Cost of Living and Welfare Across Countries
Alberto Cavallo, Robert C. Feenstra, and Robert Inklaar
NBER Working Paper No. 28711
April 2021
JEL No. E01,F12

                                         ABSTRACT

We use the structure of the Melitz (2003) model to compare the cost of living and welfare across
countries, while incorporating product variety measured by the count of barcodes or firms. For 47
countries, we compare welfare relative to the United States to conventional measures of real
consumption. Relative welfare is similar to or higher than that indicated by real consumption for
a select group of nations in Europe and some large countries like China and Russia, but lower in
most other countries. This qualitative pattern has some similarities to that found in Jones and
Klenow (2016), but for very different reasons.


Alberto Cavallo                                 Robert Inklaar
Harvard Business School                         University of Groningen
Morgan Hall 287                                 Faculty of Economics
Soldiers Field                                  PO Box 800
Boston, MA 02163                                9700 AV Groningen
and NBER                                        The Netherlands
acavallo@hbs.edu                                R.C.Inklaar@rug.nl

Robert C. Feenstra
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu
1. Introduction

        Liberalizing trade is well understood to improve country welfare. Melitz (2003) is among

the models that generate a very simple formula ­ based on openness ­ for the gains from trade

(Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, ACR, 2012). But while the Melitz model is well-

suited to compute the gains from trade within a country, can it be also used to compare welfare

between countries? We will demonstrate that it can, provided that product variety and other

domestic variables are measured and taken into account. We compare the theoretical cost-of-

living predictions from the Melitz model to consumption price levels from the International

Comparisons Project (ICP), focusing on cross-country prices for tradable goods. We will find

that the theoretical cost of living relative to the US is similar to or less than indicated by

consumption price levels for a select group of nations in Europe and some large countries like

China and Russia, which implies a higher welfare level. But the cost of living in many other

countries is higher than indicated by consumption price levels, reflecting lower levels of product

variety and thus lower welfare in those countries.

        This paper contributes to the literature in several ways. ACR (2012) allowed for a foreign

shock to impact a country, by which they mean a change in foreign variables such as iceberg

trade costs, foreign country size, etc. That allowed them to compare equilibria within a country.

We shall expand on that literature by incorporating a domestic shock, meaning a change in

domestic trade costs, country size, productivity, etc. That will enable us to compare equilibria

between countries: in particular, it is the domestic shock that leads to differences in product

variety across countries, as we show in section 2.

        Second, we demonstrate the feasibility of using online barcode data to measure product
                                                         3


variety across countries. Barcode-level data has previously been used to compare prices across

countries (Cavallo et al. 2018), and product variety has been compared across cities in the United

States (Handbury and Weinstein, 2015) and in China (Feenstra, Xu and Antoniades, 2020). But it

is challenging to compare product variety across countries due to differing classification systems

for barcodes, so that identical products cannot be identified. 1 We overcome this difficulty by

relying on simple counts of barcodes in certain sectors for major retailers, and when that country

information could not be collected, then we use the much cruder count of firms within each

sector and country to proxy for variety.

        Third, in order to compare the theoretical predictions from the Melitz model to country

price levels from ICP, we also need to control for differences in country productivity. The "next

generation" of Penn World Table (PWT, see Feenstra, Inklaar and Timmer, 2015) calculates

productivity using a measure of real GDP on the output-side, i.e. GDP deflated with aggregate

output prices that can be compared across countries. Here we use similar techniques to obtain

output prices at the sectoral level, which differ from the sectoral consumption price levels in the

ICP. So this paper becomes an evaluation of how both the ICP and PWT datasets compare to

theoretical predictions from the Melitz model.

        Finally, this paper contributes to the broader literature on measures of welfare that are

"beyond GDP", to use the phrase of Jones and Klenow (2016). They propose a welfare concept

that combines cross-country differences in consumption, leisure, mortality and inequality into a

single consumption-equivalent measure. Our goal here is much less ambitious: to incorporate




1
  An exception is Argente, Hsieh and Lee (2020), who use the fact that the US and Mexico share a barcode system
to compare identical products across these two countries. Because they also have consumption data by barcode in
both countries, exact price indexes as in Feenstra (1994) can be constructed. We do not have barcode consumption
data to construct exact price indexes, so we rely on the count of barcodes and on the theoretical structure of the
Melitz model to measure welfare.
                                                 4


product variety to measure the cost of living across countries while focusing on tradable goods.

But there are some broad similarities in our methods and results. Just as we use micro-level

barcode counts for product variety in some countries, while relying on the macro-level count of

firms in other countries, Jones and Klenow likewise compare results obtained with micro and

macro data. They find that most Western European countries have welfare relative to the US that

is comparable to or higher than indicated by conventional measures of real consumption,

whereas we find that result for a more select group of European nations and also some large

countries like China, India and Russia. Conversely, many middle-income and smaller countries

are moved farther below the US benchmark in both their analysis and in ours.

        In section 2, we examine the cross-country comparison of equilibria in the Melitz

(2003) model, which depends on: the share of expenditure on domestic goods (reflecting

openness); domestic and foreign trade costs; productivity; the terms of trade; and the extent

of product variety available to consumers. Implementing the theoretical expression for the

cost of living between countries requires data on all these variables, as well as model

parameters. In section 3, we describe the data used to measure these variables and

parameters. Our results are presented in section 4 and section 5 concludes, while the proofs

of Propositions and other details are in the Online Appendix.


2. Modeling Welfare Between Countries

       Extending the model of Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2008) to measure welfare between

countries means that we must allow for differences their populations, productivities and domestic

trade costs. The latter are modeled as iceberg costs, meaning that  d  1 units must be sent from

the domestic firms for one unit to reach the consumer. Like the foreign trade costs in Melitz and

Chaney, these iceberg costs use up resources. That is a plausible description of resources used in
                                                          5


domestic transportation and in the wholesale and retail sectors, which we use to measure  d . 2

We consider two equilibria that can experience a domestic shock, by which we mean a change in

domestic iceberg costs  d , a change in mean productivity, or a change in population. In addition,

like in ACR (2012), the two equilibria can experience a foreign shock, defined as changes in the

iceberg costs of international trade and in the foreign values of fixed costs and population

(though we will introduce below a restriction on the extent to which fixed costs can differ across

countries).

         The rest of the model is familiar from Melitz (2003), so our exposition will be brief. We

assume a CES utility function with elasticity of substitution  > 1. A mass M e of domestic firms

pay an entry cost f e to receive a draw of productivity from the distribution g ( ) . With trade, the

CES price index for the home consumer is defined over domestic and foreign goods as:

                                                                                            1/(1- )
                                                                            
              M               g ( )                            g ( )
                       1-                               1-
                                                                          d 
               d  d
         P        p ( )                  d + M x  px ( )
                                               *   *
                                                                                                      ,      (1)
                          [1 - G (    )]                   [1 - G (    )]   
                d                   d            *
                                                 x
                                                                     x
                                                                            

                                                                         M d M e [1 - G (d )] of
where the first integral reflects the consumer prices pd ( ) of the mass =

domestic firms with productivity   d , and the second integral reflects the import prices p*
                                                                                           x ( )



of the mass =*
            Mx  *
               Me [1 - G ( *
                           x )] of foreign firms with productivity    x . We follow Chaney
                                                                      *



(2008) in assuming that the density of home and foreign productivities is Pareto distributed:


                             G ( ) = 1 - ( / A)- for   A and  > ( - 1) > 1.                                        (2)


                                               A  g ( )d = ( -1 ) A. It follows that the lower-bound for
                                                 
Note that the mean productivity is then



2
 Our theoretical analysis could also be extended to include differences in excise taxes across countries, which are
part of our empirical analysis.
                                                   6


productivity, A, is proportional to the mean productivity.

        To obtain the share of expenditure on domestic goods, which we denote by d , we take

the ratio of the first term on the right of (1) to the whole term in brackets,

                            
                                               g ( )     
                 d =  M d       pd ( )1-               d     P (1- ) .                        (3)
                                           [1 - G (d )] 
                            d                            

This expression can be simplified by solving for domestic prices. The marginal costs of

production at home are w/, so that with the usual CES markup the consumer price is

pd ( ) = [ / ( ­ 1)] ( d w /  ), where  d  1 are the domestic iceberg costs. Substituting these

prices into the numerator of (3) and computing the integral, we obtain:

                  1-           1-                                           1-       1-
                        w d             g ( )                                     w d 
   Md         -1
                       
                         
                            
                                    [1 - G (d )]
                                                 d = M d          
                                                           -  + 1   - 1 
                                                                                 
                                                                                  d 
                                                                                          .   (4)
        d


Substituting (4) into (3), the share of expenditure on domestic goods is:

                                            1-         1-
                                                  w d       Md
                 d =                                              .                           (5)
                       -  + 1   - 1               d         P1-

        Now consider two equilibria, with the shocked equilibrium denoted by a prime. The ratio

of CES price indexes is denoted by P / P , and it measures the change in the cost of living

between the two equilibria, i.e. the inverse of the change in welfare. Then the ratio P / P is

readily obtained by re-arranging (5) as:

                                      1-      1
                                                          d
                                                             1
                                 P  ( M d )  w d    / d
                                                             -1
                                  =
                                 P  M 1-    1
                                                          d 
                                                            
                                          d
                                             w   d /  d 
                                                                                              (6)
                                                                  1
                                        w d
                                           / d  M d / d          1-
                                      =                               .
                                        w d / d  M d / d 
                                                  7


The first term on the right of (6) in brackets is the ratio of the CES price index of domestic goods,
                            1
                         1-
where the variety term M d  (and, likewise, in the prime equilibrium) is the welfare effect of

any change in the mass of domestic varieties, while w d / d is proportional to the average price

of these domestic varieties (using equation (4)). The second term on the right of (6) is the ratio of

the share of spending on domestic goods, or one minus the share of spending on new imported

varieties, which adjusts the price index for import varieties as in Feenstra (1994). Either an

                                                                      ) reduces the price index.
                                        ) or in import variety ( d < d
increase in domestic variety ( M d > M d

By rewriting the price index as in the second line of (6), we can see that the term M d / d (and,

likewise, in the prime equilibrium) measures the "overall" product variety taking into account

both domestic and import varieties, with an increase in overall variety lowering the overall price

index according to the exponent 1/ (1 -  ) < 0.

       We do not describe the rest of the equilibrium conditions here, but they are outlined in

the Appendix. The zero-cutoff-profit (ZCP) condition determines the threshold productivity d

for home domestic firms, which is:

                                                          -1
                                  -1    wf    w d 
                                d      = d                     ,                             (7)
                                          X  P( - 1) 

where X denotes total expenditure on the differentiated good at home. The mass of entering

firms is determined by the free entry and full employment conditions.

       We consider two equilibria that can experience both a domestic and a foreign shock,

meaning different values of the iceberg costs, fixed costs, population, and productivity A. In this

way, we can examine the impact on one country from a change in the foreign variables

(following ACR), or we can compare the equilibria between two countries that have differing

values for both the home and foreign shock variables. The equilibrium conditions that we have
                                                          8


described above are enough to determine the sources of welfare differences between the two

equilibria. We take the ratio of the ZCP productivity in (7) between the two equilibria, and

substitute that into (6) to obtain,

                                                    1                   1
                                      X  / wf d
                                                 -1  M d / d   -1
                                                   =           .                                            (8)
                                      X / wf d        M d / d 

          The expression on the right of (8) is the inverse of the domestic variety and share terms

appearing on the right of (6). Expression (8) therefore measures the welfare gain between the two

equilibria due to any expansion of "overall" variety. 3 Comparing two equilibria with the same

values of expenditure X relative to fixed costs wf d , then there will be no welfare change due to

                                    / d
variety: equation (8) shows that M d   = M d / d when X  / wf d = X / wf d , which means that

there is no change due to variety in the relative price indexes in (6). 4 That is the case in the one-

sector Melitz-Chaney model in ACR (2012), for example, where trade balance ensures that

expenditure equals labor income, X = wL, and changes in L and f d are ruled out, so that the left

                                                          / d
of (8) is unity. It follows from the right of (8) that M d   = M d / d so there is no welfare

change due to variety. By allowing for domestic shocks, however, we can have welfare changes

due to variety, either within or between countries.

          Expression (8) shows us how to interpret the variety terms appearing in (6), but we still

need to solve for ZCP productivity levels appearing there. As mentioned, we assume a Pareto

distribution for firm productivity given by (2). The mass of operating domestic firms equals

Md =M e [1 - G (d )] =M e (d / A) - where M e is the mass of entering firms. Then using this


3                                                                       < d , provided that this impact exceeds any
    In particular, welfare rises with increased openness, resulting in d
                                                       / d
                                    < M d , so that M d
reduction in domestic varieties, M d                      > M d / d .
4
  Note that M d can change due to a domestic shock, but with an equal and offsetting change in d .
                                                     9


in (8), we obtain,

                            -1                  -
                                               -1                                         -
        d      X  / wf d   M e
                               d / A   X  / wL   f d / f e  d
                                                             / A 
              =                                                                               ,    (9)
        d      X / wf d   M e  d / A   X / wL   f d / f e  d / A 

where the final equality uses the fact that the mass of entering firms is inversely proportional to

the effective population size, M e  L / f e , as shown in the Appendix. The ratio of the fixed costs

of production and entry that appears in (9) is difficult to identify from the data, so we simplify

our model by assuming that it is the same across countries. We state this assumption formally by

adding a country superscript i = 1,...,C:


Assumption 1:
The fixed costs of production and entry for the home market are proportional, f d / f e = f d / f e =

f di / fei for all countries i = 1,...,C.


Assumption 1 ensures that the ratio ( f d / f e) / ( f d / f e ) vanishes in (9). We will also consider the

following stronger version, which implies Assumption 1:


Assumption 1 :

The fixed costs of production and entry for the home market are proportional to L , 0    1, so
                           i                           i i
f d / L = f d / L = f d / L and f e / L = f e / L = f e / L for all countries i = 1,...,C.
                       i




This stronger version is motivated by the fixed market penetration costs discussed by Arkolakis

(2010), which in a simplified version of his model are L . With these assumptions, we readily

obtain the following result by computing real wages from (6) and substituting for the ZCP

                      / d ) from (9):
productivity levels (d
                                                  10


Proposition 1:

(a) Under Assumption 1, the ratio of real wages between two equilibria is:

                                        -1       -1            1
                                                            -1  X  / wL - 
                                                                                       1
                  w / P   A   d
                                             d    Md  / d
                         =                                               .                     (10)
                  w / P   A   d                d   M d / d   X / wL 

(b) Under Assumption 1 , this expression becomes:

                                        -1       -1             1   -1         (1- )
                               
                  w / P   A   d              d    Md  / d   -1            L     
                         =                                                             ,       (11)
                  w / P   A   d                d   M d / d               L

and product variety is determined by,

                                Md / d   L 1-  X  / wL 
                                        =              .                                       (12)
                                M d / d   L   X / wL 


       To interpret these results, the first term on the right of (10) and (11) is the ratio of overall

productivity levels. The second term is the ratio of the share of expenditure on domestic goods,

or an inverse measure of openness but with a negative exponent: when that share falls--

indicating that more varieties are available from abroad-- then the gains from trade are higher.

This is the sufficient statistic identified by ACR for the gains from a foreign shock.

       The third term on the right of (10) and (11) is the inverse ratio of domestic trade costs, so

that a country with higher domestic trade costs will have correspondingly lower welfare. It is

surprising that the domestic trade costs do not involve an exponent reflecting the share of

expenditure on domestic goods. To explain this, consider two countries where the only

                                                                       >  d . That country will
difference between them is that one has higher domestic trade costs,  d

have higher domestic prices and therefore lower real wages and welfare, depending on its

consumption of the domestic good. But that country will also have lower expenditure on its
                                                         11


                 < d , due to the higher prices. So, from (10) and (11), the higher domestic
domestic goods, d

trade costs are partially offset by the lower domestic share, meaning that country welfare does

not fall in direct proportion to the higher domestic trade costs. 5

         The fourth term appearing on the right of (10) and (11) is the "overall" welfare gain from

domestic and import varieties available to consumers, as discussed just after (8), but this term

appears with differing exponents in (10) and (11): the exponent on overall variety in (10)

exceeds that in (11), which would seem to give a greater impact of product variety on welfare in

(10). But that seemingly greater impact in (10) is offset by the final term in each equation. The

final term in (10) is an adjustment for trade imbalance ( X  / wL) / ( X / wL), while the final term

in (11) is an adjustment for the size of the labor force, which adds a further impact of product

variety in (11) and (12) due to this "scale effect" from country size.

         We stress that the formulations in (10) and (11) are theoretically equivalent because (12)

holds. Nevertheless, we prefer to work with (11) while estimating the exponent (1­ ) on the

labor force from the regression shown by (12). When running this regression at the sectoral level,

( X s / wL) measures the expenditure share of each sector s in GDP. We will find that this sectoral

expenditure share is a rather poor predictor of product variety in the regression (12), but that the

relative population in (12) is a robust regressor that adjusts for the scale of economies, and

therefore predicts variety. For this reason, we rely on equations (11) and (12). In contrast, the

formulation in (10) would be very sensitive to the inclusion of the expenditure share at the

sectoral level, which we do not find is a reliable predictor of variety, and is therefore not a

reliable predictor of the cost of living.


5
  There is one parameterization, however, where the welfare will fall in direct proportion to the domestic trade costs,
and that is where the domestic costs of transport and retail trade, apply equally to domestic and imported goods. This
simple case is assumed below and in the Appendix to derive (15).
                                                        12


3. From Theory to the Data
3.1 The Cost of Living

        We shall use Proposition 1(b) to compare the cost of living across countries. To achieve

that, we invert (11) to obtain the cost of living between countries i and j:

                                             1                      1- 1                 (1- )
                                                                                     -
                 Pi     wi / Ai         ii         ii     M i /  ii    -1
                                                                             Li           
                 j    = j              jj         jj     j                                       .   (13)
                P       w / Aj                            M /  jj            Lj   
                                                                                  


where we have dropped the subscript d, so that  ii is understood as the share of expenditure in

country i coming from domestic production,  ii are domestic trade costs in country i, and M i is

the mass of domestic products available. We can compare this theoretical cost-of-living index

across countries to the price level of traded consumption, which we denote by PC Ti in country i.

The price level of traded consumption is computed from the 2011 round of the ICP (World Bank,

2014) and is measured as the observed prices of tradable consumption goods in each country,

converted to US$ using the nominal exchange rate and measured relative to the US prices of the

same goods. By construction, then, PC Ti in country i is measured relative to the United States

as country j (i.e., PC T ,US  1 ).

        Several adjustments to (13) are needed to bridge the gap between our stylized model and

the data we shall apply to it. First, our model has only labor, while in reality there are many

factors of production. This feature is readily incorporated by consideration of the terms wi/Ai

and likewise for country j (i.e., the United States). Let wi denote a weighted average of factor

prices used in production. The term Ai is the lower bound to productivity in (7), and as such it

also reflects the mean productivity in country i (as discussed just below equation (2)). Suppose

we measure country productivity using a dual approach, which would equal the ratio of the

weighted average of factor prices to the aggregate output price. Then the ratio wi/Ai would equal
                                                         13


the output price level, which we denote by PY i . In contrast to the price level of consumption,

the price level of output reflects the prices of produced goods in each country, relative to the US.

In particular, export prices are included in the price level of output, whereas import prices are

included in the price level of consumption. The "next generation" of PWT (Feenstra, Inklaar and

Timmer, 2015) measured the aggregate output price by correcting for the terms of trade in this

fashion. We shall use the same approach to measure sectoral output prices in traded sectors,

which we denote by PYsTi (see the Appendix and section 4.1).

         Second, we shall apply formula (13) at the sectoral level, denoted by the subscript s. We

use seven sectors of consumption shown in Table 1, defined at the two-digit level of the

"classification of individual consumption by purpose" (COICOP). Third, we restrict ourselves to

potentially traded products for household consumption ­ meaning goods rather than services ­

and these goods shares vary between 25% (Other goods) and 100% (Food, Beverages and

Tobacco), as shown in Table 1. 6 For example, expenditure in the transportation sector includes

taxi services, which we omit from traded products. The domestic expenditures shares s
                                                                                    ii
                                                                                       , in

particular, are measured for manufactured goods in each sector s. Domestic trade costs  s in
                                                                                        ii


sector  include the margin earned in transportation and retail trade and also taxes on products,

notably sales tax, VAT and excise taxes. Information on the construction of both these terms is

provided in the Appendix, and their average values over our 47 countries are reported in Table 1.

         Let s
             Ti
                equal the Sato-Vartia weight of traded goods in sector s relative to the US (see

the Appendix). Then averaging across the sectors, (13) is re-written as the cost of living in



6
  Four other sectors of consumption are omitted because the products in those sectors are either all nontraded
(education, hotels and restaurants) or have very few traded products (housing and utilities, communication).
                                                            14


        Table 1: Consumption sectors, goods share in each sector, and variable means
                                                          Goods                   Mean            Mean                 Product
   Sector                                           Code share (%)                  
                                                                                                                       variety
Total traded consumption                                      47
 Food, beverages & tobacco                          01-02    100                   0.73           1.78                  Yes
 Clothing & footwear                                   03     97                   0.27           2.05                  Yes
 Furnishing, household equipment                       05     89                   0.44           2.06                  Yes
 Health                                                06     24                   0.30           1.80                   No
 Transport                                             07     57                   0.52           1.82                   No
 Recreation and culture                                09     45                   0.58           1.65                  Yes*
 Other goods                                           12     17                   0.53           1.94                  Yes

Notes: Code is the COICOP code for the sector; goods share is the share of total sectoral expenditure on goods
rather than services, averaged over the 47 countries.
* Barcode data for newspapers and books are not available within the Recreation and Culture sector.



traded goods for country i, CoLTi / CoLTj , relative to the US as country j:

                                               Ti                                Ti
                                                                                 s - s
                                                                                      Ti                 (1- )Ti
                             Ti s                     ii s                                           -
                                Ti             s         Ti                                                   s
         CoL  Ti     PYs
                     S                sii      s     s            Msi
                                                                      / s
                                                                        ii        s  s -1
                                                                                             Li            s
                 PY Tj 
         CoLTj s =1                    jj
                                                      jj          M j /  jj                  Lj
                                                                                                                   ,        (14)
                     s                s              s            s s                             


                                                                                   s=1sTi = 1. The last term
                                                                                     S
where the weights of traded goods across sectors sum to unity,

appearing on the right of (14) is the population of each country i, relative to the US.


3.2 Product Variety

         A final variable needed to measure (14) is the number of domestic product varieties in

               i
each sector, M s . Our first measure of domestic varieties is based on the number of domestic

firms active in each sector, taken from the Bureau van Dijk's ORBIS global dataset, which in

turn, is based on business registers in different countries. We eliminate duplicate names and drop

firms with zero employees to eliminate shell companies. As a verification exercise, we also

collected data on the number of firms from national enterprise statistics, primarily from the

OECD Structural Business Statistics and Eurostat Enterprise Statistics, supplemented by national
                                                        15


reports. For most countries, the correspondence between the two sources is close; the correlation

of the log number of firms between both sources is 0.75, rising to 0.90 when excluding India and

Indonesia. Both of those countries have very large numbers of informal firms, which would skew

upwards their variety count.

        The number of firms in each sector is obtained for 46 countries, and in Table 2 we show

the results for 24 countries where we also have an alternative measure of variety from barcode

data. 7 The number of firms is a very crude measure of the number of products because of multi-

product firms. At one extreme, large firms produce very many products that are not counted. At

the other extreme, certain low-income countries like India have a very large number of informal

firms, as just mentioned, which include firms perhaps serving only a single city or neighborhood.

We might think of these firms as producing less than a single (national) product.

        To obtain a more accurate count of product variety, we rely on a count of barcodes for

goods sold within each of the sectors as shown in Table 1, except for Health and for Transport. 8

In these sectors without barcode data, we use the relative variety estimates from the firm-count

data. The barcode counts are obtained from micro data available at the Billion Prices Project

(BPP), for all products sold by some of the largest multi-channel retailers in in 24 countries:

Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, France, Germany, Greece, India, Ireland,

Italy, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea,

Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. To compute the barcode counts at the



7
  Barcode count data cover 26 countries including Argentina and Uruguay, but the we do not have data on the share
of domestic expenditure for these two countries. We also lack data on the number of firms from ORBIS for
Colombia, which means our analysis based on this variety measures covers 46 countries. See the Appendix Table
A1 for the firm counts in 46 countries and 7 sectors and Appendix Table A2 for the barcode counts in the 24
countries that we cover in this paper.
8
  Barcodes for the Recreation and Culture sector are not measured for all products in that sector (see the notes to
Table 1), so s
             ii
                is adjusted to match this coverage based on WIOD/TiVA data.
                                                          16


sector level, we first take the modal daily barcode count for each retailer in the BPP sample

during 2018, computed at a 4-digit COICOP level of aggregation (e.g., "Coffee, Tea, and

Cocoa"). To avoid double counting varieties sold in multiple retailers, we use the largest barcode

count for each 4-digit category available across retailers, and then add up all the barcodes at the

                                                                      i
sectoral level. The number of barcodes in each sector is denoted by N s , shown in Table 2.


                            Table 2: Number of Firms and Domestic Varieties
                                                           Food & Beverages              Recreation & Culture (Electronics)
               Orbis Firm Count     # Barcodes                      Share Domestic                        Share Domestic
      Country     (7 Sectors)     (5 Sectors, N)   # Barcodes (N)    Barcodes (B)       # Barcodes (N)     Barcodes (B)
Australia                63,482         117,992             9,738               0.61            29,217                0.01
Brazil                  140,822         237,604             7,721               0.90            70,128                0.48
Canada                   38,117         110,006            13,502               0.56            30,910                0.10
Chile                     7,761          61,122             3,680                   -            6,810                   -
China                   282,499         211,779            22,123               0.77            23,065                0.99
France                   55,284         248,857            11,235               0.83            23,793                0.11
Germany                  76,061         250,767            15,860               0.87            98,334                0.32
Greece                    5,607          59,449             4,454               0.81            11,678                0.13
India                    57,678          50,438             4,039               0.99             2,019                   -
Ireland                   5,045          40,088             9,162               0.63             3,005                0.13
Italy                   162,167          80,063             7,819               0.89            14,348                   -
Japan                    65,994         563,973            16,163               0.88           165,692                0.16
Korea                    78,893         254,510            41,641                   -           42,891                   -
Mexico                   32,253          57,096             7,789               0.80             7,275                0.11
Netherlands              34,534         122,835            12,038               0.67            17,533                0.18
New Zealand              10,591          74,351             7,006                   -           20,800                   -
Poland                   57,567          60,790             7,927               0.53            28,590                0.34
Russia                  195,887          84,725             7,821               0.71            21,049                0.11
South Africa             37,498          50,238             9,493                   -           14,512                   -
Spain                    64,970         175,981            12,741                0.67           35,568                0.20
Turkey                   66,240          97,158             6,753                0.78            8,910                0.38
United Kingdom           91,124         110,509            11,996                0.78           19,880                0.19
United States           359,967         375,943            22,386                0.89           80,598                0.24




         When collecting the count of barcodes in these sectors, we are mixing both domestically

produced and imported goods. For just two sectors ­ Food, Beverages and Tobacco and

Recreation and Culture ­we further collected the country-of-origin information for a random

sample of the total number of barcodes. 9 Specifically, we hired freelancers to manually check



9
 Within Recreation and Culture, we collected country of origin information for barcodes in Electronics and certain
other consumer products such as bicycles.
                                                          17


500 randomly sampled barcode items per sector in each country. Using a custom mobile phone

application, each freelancer visited one of the retailers in the BPP sample, scanned the barcode of

each product, took a photo of the country-of-origin label, and determined if the product was

domestic or imported. When no country of origin is listed, then the product is treated as

domestically made (see the Appendix). For these two sectors, we therefore have the barcode

domestic ratio, i.e., the ratio of domestically produced to the total number of sampled barcodes,
                     i 10
which is denoted by Bs . The number of domestically produced barcodes is therefore
 i
Ms = Ns
      i i
        Bs . In addition, for these sectors we also have the expenditure domestic ratio, which we

have denoted by s
                ii
                   . The overall measure of product variety is therefore,

                                               Msi     Nsi i
                                                          B       
                                                      =  ii s      .
                                                ii                
                                               s       s          

         Outside of Food, Beverages and Tobacco, and Recreation and Culture (and for some

countries within those sectors), 11 we do not have information on the share of domestically
                                                                       i
produced barcodes. In these cases, we make the simple assumption that Bs  s
                                                                          ii 12
                                                                            . That is, we

are assuming that the barcode domestic share is approximately equal to the expenditure domestic

share. In that case, the overall measure of product variety is approximated by the total count of

barcodes (including domestic and imported goods) for each sector:

                                               i
                                              Ms / s
                                                   ii
                                                       Ns
                                                        i
                                                          .


10
   To test the validity of our estimates for the barcode domestic ratios, we also computed an alternative metric using
country of origin information collected online for individual products in a subset of 9 countries. This information
was scraped from the website of a single retailer in each country. The correlation between the online and offline
barcode domestic ratios is 0.76. More details are provided in the Appendix.
11
   No data for either sector could be collected for Chile, New Zealand, South Africa and South Korea. No data for
Recreation and Culture could be collected for India and Italy.
12
   For those countries where we have the barcode domestic share (see Table 2), the median value of that share in
Food, Beverages and Tobacco is 0.78 as compared to the median value of s        ii
                                                                                   which is 0.73; while in Recreation
and Culture (Electronics) those medians are 0.18 and 0.14. So our simple assumption is plausible.
                                                        18


3.3 Parameter Values

        Also needed in (14) are the elasticity of substitution  and the Pareto parameter  ,

which we treat as the same across sectors. For the Pareto parameter, we obtained an estimate for

the Melitz-Chaney model by relying on the simulated method of moments from Simonovska and

Waugh (2014), who also use cross-country data on the prices of goods collected by the

International Comparisons Project (ICP). 13 Using ICP data from 2011, we obtain the pooled

estimate of  = 5.1 across all sectors. 14

        For the elasticities of substitution, we considered the recent work of Redding and

Weinstein (2020), who estimate elasticities of substitution across barcode varieties using the

Nielsen Homescan data. These barcodes are for grocery store items (many of their barcodes are

within our Food, Beverage and Tobacco sector), and they obtain a median elasticity of  = 6.5.

This estimate is incompatible with  = 5.1, however, because it violates  >  ­ 1. This finding

is not surprising, since we are comparing a median estimate of  obtained from barcode data

within narrow modules to a Pareto parameter  obtained from ICP price data using the "basic

heading" price data pooled across all sectors. 15

        To reconcile the estimates of  and , we proceed in two way. First,  = 6.5 can be

compared with an initial estimate of  = 8.3 from Eaton and Kortum (2002, p. 1754) that is not

too model-dependent. The ratio of these parameters gives  /( ­ 1) = 1.5, which is an acceptable

spread between the parameters. 16 Conversely, we can start with the ratio  /( ­ 1) = 1.5 and


13
   We are grateful to Mike Waugh for providing us with the programs required to run these estimates, see
https://github.com/mwaugh0328.
14
   We were not successful in obtaining sectoral estimates for the Melitz-Chaney model.
15
   Broda and Weinstein (2008) argue that the price differences across countries are much less for goods with
identical barcodes than observed in datasets without barcode classifications.
16
   Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2011, p. 1472) find that  /( ­ 1) = 1.75 from an initial calculation of this ratio
from French data that is, once again, not too model-dependent.
                                                      19


apply this to the estimate of  = 5.1 obtained from the model-based methods of Simonovska and

Waugh (2014) to obtain  = 4.4. That estimate is very close to the median value of the elasticity

of substitution obtained by Broda and Weinstein (2006), once we concord their results to

products within our Food, Beverage and Tobacco sector (resulting in  = 4.2). So using these

two approaches, we obtain low estimates of ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1) and high estimates of ( , ) =

(6.5, 8.3). We have made all our calculations using both sets of estimates and find that the

results are remarkably similar. While the scale of the cost of living is about 1.5­2 times greater

when the low parameter estimates are obtained, the relative position of countries is much the

same. We present in the text the results obtained with the high estimates ( , ) = (6.5, 8.3), and

report in the Appendix the results obtained using the low estimates ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1).


4. Empirical Results

4.1 Openness, Domestic Trade Costs and the Terms of Trade
                                                                                1
        We refer to the lambda-ratio that appears in (14), (s
                                                            ii
                                                               / sjj ) s , as "inverse openness". It

and the ratio of domestic trade costs, ( s
                                         ii
                                            /  sjj ) , are both constructed at the sectoral level, with

j = USA. For convenience in graphing these, however, we take the weighted average across
                                                             Ti
                                                             s

                                                                             s=1 ( sii /  sjj )
                                           S                                   S                  Ti
sector within each country, and plot           ( ii
                                           s =1 s
                                                      / sjj )  s   versus                         s    , as shown in

Figure 1. There is a negative relationship between these two variables, so countries that are more

open than the United States tend to have higher domestic trade costs and vice versa. This

negative relationship is due, in part, to the generally higher rates of indirect taxation in European

countries who also are more open. At the other end of the scale are countries such as Indonesia

(IDN), India (IND), China, and Colombia, where domestic trade costs are notably lower than in
                                                 20


        Figure 1. Inverse openness versus domestic trade costs by country (USA=1)




the US, but these countries are less open to trade, as shown by higher inverse openness.

       It is instructive to graph overall openness and the domestic trade costs against the overall

price level of tradable consumption goods, PC Ti , as shown in Figure 2, in log terms with the US

at point (0,0) in both panels. As noted earlier, we construct the level of consumption prices by

aggregating the prices of tradable consumption goods within each country (from the 2011 round

of the ICP). So in contrast to the theoretical cost of living, which we are measuring using the

Metliz model, the consumption price level simply reflect price data collected across countries

and expressed relative to the US. From the second panel of Figure 2, we can see that traded

consumption prices are strongly correlated with domestic trade costs, which is no surprise: excise

taxes and retail margins increase country prices. Many of the high-domestic-trade cost countries

are also more open than the US, however, as shown in the first panel.

       Next, we calculate all the factors in the cost of living in (14) ­ including the output price,

domestic trade costs, and openness ­ except for variety in the final two terms. In Figure 3, the
                                                                21


Figure 2: Inverse openness and domestic trade costs versus traded consumption price level
(log scale, USA=0)




                                                                       Ti

                                         (        )
                                                                      Ws
                                                   WsTi
                               
                                  S                                                    Ti
first panel plots the log of      s =1
                                             PYsTi        (s
                                                           ii
                                                                / sjj ) s   ( s
                                                                              ii
                                                                                 /  sjj )Ws against the consumption

prices of traded goods, PC Ti . The cost of living (without variety) and the consumption prices are

tightly clustered around the 45-degree line in the first panel. From the second panel, we see that

roughly an equal number of countries have a cost of living (without variety) relative to the US

that is higher versus lower than indicated by their consumption price level. Those with a cost of

living below their relative consumption price include Taiwan and Russia, some countries in

Eastern Europe (Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Slovakia and Slovenia) and many in

Western Europe (Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Luxembourg, the

Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, CHE and the United Kingdom, GBR), as well as Canada.

Denmark, Luxembourg and the Netherlands are extreme cases where the cost of living is more

than 20% below their relative consumption prices.

        To understand why Denmark and the Netherlands have such a low cost of living (without

variety) relative to the US in Figure 3, and conversely why some other countries have higher cost
                                                   22


Figure 3. Cost of living (without variety) due to productivity, openness and the domestic
trade costs versus traded consumption price level (log scale, USA=0)




Notes: The left-hand figure plots log  versus log   for the 47 countries in our analysis, with log  as
                                                                 
defined in equation (14) (excluding the variety effects) and log  computed as the price level of traded
consumption, normalized to USA=1. The right-hand figure plots log /   versus log   .



of living despite being more open than the US, we need to explore the terms influencing the

cost of living: in particular, the output price levels PYsTi . These output prices differ from the
                     Ti
consumption prices PCs  because consumption prices include imports, whereas output prices

include exports. These two variables therefore differ by the terms of trade. The terms of trade are

constructed from the quality-adjusted export and import prices estimated by Feenstra and

Romalis (2014). As already mentioned, these prices are used in PWT to construct an aggregate

output price, and here we follow much the same procedure to construct sectoral output prices.

        Specifically, to obtain the output prices we start with the price level of consumption for

traded goods and net out the domestic trade costs (which we assume are identical for

domestically produced and imported goods); then we add export prices; and finally, we net out

tariff-inclusive import prices. This calculation gives (see the Appendix):
                                                                    23

                                                    Xi )
                                                 (1-s                                            Mi (1- Xi )
                                                                                                 s
                                                                      sXi                    -         s
                   PYsTi     PCsTi
                                   /s ii                   Xi
                                                (1-sMi )  P                  P Mi                      Mi )
                                                                                                    (1-s
                           =                               s
                                                                              s
                                                                                                               ,                       (15)
                   PYsTj     PC Tj /  jj                 P Xj                P Mj         
                               s     s                    s                   s           

       Xi and P
where P        Mi are quality-adjusted prices for exports and imports, 17 while  Xi and  Mi
       s       s                                                                s       s

are the associated Sato-Vartia weights. Substituting (15) into (14) we obtain: 18

                                        Ti (1- Xi )
                                        s                       Ti ( Xi - Mi )
                                                                s                                                          Ti Mi  Xi
                                                                                                  s s                      s s (1-s )
                                                                                                               Mi  Mi  -
                                              s                     s    s                        Ti Xi
         CoL  Ti     S        Ti
                            PCs              Mi )
                                          (1-s         sii            Mi )
                                                                   (1-s          P Xi                         s   Ps            Mi )
                                                                                                                             (1-s
                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                      
            Tj                Tj                        jj                       P Xj                          P
                                                                                                               Mj  Mj 
         CoL   s =1         PCs                        s                          s                            s   s  
                                                                                                                                        (16)
                                     Ti                      Ti
                                                             s - s
                                                                  Ti                    (1- )Ti
                                     s                                              -        s
                     S      sii      s     Msi
                                               / s
                                                 ii           s  s -1
                                                                          Li              s
                   ×                                                                                 .
                             jj            M j /  jj                      Lj     
                    s =1    s              s s                                   

To interpret the first line of (16), consider the simplified case where trade is balanced sector-by-

sector, with sXi = s
                   Mi
                      . In that case the first line starts with the weighted consumption price

level. The next term, which is domestic trade costs, disappears when sXi = s
                                                                           Mi
                                                                              because it

equally impacts the cost of living (on the left) and the consumption price level (on the right). The

remaining terms on the first line are interpeted as the terms of trade, i.e. the price of exports

relative to imports. In the Metliz model, the beneficial impact of trade is measured by openness,

which lowers the cost of living by appearing inversely on the second line of (16); but in ICP or

PWT data, the beneficial impact of trade is measured by the terms of trade, which lowers the

consumption price level as compared to the output price level. In Figure 4, we plot openness

(i.e. the inverse of the lambda-ratio) against the terms of trade (i.e. the relative price of exports).

We see that there is a positive correlation between the two, though with some outliers.




17
   In Feenstra and Romalis (2014) the quality-adjusted import prices are measured net of tariffs, since they are used
to deflate duty-free imports in GDP, but here we measure them inclusive of tariffs.
18
    In Appendix Tables A3 and A4, we show the log values of the terms in (16) to provide a decomposition of the
cost of living to relative to the consumption price level.
                                                 24


       Figure 4. Openness versus the terms of trade by country (USA=1)




       Consider Denmark, Luxembourg and the Netherlands in Figure 4, which are very open

but have terms of trade that are not much higher than for the United States, i.e., close to unity.

Their openness contributes to a low cost of living relative to the US, while having terms of trade

close to unity does not contribute to low consumption prices. As a result, these three countries

have the lowest costs of living (without variety) as compared to consumption prices in Figure 3.

Similarly for Belgium, which is less open than these three countries in Figure 4 but still more

than the US, and so its cost of living relative to consumption price is higher than for these three

countries in Figure 3. Then consider Switzerland (CHE), which is somewhat more open that the

US but has the highest terms of trade in Figure 4, which contributes to low consumption prices.

As a result, its cost of living as compared to its consumption price is higher than for Belgium in

Figure 3. We conclude that openness versus the terms of trade contributes meaningful variation

to the cost of living (without variety) relative to the consumption price level.
                                                           25


4.2 Product Variety

       The main novelty of our approach is to incorporate product variety. Our theory implies

that variety is related to country size according to (12), where X is expenditure and L is

population. Rather than thinking of aggregate expenditure for the economy, we instead we think

of it as sector-level expenditure Xs, in the same sectors for which we measure variety. We then

rewrite (12) as:
                                                    1-
                                 Msi
                                     / s
                                       ii      Lj         Xsi
                                                              / w j Lj   
                                              = i                        
                                                                          ,                   (12')
                                 M j /  jj                X j / w j Lj   
                                 s s          L           s              

        i
where X s / wi Li denotes expenditure on sector s relative to GDP of country j. Then we estimate
this relationship as a regression where we initially do not difference with respect to country j and

we move s
        ii
           to the right:

                                                                       Xsi 
                        i
                            =   0 + 1 ln sii   + (1 -  ) ln L +  2 ln 
                                                            i
                                                                             +i .
                                                                       GDPi 
                   ln M s                                                                     (17)
                                                                             s
                                                                            

We also consider constraining 1 = 1 and moving s
                                               ii
                                                  back to the left:

                          Ms
                           i                               Xsi 
                      ln  ii  =  0 + (1 -  ) ln L +  2 ln 
                                                 i
                                                                 +i .
                                                           GDPi 
                                                                                              (17')
                                                                 s
                          s                                     

       The regressions in (17) and (17') can be estimated using either barcode or firm counts to

measure product variety. Before estimating this regression using firm-count data, however, we

should recognize that the count of firms is potentially a proxy for "true" product variety.

                                                                      , by sector s, is related
Specifically, suppose that the firm-count measure of product variety M s


to "true" variety M s measured using the barcode count according to:

                                          i =
                                            s µ0 + µ ln M s + us .
                                                          i    i
                                       ln M

Differencing with respect to the United States as country j, and taking the weighted average
                                                                   26


   across sectors to reduce the errors, we obtain:


=
 S
 =  WsTi ln M
 s 1=
            i /M
              s
                 j
                 s
                     S
                      
                   µ s 1WsTi         (             )                       ( i
                                                                        ln M s       )
                                                                               / M sj + U ij .                   (18)


            The ordinary least squares estimate of (18) is OLS estimate of µ
                                                                           ^ = 2.03 (s.e. = 0.24). We

   conclude that taking approximately the square root of the firm count gives an estimate of variety

   that is reasonably close to that obtained from barcode count (for those countries where we have

   both sources of data). Accordingly, we take µ  2 to the left of (18) and the variety effect in (16)


               s=1
                       s
                             -  s-1 
                               Ti       
                                           (              )        j /  jj  , with  s    s     
                       Ti                                                           Ti     Ti
   becomes
                  S
                                     ln         i /  ii
                                               M              /   M                  s -  s -1  < 0. This proxy from
                                                 s  s               s  s 
                         s     s                                                               

   the firm-count is compared to the variety effect using the barcode count in Figure 5. It is clear

   that these two measures are highly correlated with very similar scales. From now on, we take

   approximately the square root of the firm count when measuring variety with those data. 19

            We now estimate the regressions (17) and (17') on both the barcode data and the square

   root of firm counts, with the results shown in Table 3. From columns (1) and (2), the variable

   ln  
       performs reasonably well, with a coefficient less than its predicted value of unity but highly


   significant. We find a coefficient (1 - ^ ) on ln  that is between 0.1 and 0.3, though the sector

   share of GDP has a coefficient far below unity and marginally significant. When we move  
                                                                                            to

   the left of the equation and estimate (17'), the results in columns (3) and (4) are quite sensitive to

   whether we include India or not, since both the barcode for that country are unusually small as

   illustrated in Figure 6. 20 When omitting India from the barcode data, we find that (1 - ^) =
                                                                                               0.2.



   19
      To be precise, we use 1 / µ^ = 0.49 to transform the firm count, and we also take into account the standard error of
   this estimate to compute the standard errors shown in Table 3, columns (4) and (6) and in Figures 7 and 9.
   20
      India's online retail sector was relatively undeveloped when these barcodes were counted in 2018. The country
   ranked last in the UN "Ecommerce Index" among those included in our barcode sample (UNCTAD 2017) and the
   World Bank estimated that only about 1.6% of sales took place online that year (Kathuria et al., 2019).
                                             27


       Figure 5. Variety effects by country ­ firm count versus barcode count (USA=1)




                             Table 3. Product Variety Regressions
                    (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)
  Variety:        Barcode       Barcode     Barcode     Barcode      Firm            Firm
                   count         count       count       count       count           count


Dependent                                                      i
                        i             i            i
                                                  Ms          Ms           i
                                                                          Ms            i
                                                                                       Ms
variable:          ln M s        ln M s      ln          ln         ln          ln
                                                  sii         sii         sii         sii

  ln 
                  0.604***     0.542***
                   (0.134)      (0.133)

  ln               0.112       0.298***      0.034      0.200**     0.171***    0.203***
                  (0.102)       (0.076)     (0.096)     (0.077)      (0.063)      (0.066)

        
  ln              0.267*        0.247*       0.080       0.035      -0.156           -0.153
                  (0.143)       (0.136)     (0.126)     (0.121)     (0.195)          (0.188)

Include India:      Yes           No          Yes         No             Yes           No

Observations        100          95           100         95             299          292
Notes: * p 0.1, ** p  0.05, *** p  0.01
                                                             28


                               Figure 6. Variety and size at the sectoral level




Note: Observations in blue are covered by firm count data and barcode data, while observations in red are only in
the firm count data.


Turning to the results with firm counts, columns (5) and (6) give results quite similar to

(1 -    0.2, especially when India is omitted. Accordingly, we shall use (1 - 
     ^) =                                                                     ^ ) from columns

(4) and (6), and its standard error, to compute the cost of living according to (16) and its

associated 95% confidence interval.

         Figure 7 shows the estimates of the cost of living for 46 countries based on the firm count

data. The variety effect increases the cost of living in all countries relative to the United States,

which has nearly the greatest variety. 21 As a result, most countries have a greater cost of living

relative to the US than indicated by their relative consumption prices (second panel). Only

Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom (GBR) have



21
   Japan exceeds the United States in the raw barcode count across all sectors shown in Table 2, while Germany and
South Korea each exceed the US in specific sectors. Our overall measure of product variety is computed as
     i
[( M s / s
         ii
            ) / ( M sj / sjj )] , then including its negative exponent as in (16) and weighting across sectors. Figure 5
shows that the Netherland has greater overall variety than the US using barcode counts, as does Germany when
using the square root of the firm counts, due to their high openness (which increases effective import variety).
                                                         29


Figure 7. Cost of living versus the traded consumption price level ­ firm count data




Notes: The left-hand figure plots log  versus log       
                                                           for the 46 countries in our analysis with firm count data,
                                                      
with log  as defined in equation (14) and log  computed as the price level of traded consumption, with
  and  normalized to USA=1. The right-hand figure plots log /   versus log   . Countries in
blue are covered by firm count data and barcode data, while observations in red are only in the firm count data.

Figure 8. Cost of Living versus the Traded Consumption Price Level ­ barcode data




Notes: The left-hand figure plots log  versus log  
                                                    for the 23 countries in our analysis with barcode data,
                                                  
with log  as defined in equation (14) and log  computed as the price level of traded consumption, with
  and  normalized to USA=1. The right-hand figure plots log /   versus log   .
                                                  30


a cost of living relative to the US that is lower than their traded consumption price level. A

collection of other countries have relative costs of living that are insignificantly different from

their relative consumption prices, based on the 95% confidence intervals for the cost of living

shown in the second panel. This group includes China and Russia, and several countries in

Europe: Austria, Czech Republic, France, Hungary, and nearly Germany. Figure 8 shows the

results based on the barcode data for the 24 countries with available data. Here, too, most

countries have a higher cost of living relative to the US than their consumption price level, with

only the Netherlands at a lower level; while China, France, Germany and the United

Kingdom are insignificantly different in the two measures.

       To further examine the relationship between CoLTi and PC Ti and to understand how the

different factors contribute to the their difference, we perform a decomposition analysis similar

to Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz (2004). We take the difference between the "true" cost of living

in (16) and the price of consumption,

                                ln CoLTi  ln CoLTi - ln PC Ti ,                                 (19)

corresponding to the second panels in Figures 7 and 8. The log of all the terms appearing on the

                                   i
first line of (16) are denoted by Z1 , which we refer to as "trade costs plus the terms of trade",

since they include tariffs (in the import prices), domestic trade costs (when sXi  s
                                                                                   Mi
                                                                                      ) and the

                                                                                         i
terms of trade. The other terms appearing on the second line of (16) are denoted by ln Z k ,

k = 2,3, 4, which refer to inverse openness, variety, and the scale effect of population We define

 ln Z k
      i
         ln Z k
              i
                - ln PC Ti as the difference with the consumption price level, and we run the

regressions:
                                ln Z
                                   = i
                                     k  0k +  k  ln CoLi , k = 1,..., 4.                        (20)
                                                         31


Table 4. Difference between the cost of living and the traded consumption price level

                                                 (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)
                                                 No           Firm      Barcode        Firm       Barcode
                                               variety        count      count         count       count
 Explanatory variable: ln(CoLTi/PCTi)
 Dependent variables:
 Trade costs and terms of trade                 0.067          0.097     0.124         0.164        0.209
                                               (0.053)        (0.046)   (0.088)       (0.044)      (0.095)
 Inverse openness                               0.933          0.559     0.624         0.312        0.420
                                               (0.053)        (0.085)   (0.133)       (0.120)      (0.225)
 Variety                                                       0.343     0.252         0.369        0.244
                                                              (0.050)   (0.062)       (0.024)      (0.038)
 Scale                                                                                 0.154        0.128
                                                                                      (0.068)      (0.115)
 Number of countries                              47            46         24            46           24
Note: Each line in the table corresponds to a  coefficient estimated from equation (20). Robust standard errors are
in parentheses.


         These regressions aim to account for the cross-country variation in the difference between

the relative cost of living and the consumption price level. Table 4 presents the results. By

construction, the regression coefficients shown in Table 4 sum to unity, so we can interpret them

as the portion of the variation in the cost-of-living difference relative to the consumption prices,

 ln CoLTi  ln CoLTi - ln PC Ti , that is explained by the dependent variable in each regression. We

focus on the results shown in column (4), representing the broadest sample of countries using

firm counts, though the results in column (5) are very similar using barcode counts.

         Trade costs and the terms of trade combined have a positive and significant regression

coefficient of 0.29 as shown in the first row of Table 4, column (4), indicating that 29% of the

variation in the cost-of living as compared to relative consumptions price is explained by those

terms. Inverse openness accounts for 24% of the cost-of-living difference, as shown in the

second row. The variety and scale terms account for 33% and 14%, respectively, of the variation
                                                 32


in the cost-of-living index as compared to the consumption prices. Summing these two terms, we

see that the combined effect of product variety and scale account for nearly one-half (47%) of the

cost-of-living differences across countries, as compared to their consumption prices. That impact

of product variety is rather large, and it suggests that conventional price indexes could miss this

source of welfare variation across countries. To explore this issue further, we convert our results

for the cost of living into real consumption and compare them to the alternative measure of real

consumption developed by Jones and Klenow (2016).


4.3 Comparison with Jones-Klenow

       Jones and Klenow (2016) propose a measure of welfare across nations that is meant to be

much more inclusive that consumption, by also incorporating leisure, mortality and inequality

into a single consumption-equivalent measure. Our analysis, in contrast, is a more restrictive

measure of welfare from the Melitz model that incorporates openness and product variety.

Despite the differences in our approaches, it is worth asking whether the cross-country variation

in welfare ­ as compared to a conventional measure of real consumption ­ has any similarity in

their analysis and in ours. We shall find that they do.

       Up until now, our paper has relied on sectors of tradable goods in household consumption

(see Table 1). For a broader comparison, in particular to Jones and Klenow (2016), we now

consider including non-traded consumption, for which countries differ substantially in who pays

for these products. For healthcare and education, in particular, how much of these are purchased

directly by consumers and how much by the government varies considerably across countries.

Yet regardless of who pays for them--be it households, non-profit organizations or the

government--these services are consumed. We thus use a measure of total consumption that

includes these services, corresponding to the statistical concept of "actual individual
                                                            33


consumption" (AIC). 22

        We rely on ICP data to calculate the price level of nontraded consumption that is

included in AIC, denoted by PC Ni in country i. We add these nontraded prices into our previous

calculation of the cost of living for traded goods consumption:
                                                          Ti                Ni
                                    CoL  CoLTi
                                            i                     PC Ni   
                                                                                    ,                      (21)
                                    CoL j  CoL
                                              Tj         
                                                         
                                                                  PC Nj
                                                                 
                                                                          
                                                                          

where the Sato-Vartia weights satisfy  Ti +  Ni =
                                                1 (see the Appendix). Likewise the price level
of AIC, inclusive of the nontraded services, is constructed as:

                                                        Ti                 Ni
                                    PC  i PC Ti               PC Ni   
                                                                                .                          (22)
                                    PC j  PC
                                             Tj       
                                                      
                                                              PC Nj
                                                             
                                                                      
                                                                      
We are adding the same nontraded prices to both the cost of living and to the price of

consumption goods, so that procedure will tend to reduce any differences in these two measures.

Our final step is to use (21) or (22) to deflate nominal AIC in US$ for each country relative to

the United States, to obtain theory-based real consumption (or welfare) as compared to actual

real consumption using ICP prices.

        The results when using the square root of the firm count to measure product variety are

shown in Figure 9, where our theory-based real consumption measured relative to actual

consumption is shown in the first panel, and the Jones-Klenow measure of welfare relative to

actual real consumption for a matching set of countries is shown in the second panel. 23 The most

obvious difference between the two panels is in the vertical scale of each: welfare in Jones and

Klenow differs by ±20% of actual real consumption for all countries except Russia and South


22
   We only exclude net purchases of households abroad, which cannot be allocated to a type of products. In their
macro-level comparison Jones and Klenow (2016) focus on an even broader measure of consumption that also
includes expenditure on collective goods and services. Collective services make up 10­12 percent of the Jones-
Klenow consumption measure for most of our set of countries.
23
   Not included are Hungary, Romania and Taiwan, which were not covered by Jones and Klenow (2016).
                                                           34


Figure 9. Ratio of theory-based real consumption to actual real consumption using ICP
prices, versus actual real consumption ­ firm count data




Notes: The left-hand figure plots the log of the ratio of theory-based real consumption (using firm counts) to real
consumption (based on ICP prices), against log real consumption, for 43 countries in our sample. The right-hand
panel plots the log of ratio of welfare from Jones and Klenow (2016) to actual real consumption (based on ICP
prices), against log real consumption, for the matching 43 countries in their sample.



Korea, whereas our measure of real consumption differs by only ±5% from actual real

consumption in all countries except Cyprus and Malta. The smaller scale in our case is not

surprisingly in view of the more limited scope of our welfare measure. 24 In other respects,

however, there are some similarities in the results.

         Following countries from the left to the right, India (IND) and China appear first

and have theory-based real consumption from the Melitz model that is very close to actual real

consumption. 25 Similarly, welfare in these countries is not too far below actual consumption for


24
    Recall that Figure 9 is computed with the high elasticities ( , ) = (6.5, 8.3). In Appendix Figure A9 we
instead use the low estimates ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1), and in that case theory-based real consumption in the first
panel is between ±10% of actual real consumption for all countries (including Cyprus and Malta), or still less
than one-half of the range for Jones-Klenow welfare.
25
   India had a higher cost of living relative to the US than its traded consumption price level in Figure 7. In Figure 9,
first panel, India has theory-based consumption very close to actual real consumption because of its high share of
nontraded goods, which move (20) and (21) closer together.
                                                       35


Jones and Klenow. As we move to the right, welfare relative to actual consumption falls for most

countries in our sample and also for Jones-Klenow, and then this ratio rises again. The key

difference between the two panels in Figure 9 is that welfare relative to the US in nearly all the

Western European countries exceeds real consumption for Jones and Klenow; whereas in our

case, welfare is higher only for Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the United

Kingdom. In addition, for much the same group of European nations with relative costs of living

similar to their relative consumption prices in Figure 7 (including Austria, Czech Republic and

France), welfare from the Melitz model is insignificantly different from actual real consumption.

For these combined European nations along with China, India and Russia, welfare is thus above

or comparable to actual real consumption relative to the US in our analysis; but for all other

countries, welfare relative to the US falls short of actual real consumption, as also occurs for a

reduced set of middle-income countries in Jones and Klenow.


5. Conclusions

        The monopolistic competition model suggests that product variety is an important

determinant of welfare. There are two challenges with evaluating this hypothesis. First, the most

disaggregate data for measuring product variety ­ which is barcode data ­ is not typically

available across multiple countries with the same classification system. When it is available, as

for Mexico and the United States (Argente, Hsieh, and Lee, 2020), then it becomes possible to

construct exact consumer price indexes as in Feenstra (1994). 26 In the absence of a common

classification system across many countries, we have relied on the count of barcode items from

micro-data in the Billion Prices Project; and when those data are not available, on the simple


26
  Note however, that the number of barcodes that is found in both countries is 8.5 percent of the number of total
Mexican barcodes and 1.5 percent of US barcodes, so even in this case the number of identical barcodes between the
countries is quite limited and could understate the number of identical products.
                                                  36


count of firms as a proxy for variety.

           Second, literature on the gains from trade under monopolistic competition (Arkolakis,

Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare, 2012) has emphasized the gains within a country when it is

shocked by a change in foreign variables, such as trade costs. To evaluate welfare between

countries, however, we also need to include shocks to domestic variables, and that is what we

have incorporated here. As country size, fixed costs or productivities change, we find that

product variety responds endogenously. We develop a parsimonious expression for the "true"

costs of living in the Melitz (2003) model that incorporates changes to all these variables, and

therefore changes in product variety. We model fixed costs by relying on a simplified version of

Arkolakis (2010), where such costs depend on the mass of customers. So our model includes a

scale effect of population on variety, with an estimated elasticity of about 0.2. Because we

compare the theoretical cost of living with the price level of consumption as measured from ICP

data, we also end up comparing the openness of a country (which lowers the theoretical cost of

living) with the terms of trade (which lowers the price level of consumption relative to the price

of output). Differences between openness and the terms of trade lead to commensurate

differences between the cost of living and the consumption price level.

           Before adjusting for product variety, roughly an equal number of countries in our sample

have a cost of living from the Melitz model that is above versus below their consumption price

relative to the US. Those differences are principally explained by the countries' openness as

compared to their terms of trade. The United States, however, has higher product variety than

nearly all other countries. 27 Once we incorporate variety, then, the relative cost of living is raised

in many countries, and we find that only five countries ­ Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg,



27
     See note 21.
                                                37


Netherlands and the United Kingdom ­ have a cost of living relative to the US that is

significantly below its consumption price, while China, France and Russia are very close. There

is a collection of other European countries ­ including Austria, Czech Republic, Germany and

Hungary ­ whose relative costs of living are not significantly different from their relative

consumption prices.

       We have also used cost of living and consumption price levels to compute theoretical

measure of welfare and real actual individual consumption (AIC) across countries. By

construction, our theoretical measure of welfare varies inversely with the theoretical cost of

living: Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, Netherlands and the United Kingdom now have

welfare relative to the US above actual consumption, while a further group of European

countries, along with China, India, and Russia, have relative welfare that is not substantially

different from actual consumption; the remaining set of countries have lower relative welfare.

That pattern is more pronounced in Jones and Klenow (2016), where nearly all Western

European countries have welfare relative to the US exceeding real actual consumption, whereas a

reduced set of middle-income countries have lower welfare. It is surprisingly but perhaps

reassuring that our narrow focus on the determinants of welfare in the Melitz model leads to a

pattern of welfare across countries that has similarities to Jones and Klenow (2016), even though

they focus on much broader determinants of welfare.
                                              38


References

Argente, David, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Munseob Lee. 2020. "Measuring the Cost of Living in
       Mexico and the US," NBER Working Paper 27806,

Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2012. "New Trade Models,
      Same Old Gains?" American Economic Review 102(1): 94-130.

Arkolakis, Costas. 2010. "Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
      International Trade," Journal of Political Economy, 118(8): 1151 ­ 1199.

Cavallo, Alberto, W. Erwin Diewert, Robert Inklaar, and Marcel P. Timmer. 2018. "Using
       Online Prices for Measuring Real Consumption across Countries," American Economic
       Review, 108, May, 483-487.

Chaney, Thomas. 2008. "Distorted Gravity: the Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
      Trade," American Economic Review 98(4): September, 1707-1721.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein. 2006. "Globalization and the Gains from Product
       Variety." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), May, 541-585.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein. 2008. "Understanding International Price Differences
       Using Barcode Data." NBER Working Paper 14017.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum. 2002. "Technology, Geography and Trade." Econometrica,
       70(7): September, 1741-1780.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz. 2004. "Dissecting Trade: Firms,
       Industries, and Export Destinations." American Economic Review, 94(2): May, 150-154.

Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum and Francis Kramarz. 2011. "An Anatomy of International
       Trade: Evidence from French Firms." Econometrica, 79(5): 1453­98.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1994. "New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,"
       American Economic Review, 84(1): March, 157-177

Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Inklaar and Marcel Timmer. 2015. "The Next Generation of the
       Penn World Table," American Economic Review, 105(10): October, 3150-3182.

Feenstra, Robert C., Mingzhi Xu and Alexis Antoniades. 2020. "What is the Price of Tea in
       China? Towards the Relative Cost of Living in Chinese and US Cities," The Economic
       Journal, 130(632), November, 2438­2467.

Handbury, Jessie and David E. Weinstein. 2015. "Goods Prices and Availability in Cities."
      Review of Economic Studies, 82(1): 258-296.
                                             39


Jones, Charles I. and Peter J. Klenow. 2016. "Beyond GDP? Welfare across Countries and
       Time." American Economic Review, 106(9): 2426-2457.

Kathuria, Sanjay, Arti Grover, Viviana Maria Eugenia Perego, Aaditya Mattoo, and Pritam
       Banerjee. 2019. Unleashing E-Commerce for South Asian Integration. The World Bank.

Melitz, Marc. 2003. "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
        Industry Productivity." Econometrica, 71(6): November, 1695-1725.

Redding, Stephen J. and David Weinstein. 2020. "Measuring Aggregate Price Indexes with Taste
   Shocks: Theory and Evidence for CES Preferences." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(1):
   503-560.

Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh. 2014. "Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains from
   Trade," NBER Working Paper 20495.

UNCTAD 2017. "B2C E-Commerce Index 2017." UNCTAD Technical Notes on ICT for
    Development, 2017. https://unctad.org/system/files/official-
    document/tn_unctad_ict4d09_en.pdf.

World Bank. 2014. Purchasing Power Parities and the Real Size of World Economies. A
      Comprehensive report of the 2011 International Comparison Program. World Bank:
      Washington: DC.
                                                   40


        Product Variety, the Cost of Living and Welfare Across Countries

                               Online Appendix: Not for Publication

Proof of Proposition 1:

        The final equality in (9) uses M e  L / f e . To prove this condition, we complete the

description of the model in part (a) below, and then we prove Proposition 1 in part (b).

a)      With CES demand using the consumer price pd ( ) = [ / ( ­ 1)] ( w d /  ), and total home

expenditure of X, the home demand for a firm with productivity  is:

                                                             -
                                          X       w d  
                                 yd ( ) = 1-       ( - 1)        .
                                         P                

Multiplying by price minus variable cost, pd ( ) - ( w d /  ) =
                                                              [1 / ( ­ 1)] ( w d /  ), profits in
the home market are,
                                 1-
                      X  w          -1
             = d ( )          d
                                    - wf d ,
                         P( - 1)  
                                    
                           Bd
where f d are the fixed costs that use labor in the domestic market. It follows that the zero-

cutoff-profit (ZCP) condition in the domestic market is:

                                                                                   -1
                        -1                       wf d wf d    w d 
                                                  -1
             ) Bd d
         d (d=               - wf= 0           = =                                      ,           (A1)
                                                         X  P ( - 1) 
                                 d             d
                                                 Bd

which also appears as condition (7) in the main text.

        With iceberg costs of exporting  x , export prices are px ( ) = [ / ( ­ 1)] ( w x /  ) and so

demand for the home firm with productivity  is:
                                                             -
                                           X*     w x 
                                 y x ( ) = *1-     ( - 1)        .
                                          P               

Multiplying by price minus variable cost, px ( ) - ( w x /  ) =
                                                              [1 / ( ­ 1)] ( w x /  ), profits in

the export market are,
                                                            41


                             X *  w     1-
                                           -1
                    = x ( )    *     x
                                           - wf x ,
                               P ( - 1)  
                                           
                                  Bx

        where f x are the fixed costs for exporting. It follows that the zero-cutoff-profit condition

        in the export market is:
                                                                                          -1
                                -1                     -1        wf x wf x     w x 
                      ) Bx x
                 x ( x=              - wf= 0          =          =             *               .        (A2)
                                                                               P ( - 1) 
                                         x            x
                                                                 Bx    X*
                Total employment at home for domestic and export sales equals:

                                                                    
                            d yd ( )       g ( )                   y ( )       g ( )
          M e fe + M d
         L=                    
                                     + fd 
                                           [1 - G (   )]
                                                         d + M x   x x
                                                                     
                                                                         + fx 
                                                                               [1 - G (   )]
                                                                                             d .        (A3)
                         d                          d           x                       x


        Notice that we have multiplied the quantity delivered to home and foreign consumers by their

        respective iceberg costs,  d and  x , to obtain the quantity produced by the firm. Multiply the

        entire expression by wages w, and then multiply and divide the production terms by  / ( - 1)

                   =
        to obtain prices pd ( ) ( d /  )[ / ( - 1)]
                                                  = and px ( ) ( x /  )[ / ( - 1)] , so that:


                                                   -1                                    px ( ) y x ( ) g ( ) 
                                                                                        
                                                           pd ( ) yd ( ) g ( )
         wL= w ( M e f e + M d f d + M x f x ) +       d
                                                        M                      d  + M x                      d 
                                                        d
                                                              [1 - G ( d )]            x
                                                                                            [1 - G  ( x )]
                                                                                                               
                                                  -1 
           = w ( M e fe + M d f d + M x f x ) +       wL,
                                                  

        where the bracketed term on the first line is total revenue earned by firms. With zero expected

        profits, total revenue equals the payment to labor wL, so then L=  ( M e f e + M d f d + M x f x ) is

        obtained. It follows that the full employment condition (A3) is simplified as:

                                                                       
   -1         d yd ( )  g ( )             y ( )  g ( )
=      L Md                     d + M x   x x                  d .
                                             
                                                                                                        (A4)
           d 
                   [1 - G (d )]        x         [1 - G ( x )]

                        =
        CES demand with prices pd ( ) ( d /  )[ / ( - 1)] implies that yd ( ) = ( / d ) yd (d ) .
                                                     42


Using the Pareto distribution for productivity, the first integral in (A4) is then:

                                                                  
           d yd ( )  g ( )         y ( )         g ( )
                    
                [1 - G (d )]
                             d =  d d d  
                                          d  [1 - G (d )]
                                                          d
        d                       d
                                                        -1
                               d yd (d )                      - -1
                            =
                                  d                          (d ) -
                                                                    d
                                         d  d 

                                                                   - -1 
                              y ( )            
                            = d d d            
                                d   ( -  - 1)  d 
                                                                      d

                                    ( - 1)
                            = fd             ,
                                   ( -  + 1)

where the last line uses  d yd (d ) / =
                                      d ( - 1) f d , as follows from (A1). Likewise we have

 x y x ( x ) / =
               x ( - 1) f x from (A2), and so the second integral in (A4) is evaluated as:

                        
                           x y x ( )  g ( )            ( - 1)
                        
                                     
                                [1 - G ( x )]
                                              d = f x
                                                      ( -  + 1)
                                                                .
                        x


Substituting these back into (A4) we arrive at:

                                        
               =L                              ( M d fd + M x f x ) .
                                     ( -  + 1)

Using L=  ( M e f e + M d f d + M x f x ) we obtain M
                                                    = e L( - 1) /  f e , so that M e  L / f e .

b) Now completing the proof of Proposition 1, from (6) we have:

                                                 1           -1
                        w / P  M d
                                  / d   -1   d
                                                d .
                             =                                                                (A5)
                        w / P  M d / d    d   d 

The final ratio on the right of (A5) is solved using (9) as,

                                                 -1/                 -1/
                                 A  d
                                d                       X  / wL 
                                  =                                        ,                  (A6)
                                d A  d                  X / wL 

         / f e = f d / f e from Assumption 1. Substituting (A6) into (A5), we obtain (10).
where f d
                                                    43


          Under Assumption 1' and (8), the final term in (10) becomes:

                        1             1-              -
                                                          1                  1-         -
                                                                                            1
          -
 X  / wL    X  / w    X  / wf d    X  / w    M d
                                                / d                                         
=
            =                                                                                   .   (A7)
 X / wL      X /w     X / wf d     X /w      M d / d 

   We can use (A7) to solve for product variety as in (12). To obtain real wages, we use (12) to

   solve for ( X  / wL) / ( X / wL) and substitute that into (10) to obtain (11). QED

   Sato-Vartia weights:

          We consider the general case of a nested CES function, where the expenditure across

   traded goods is aggregated using a CES function, the expenditure across the various traded

   sectors is aggregated using a second CES function, and then nontraded goods included within

   "actual individual consumption" (AIC) are added with a third CES function.

          At the lowest level, the traded goods price index PsTi is obtained from the prices of goods

   purchased from home, PsTii , and those that are purchased from abroad, PsTji , j  i :

                                                                1/(1- )
               C b j ( PTji )1- 
                j =1 s s
        =PsTi                                                             ,  > 1.                   (A8)
                                

   This price index is comparable to what appears in (1) in our model, where the mass of products

   from each country in (1) is captured above by the (constant) parameter bsj . Above this level, the

   price index of traded goods PTi for country i is given by:

                                                               1/(1- )
           PTi        bs ( PsTi )1- 
                 S
          =                                                              ,  > 0.
                 s =1               

   Finally, we denote the price of nontraded goods included in AIC by P Ni , which could be an

   aggregate over multiple sectors, and construct the overall price index in country i as:

                                                              1/(1- )
                               bN
                            Pi =i
                                  ( P Ni )1- + bT
                                                i
                                                  ( PTi )1-              ,  > 0.
                                                            
                                                                 44


       Choose country j (i.e. the United States) as the base country. Then the traded goods price

index in country i relative to j can be measured by the Sato-Vartia price index:

                                                                  s
                                                                  Ti
                                     P   Ti        S      PsTi   
                                              =                        ,                              (A9)
                                     PTj                  PTj    
                                                  s =1    s      

                                        s=1sTi = 1 , are defined over the expenditure shares on traded
                                              S
where the Sato-Vartia weights,

goods. Since we have already used the variable X to denote expenditures and s to denote sectors,

                                                s  Xs / X
we will use x to denote expenditure shares. So xTi  Ti    Ti
                                                             is the share of expenditure on

traded goods of sector s relative to total expenditure, X Ti =  s =1 X s
                                                                       Ti            S
                                                                          , in country i . Then the

Sato-Vartia weights used in (A9) are:

                                         Ti
                                      ( xs  - xs
                                               Tj
                                                  )              S        ( xsTi
                                                                                 - xs
                                                                                    Tj
                                                                                       ) 
                         s                                       
                         Ti
                                                                                       Tj 
                                                                                            .
                                         s - ln xs )
                                    (ln xTi                                      -
                                                 Tj                          Ti
                                                                  s =1 (ln  xs     ln xs ) 

These are the Sato-Vartia weights that appear in (14), (15) and (16) in the main text.

       When we include the nontraded services that are part of AIC, the overall price index is:

                                                         s
                                                         Ti
                                                                           sNi
                                     P  PTi
                                         i                     P Ni    
                                       =  Tj                   Nj                ,                    (A10)
                                     Pj  P
                                                         
                                                         
                                                              P
                                                              
                                                                       
                                                                       

where total AIC expenditure in country i is X i  ( X Ti + X Ni ) with the expenditure shares

xTi  X Ti / X i and x  X / X , and so the Sato-Vartia weights used in (A10) are:
                     Ni Ni  i



                 ( xTi - xTj )          ( xTi - xTj )           ( x Ni - x Nj ) 
         Ti                                                +                        , sNi  1 - s
                                                                                               Ti
                                                                                                  .
               (ln xTi - ln xTj )       (ln xTi
                                                - ln xTj
                                                         )   (ln  x Ni
                                                                       - ln x Nj
                                                                                 ) 

These weights appear in (21) and (22) in the main text.

Output prices:

       To construct a measure of output prices used in (14), we use the above equations and also
                                                             45


follow the framework of Inklaar and Timmer (2014). The price index PsTi in (A8) combines

domestically produced goods, with price PsTii and imports with price PsTji for j  i. We define

PsMi as the import price index,
                                                                           1/(1- )
                                      PsMi =         j Tji 1- 
                                               j i bs ( Ps )                         ,
                                             
so that the overall traded goods price index in sector s can be constructed as,

                                                         1-s
                                                           Mi
                                                                         s
                                                                         Mi
                                       PsTi       PTii           PsMi   
                                               =  sTjj                           ,
                                       PsTj      P               P Mj   
                                                  s              s      

where xTii  X Tii / X Ti and x Mi   j i X Tji / X Ti are the expenditure shares on domestic goods

and imports, respectively, and the Sato-Vartia weights on imports is:

                                  Mi
                               ( xs  - xs
                                        Mj
                                           )          ( xTji - xTjj )        Mi
                                                                          ( xs  - x Mj ) 
                    s
                    Mi
                                                           s    s       +                 .                      (A11)
                                  Mi
                             (ln xs  - ln xs
                                           Mj
                                              )       (ln xs - ln xs ) (ln x - ln x ) 
                                                           Tii      Tjj      Mi        Mj
                                                                                          

Notice that from (A11) we construct the domestic price of tradable goods as:

                                                         1/(1-s
                                                              Mi
                                                                 )              -s
                                                                                 Mi
                                                                                    /(1-s
                                                                                        Mi
                                                                                           )
                                       PsTii      PTi                 PsMi   
                                               =  sTj                                          .                 (A12)
                                       PsTjj     P                    P Mj   
                                                  s                   s      

All these prices are inclusive of the domestic trade costs  s
                                                            ii
                                                               needed to deliver a good to

consumers, while import prices also include foreign trade costs .  sji                    28          Tii  PTii /  ii
                                                                                               We let Ps    s      s

denote the prices net of the domestic trade costs ­ or what is called a "basic" price ­ which is the

price that home producers face for domestic sales. Home firms also export, so the total value of

home production YsTi on tradable goods equals:


                             YsTi  PsYi Qs
                                         Yi   Tii QTii + P
                                            = P           Xi Q Xi = ( X Ti /  ii ) + P
                                                                                      Xi Q Xi ,
                                               s   s      s   s         s     s       s   s




28
     For simplicity, we assume that domestic trade costs are identical for domestically produced and imported goods.
                                                                     46


       Xi is the export price index, the Q's denote the associated quantities, and sales to home
where Ps

                                Tii QTii = X Tii /  ii . The export price index is defined using f.o.b.
consumers net of trade costs is Ps   s       s      s

(free-on-board) prices net of any trade costs (i.e. net of transport costs and tariffs),

                                                                                             1/(1- )
                                              Xi =   bi ( PTij /  ij )1- 
                                             P                                                         .
                                              s     j i s s       s      

        Assuming a CES production function for domestic consumption and exports, the output

price is constructed as a Sato-Vartia index:

                                                                 1-sXi           sXi
                                             PsYi     PTii               P Xi   
                                                    =  sTjj               s
                                                                                         ,                   (A13)
                                             PsYj     P                  P Xj   
                                                       s                  s     

       s  ( X s /  s ) / Ys and y  1 - ys are the production shares on domestic goods
where yTii    Tii  ii      Ti    Xi     Tii


and exports, respectively, and the associated Sato-Vartia weight on exports is:

                                 ( ysXi - ysXj )              ( yTii
                                                                   s - ys )
                                                                         Tjj
                                                                                   ( ysXi - ysXj ) 
                 sXi                                                             +               Xj 
                                                                                                     .       (A14)
                              (ln ysXi - ln ysXj )            (ln ys - ln ys ) (ln ys - ln ys ) 
                                                             
                                                                   Tii       Tjj       Xi
                                                                                                    

Substituting (A12) into (A13) we obtain the price of output:

                                     1-sXi             sXi
        PsYi     PTii /  s
                         ii                  P Xi     
               = s                            s
                                                      
        PsYj     PTjj /  jj                  P Xj     
                 s      s                     s       
                             (1-sXi )                                       Mi (1- Xi )
                                                                            s
                                          ii  - (1-s )   Mi ii  -                                      sXi
                                                   Xi                             s
                   PsTi         Mi
                             (1-s )      s              Ps  s                    Mi )
                                                                              (1-s           P Xi      
               =                          jj 
                                                                                                       
                                                                                              s
                                                                                                             (A15)
                                                       P Mj ii                               P Xj      
                   PsTj                  s              s s                                   s        
                                     (1-sXi )                              Mi (1- Xi )
                                                                           s
                                                     Xi s              -
                                                         Xi                      s
                   PsTi /  sii          Mi
                                     (1-s )        Ps              Mi 
                                                                  P            Mi )
                                                                            (1-s
               =                                                   s
                                                                                         ,
                   PsTj /  sjj                      Xj             Mj 
                                                   Ps             Ps 

                                      Tii  PTii /  ii in (A13), the second line comes from
where the first line comes from using Ps    s      s

                              Mi  P Mi /  ii to denote the c.i.f. and tariff-inclusive prices of
substituting (A12) and using Ps    s      s

imports, but net of domestic trade costs, and the third line from simplification.
                                                        47


        The price indexes that we have constructed so far are the theoretically correct CES

indexes. To relate these to the price level that we construct from ICP and PWT data, let us start

with (A10). The price ratio on the left is what we measure as the price level of consumption for

traded goods, so we replace PsTi / PsTj with PCs
                                               Ti     Tj
                                                  / PCs  . This price level of consumption also

appears first on the second and third lines of (A13). In that case, the price of output PsYi / PsYj

appearing on the left is replaced with PYsTi / PYsTj . Finally, the export and import prices

 Xi / P
P              Mi / P
       Xj and P      Mj are measured by the quality-adjusted export and imports prices from
 s     s       s     s

Feenstra and Romalis (2014), for j=USA.

        To implement the resulting equations which appears as (15) and (16) in the main text, we

draw on the World Input-Output Tables (Timmer et al., 2015, 2016) for calculating the Sato-

Vartia weights for import and export shares, as shown in (A11) and (A14). For Colombia, Chile,

New Zealand and South Africa, we use the data from the OECD TiVA tables. The traded

consumption prices are the same as discussed in the main text, aggregated from the (revised) ICP

2011 PPPs and consumption expenditure data using GEKS indexes. The import and export price

data are organized by SITC rev. 2, so first we use the concordance to the Broad Economic

Category (BEC-4) classification to select only traded products consumed by households. 29

Second, we use the concordance between 4-digit SITC rev. 2 and 3-digit ISIC rev. 2 constructed

by Marc Muendler, 30 and bridge that to ISIC rev. 4, the industry classification used in WIOD and

OECD TiVA. We aggregate to ISIC rev. 4 industries using export values from Comtrade and

GEKS indexes. In the final step, we use export values by ISIC rev. 4 industry from WIOD and



29
   We select food and beverages, mainly for household consumption, primary (BEC code 112) and processed (122);
processed fuels and lubricants (32), transport equipment, passenger motor cars (51) and consumption goods (6). This
selection means that products used by industry, as supplies or capital goods, are omitted.
30
   https://econweb.ucsd.edu/muendler/docs/conc/sitc2isic.pdf.
                                                         48


OECD TiVA to aggregate to the traded consumption sectors.

Other data:

         Other data used in (14) is obtained as follows. The share of consumption expenditure on

domestic products, s , is computed based on WIOD, as are the trade flows for the gravity
                   ii


equation estimation. Colombia, Chile, New Zealand and South Africa are not in WIOD, so we

use the inter-country input-output tables of OECD TiVA to compute s for those countries.
                                                                  ii


Domestic trade costs  s in sector  are measured as consumption expenditure at purchaser's
                           ii


prices divided by consumption expenditure at basic prices, which excludes the margin earned in

transportation and retail trade and excludes taxes on products, notably sales tax, VAT and excise

taxes. For most countries, we rely on the margins and tax tables (sometimes also referred to as

valuation tables) provided by Eurostat and the OECD, which report consumption at purchaser's

prices and at basic prices. For the remainder of countries, we use data from national input-output

tables, from Eurostat's Structural Business Statistics for retail trade, or WIOD to approximate

trade margins. 31 To estimate consumption taxes by sector, we use information on total taxes on

products by sector and ensure that the tax rate (taxes as a share of consumption expenditure at

purchaser's prices) does not exceed that country's indirect tax rates. 32




31
   We rely on national input-output data for China, Japan, Indonesia, New Zealand, Russia, South Africa, Taiwan;
Eurostat retail survey data for Germany, Spain and Switzerland; and WIOD data for India. The retail survey data
abstracts from transportation margins, but most transportation costs are registered as intermediate inputs rather than
as margins.
32
   Country-level indirect tax rates are from the OECD Consumption Tax Trends 2018 publication. On average across
European countries with the requisite data, only 60 percent of taxes on products are borne directly by consumers, so
scaling is important. Excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, tobacco and fuel lead to higher tax rates in the food and
transport sectors so in those sectors, the tax rate is allowed to exceed the national indirect tax rate, though not by
more than the maximum excess rate observed in other European countries. In Japan, a uniform VAT rate of 5
percent is applied to all sectors, which is increased by an additional 5.8 percent in the food and transport sectors
based on estimates of the revenue from excise taxes relative to VAT in the OECD Consumption Tax Trends 2018
publication.
                        49


Appendix Table A1. Orbis Firm Counts in 46 Countries
                                               50


            Appendix Table A2. BPP Barcode Counts by Sector in 24 Countries




       In Appendix Tables A3 and A4, we show the log values of the terms in (16) to provide a

decomposition of the ratio of the cost of living to the consumption price. Table A3 uses the firm

counts, and Table A4 use the barcode counts.
                                                          51


           Appendix Table A3. Traded consumption prices, the cost of living and a decomposition,
           Orbis firm counts

Country            ISO-code    PC     CoL       ln(CoL/PC)       Due to:
                                                                Trade costs and    Inverse   Variety        Scale
                                                                 terms of trade   openness
India                IND      0.466   0.507        0.083            0.000          0.047     0.070          -0.034
                                               [0.057, 0.100]                                          [-0.060, -0.017]
Taiwan               TWN      0.682   0.757        0.105            -0.011        -0.009     0.062           0.063
                                               [0.072, 0.154]                                           [0.031, 0.112]
Indonesia            IDN      0.727   0.858        0.165            0.024          0.017     0.118           0.006
                                               [0.162, 0.169]                                           [0.003, 0.010]
China                CHN      0.813   0.829        0.020            -0.007         0.041     0.023          -0.036
                                              [-0.008, 0.038]                                          [-0.064, -0.018]
Russia               RUS      0.838   0.846        0.009            -0.039         0.003     0.026           0.019
                                              [-0.001, 0.024]                                           [0.009, 0.033]
Mexico               MEX      0.859   0.960        0.111            0.002          0.012     0.073           0.024
                                               [0.099, 0.130]                                           [0.012, 0.043]
Poland               POL      0.874   0.965        0.099            0.038         -0.032     0.042           0.051
                                               [0.073, 0.138]                                           [0.025, 0.091]
Bulgaria             BGR      0.909   1.114        0.203            0.054         -0.022     0.080           0.091
                                               [0.156, 0.274]                                           [0.045, 0.162]
Turkey               TUR      0.911   1.013        0.106            -0.004         0.016     0.059           0.035
                                               [0.088, 0.134]                                           [0.017, 0.063]
Romania              ROU      0.927   1.083        0.155            0.024         -0.006     0.070           0.067
                                               [0.121, 0.207]                                           [0.033, 0.118]
South Africa         ZAF      0.942   1.115        0.169            0.045          0.008     0.073           0.044
                                               [0.147, 0.203]                                           [0.021, 0.077]
Hungary              HUN      0.965   1.014        0.050            0.049         -0.109     0.026           0.084
                                               [0.007, 0.115]                                           [0.041, 0.149]
United States        USA      1.000   1.000        0.000            0.000          0.000     0.000           0.000

Lithuania            LTU      1.003   1.269       0.235             0.034         -0.035     0.123         0.113
                                              [0.178, 0.322]                                           [0.056, 0.200]
Slovakia             SVK      1.031   1.184       0.139             0.054         -0.075     0.061         0.099
                                              [0.089, 0.215]                                           [0.049, 0.175]
Czechia              CZE      1.031   1.076       0.042             0.021         -0.080     0.019         0.083
                                              [0.000, 0.106]                                           [0.041, 0.146]
Croatia              HRV      1.060   1.291       0.198             0.047         -0.042     0.089         0.104
                                              [0.145, 0.278]                                           [0.052, 0.185]
                                                        52


Country          ISO-code    PC     CoL       ln(CoL/PC)          Due to:
                                                               Trade costs and    Inverse   Variety       Scale
                                                                terms of trade   openness
Chile             CHL       1.061   1.370         0.255            0.108         -0.031     0.107         0.071
                                             [0.219, 0.310]                                           [0.035, 0.125]
Estonia            EST      1.068   1.229         0.141            0.052         -0.119     0.075         0.133
                                             [0.073, 0.244]                                           [0.066, 0.236]
Latvia            LVA       1.074   1.242         0.145            0.047         -0.106     0.083         0.122
                                             [0.083, 0.239]                                           [0.060, 0.216]
Spain              ESP      1.118   1.248         0.110            0.027         -0.011     0.048         0.046
                                             [0.086, 0.145]                                           [0.023, 0.082]
South Korea       KOR       1.127   1.283         0.130            0.015          0.019     0.050         0.045
                                             [0.107, 0.164]                                           [0.022, 0.079]
Slovenia          SVN       1.130   1.365         0.189            0.046         -0.064     0.084         0.123
                                             [0.126, 0.283]                                           [0.060, 0.217]
United Kingdom    GBR       1.153   1.140        -0.011            0.013         -0.067     0.004         0.039
                                            [-0.031, 0.019]                                           [0.019, 0.068]
Portugal           PRT      1.172   1.398         0.177            0.052         -0.029     0.072         0.083
                                             [0.135, 0.240]                                           [0.041, 0.146]
Greece            GRC       1.221   1.597         0.269            0.075         -0.011     0.123         0.082
                                             [0.227, 0.332]                                           [0.040, 0.145]
Netherlands       NLD       1.232   1.012        -0.197            0.023         -0.243     -0.048        0.071
                                            [-0.233, -0.141]                                          [0.035, 0.126]
Luxembourg        LUX       1.236   1.218        -0.015            0.045         -0.274     0.057         0.156
                                            [-0.094, 0.106]                                           [0.077, 0.277]
Germany           DEU       1.238   1.282         0.034            0.016         -0.041     0.026         0.033
                                             [0.018, 0.060]                                           [0.016, 0.058]
Malta             MLT       1.240   1.766         0.354            0.091         -0.076     0.177         0.161
                                             [0.272, 0.479]                                           [0.080, 0.286]
Cyprus            CYP       1.252   1.761         0.341            0.111         -0.052     0.138         0.144
                                             [0.268, 0.453]                                           [0.071, 0.255]
France            FRA       1.264   1.269         0.004            0.016         -0.072     0.022         0.038
                                            [-0.015, 0.034]                                           [0.019, 0.068]
Belgium            BEL      1.269   1.214        -0.044            0.043         -0.152     -0.017        0.082
                                            [-0.085, 0.019]                                           [0.040, 0.145]
Italy              ITA      1.271   1.402         0.098            0.027         -0.001     0.032         0.040
                                             [0.078, 0.129]                                           [0.020, 0.072]
Austria           AUT       1.283   1.333         0.038            0.023         -0.109     0.036         0.088
                                            [-0.007, 0.106]                                           [0.043, 0.156]
                                                         53


Country           ISO-code    PC     CoL       ln(CoL/PC)          Due to:
                                                                Trade costs and    Inverse    Variety        Scale
                                                                 terms of trade   openness
New Zealand         NZL      1.303   1.624         0.220            0.023         -0.008      0.101          0.104
                                              [0.167, 0.300]                                             [0.051, 0.184]
Brazil              BRA      1.317   1.508         0.135            0.030          0.044      0.050          0.011
                                              [0.129, 0.144]                                             [0.005, 0.020]
Canada              CAN      1.389   1.483         0.066            0.036         -0.062      0.037          0.054
                                              [0.038, 0.107]                                             [0.026, 0.095]
Ireland             IRL      1.392   1.636         0.162            0.048         -0.077      0.087          0.103
                                              [0.110, 0.241]                                             [0.050, 0.182]
Finland             FIN      1.393   1.672         0.182            0.054         -0.047      0.076          0.099
                                              [0.132, 0.259]                                             [0.049, 0.175]
Sweden              SWE      1.424   1.570         0.098            0.032         -0.084      0.064          0.085
                                              [0.054, 0.163]                                             [0.042, 0.151]
Japan               JPN      1.474   1.655         0.116            0.022          0.015      0.057          0.022
                                              [0.105, 0.132]                                             [0.011, 0.038]
Australia           AUS      1.475   1.684         0.133            0.067         -0.033      0.034          0.064
                                              [0.100, 0.182]                                             [0.032, 0.114]
Switzerland         CHE      1.578   1.726         0.090            0.059         -0.100      0.042          0.090
                                              [0.045, 0.159]                                             [0.044, 0.159]
Denmark             DNK      1.597   1.427        -0.113            0.036         -0.245      -0.003         0.098
                                             [-0.163, -0.037]                                            [0.048, 0.174]
Norway              NOR      1.865   2.260         0.192            0.086         -0.071      0.076          0.101
                                              [0.141, 0.270]                                             [0.050, 0.179]


          Appendix Table A4. Traded consumption prices, the cost of living and a decomposition,
          BPP barcode counts

Country           ISO-code    PC     CoL       ln(CoL/PC)           Due to:
                                                                Trade costs and     Inverse    Variety        Scale
                                                                 terms of trade    openness
India               IND      0.466   0.515        0.100              0.000           0.047      0.086         -0.034
                                              [0.075, 0.126]                                             [-0.059, -0.008]
China               CHN      0.813   0.820        0.009             -0.007          0.041       0.012         -0.036
                                             [-0.018, 0.036]                                             [-0.063, -0.009]
Russia              RUS      0.838   0.884        0.054             -0.039          0.003       0.071          0.019
                                              [0.040, 0.068]                                              [0.005, 0.033]
Mexico              MEX      0.859   0.945        0.095              0.002          0.012       0.056          0.024
                                              [0.077, 0.113]                                              [0.006, 0.042]
Poland              POL      0.874   0.983        0.117              0.038          -0.032      0.061          0.051
                                                         54


                                             [0.079, 0.156]                                        [0.013, 0.089]
Turkey               TUR     0.911   1.016       0.109           -0.004          0.016    0.063        0.035
                                             [0.083, 0.136]                                        [0.009, 0.061]
South Africa         ZAF     0.942   1.092       0.148            0.045          0.008    0.051        0.043
                                             [0.115, 0.180]                                        [0.011, 0.076]
Columbia             COL     0.954   1.117       0.158            0.048          0.019    0.045        0.046
                                             [0.123, 0.193]                                        [0.011, 0.081]
United States        USA     1.000   1.000       0.000            0.000          0.000    0.000        0.000

Chile                CHL     1.061   1.305         0.207          0.108          -0.031   0.060        0.070
                                              [0.154, 0.259]                                       [0.017, 0.122]
Spain                ESP     1.118   1.218         0.086          0.027          -0.011   0.024        0.046
                                              [0.051, 0.120]                                       [0.011, 0.080]
South Korea         KOR      1.127   1.208         0.070          0.015          0.019    -0.009       0.044
                                              [0.036, 0.103]                                       [0.011, 0.078]
United Kingdom      GBR      1.153   1.159         0.005          0.013          -0.067   0.021        0.038
                                             [-0.024, 0.034]                                       [0.009, 0.067]
Greece              GRC      1.221   1.532         0.227          0.075          -0.011   0.082        0.081
                                              [0.166, 0.288]                                       [0.020, 0.142]
Netherlands         NLD      1.232   1.056        -0.155          0.023          -0.243   -0.005       0.071
                                             [-0.208, -0.101]                                      [0.017, 0.124]
Germany             DEU      1.238   1.238        -0.001          0.016          -0.041   -0.008       0.033
                                             [-0.025, 0.024]                                       [0.008, 0.057]
France               FRA     1.264   1.267         0.002          0.016          -0.072   0.021        0.038
                                             [-0.026, 0.031]                                       [0.009, 0.066]
Italy                ITA     1.271   1.442         0.126          0.027          -0.001   0.060        0.040
                                              [0.096, 0.156]                                       [0.010, 0.070]
New Zealand          NZL     1.303   1.532         0.161          0.023          -0.008   0.043        0.103
                                              [0.084, 0.239]                                       [0.025, 0.180]
Brazil               BRA     1.317   1.486         0.120          0.030          0.044    0.035        0.011
                                              [0.112, 0.129]                                       [0.003, 0.019]
Canada               CAN     1.389   1.473         0.059          0.036          -0.062   0.031        0.053
                                              [0.019, 0.099]                                       [0.013, 0.093]
Ireland              IRL     1.392   1.562         0.116          0.048          -0.077   0.043        0.102
                                              [0.039, 0.192]                                       [0.025, 0.178]
Japan                JPN     1.474   1.560         0.056          0.022          0.015    -0.003       0.021
                                              [0.040, 0.072]                                       [0.005, 0.037]
Australia            AUS     1.475   1.685         0.133          0.067          -0.033   0.036        0.063
                                              [0.085, 0.181]                                       [0.016, 0.111]
          Notes: Decomposition by showing the log values of the terms in (16).
                                                         55


Data Collection for the Barcode Domestic Ratio:

         Our main measure of the barcode domestic share uses data collected by freelancers in

physical stores of large retailer. The first columns in Table A5 provide details of this data

collection effort in 19 countries. In some countries we hired multiple freelancers to collect data

from several large companies. The freelancers took photos of the product labels (see example

shown in Figure A1), which we then used to monitor and validate their work. A more detailed

description of the mobile-phone app used by the freelancers can be found on Cavallo (2017).




Appendix Figure A1: Example of a Crowdsourced Product Image




.

Note: Freelancers were instructed to take a photograph of the package's country-of-origin information. In this
example taken inside a German electronics retailer, the product is made in China.
                                                56


       The crowdsourcing method makes it possible to collect country-of-origin data from many

locations, but it also limited us to a relatively small sample of about 1000 products in each

country (500 food products and 500 electronic product). As a robustness check, we were also

able to collected web-scraped data from the websites of retailers that show the country-of-origin

information for individual goods. These online estimates are only available for 9 food and 2

electronics retailers (covering 10 countries), but the product samples are much larger because

they include all goods available for sale in these companies. The last columns of Table A5 show

the number of domestic and imported varieties using this online scraped data. The barcode

domestic ratios are very similar, with a correlation 0.76 between the benchmark offline

(crowdsourced) and online estimates.

       As a final robustness check, we also estimated the domestic barcode ratio for food in the

US using Nielsen' Scanner data, shown in the last column of Table A5. Reassuringly, the

barcode domestic ratio is 0.86 with scanner data, 0.90 with online scraped data, and 0.89 with the

crowdsourced data.


Appendix References

Cavallo, Alberto. 2017. "Are Online and Offline Prices Similar? Evidence from Large Multi-
       Channel Retailers." American Economic Review 107, no. 1 : 283­303.

Inklaar, Robert and Marcel Timmer. 2014. "The Relative Price of Services." Review of Income
        and Wealth, 60(4): 727-746

Timmer, M. P., Dietzenbacher, E., Los, B., Stehrer, R. and de Vries, G. J. 2015. "An Illustrated User
   Guide to the World Input­Output Database: The Case of Global Automotive Production." Review
   of International Economics, 23: 575­605.

Timmer, M. P., Los, B., Stehrer, R. and de Vries, G. J. 2016. "An Anatomy of the Global Trade
     Slowdown based on the WIOD 2016 Release." GGDC research memorandum number 162,
     University of Groningen.
Appendix Table A5. Offline and Online Data Collection for Estimating the Share of Domestic Barcodes
                                          Mobile Phone Data Collection                                                     Online Scraped Data                             Scanner Data
                                                                             Share                                                                                            Share
                                                                            Domestic                                                                   Share Domestic        Domestic
Country     Type         Workers Retailers Barcodes Domestic Imported       Barcode             Barcode Online    Domestic Online   Imported Online        Online            (Nielsen)

AUS       Food                  1         2       482       294      188            0.61                 14,829            11,249              3,580                0.76
BRA       Food                  4         4       478       430       48            0.90                 12,293            10,392              1,901                0.85
CAN       Food                  1         2       408       230      178            0.56
CHN       Food                  2         2       517       397      120            0.77                 21,843           17,932               3,911                0.82
DEU       Food                  2         3       513       448       65            0.87                 26,808           21,157               5,651                0.79
ESP       Food                  4         5       419       280      139            0.67
FRA       Food                  4         7       472       392       80            0.83
GBR       Food                  3         5       547       426      121            0.78
GRC       Food                  3         6       585       475      110            0.81
IND       Food                  3         4       206       204        2            0.99
IRL       Food                  3         4       423       268      155            0.63                  9,219             5,926              3,293                0.64
ITA       Food                  4         3       420       374       46            0.89                  7,881             6,620              1,261                0.84
JPN       Food                  1         8       508       447       61            0.88
MEX       Food                  4         7       346       276       70            0.80
NLD       Food                  1         5       501       337      164            0.67                  5,593             1,891              3,702                0.34
POL       Food                  1         2       384       205      179            0.53
RUS       Food                  3         3       533       377      156            0.71                 21,900           12,538               9,362                0.57
TUR       Food                  2         3       513       402      111            0.78
USA       Food                  3         3       509       454       55            0.89                 23,259           21,035               2,224                0.90            0.86
AUS       Electronics           1         6      1035        15     1020            0.01                  4,474               92               4,382                0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                           57




BRA       Electronics           4         7       487       235      252            0.48
CAN       Electronics           1         3       435        44      391            0.10
CHN       Electronics           1         3       516       510        6            0.99
DEU       Electronics           3         7       502       162      340            0.32
ESP       Electronics           4         5       382        78      304            0.20
FRA       Electronics           3         5       502        53      449            0.11
GBR       Electronics           1         2       308        60      248            0.19
GRC       Electronics           3         3       411        52      359            0.13
IRL       Electronics           3         2       150        20      130            0.13
JPN       Electronics           1         4       420        66      354            0.16
MEX       Electronics           3         8       428        46      382            0.11
NLD       Electronics           1         1       505        89      416            0.18
POL       Electronics           3         3       467       158      309            0.34
RUS       Electronics           2         3       391        42      349            0.11
TUR       Electronics           5         7       445       168      277            0.38
USA       Electronics           4         6       410        97      313            0.24                  6,596             2,477              4,119                0.38
                                                         58


Appendix Figures A5, A7, A8, and A9 using low estimates ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1):

Figure A5: Variety effects by country ­ firm count versus barcode count (USA=1)




Figure A7. Cost of living versus the traded consumption price level ­ firm count data




Notes: See notes to Figure 7 in the main text, which uses the high parameter estimates ( , ) = (6.5, 8.3) to
obtain the cost of living. This Appendix Figure A7 uses the low estimates ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1).
                                                         59


Figure A8. Cost of Living versus the Traded Consumption Price Level ­ barcode data




Notes: See notes to Figure 8 in the main text, which uses the high parameter estimates ( , ) = (6.5, 8.3) to
obtain the cost of living. This Appendix Figure A8 uses the low estimates ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1).


Figure A9. Ratio of theory-based real consumption to real consumption using ICP prices,
versus real consumption ­ firm count data




Notes: See notes to Figure 9 in the main text, which uses the high parameter estimates ( , ) = (6.5, 8.3) to
obtain the theory-based real consumption. This Appendix Figure A9 uses the low estimates ( , ) = (4.4, 5.1).
