                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

                   SELECTING THE MOST EFFECTIVE NUDGE:
        EVIDENCE FROM A LARGE-SCALE EXPERIMENT ON IMMUNIZATION

                                      Abhijit Banerjee
                                   Arun G. Chandrasekhar
                                       Suresh Dalpath
                                        Esther Duflo
                                        John Floretta
                                    Matthew O. Jackson
                                       Harini Kannan
                                     Francine N. Loza
                                      Anirudh Sankar
                                      Anna Schrimpf
                                    Maheshwor Shrestha

                                     Working Paper 28726
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28726


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021

We are particularly grateful to the Haryana Department of Health and Family Welfare for taking
the lead on this intervention and allowing the evaluation to take place. Among many others, we
acknowledge the tireless support of Rajeev Arora, Amneet P. Kumar, Sonia Trikha, V.K. Bansal,
Sube Singh, and Harish Bisht. We are also grateful to Isaiah Andrews and Karl Rohe for helpful
discussions. We thank Emily Breza, Denis Chetvetrikov, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, Nargiz
Kalantarova, Shane Lubold, Tyler McCormick, Francesca Molinari, Douglas Miller, Suresh
Naidu, Eric Verhoogen, and participants at various seminars for suggestions. Financial support
from USAID DIV, 3iE, J-PAL GPI, Givewell, and NSF grant SES-2018554 is gratefully
acknowledged. Chandrasekhar is grateful to the Alfred P. Sloan foundation for support. We
thank Chitra Balasubramanian, Tanmayta Bansal, Aicha Ben Dhia, Maaike Bijker, Rajdev Brar,
Shreya Chaturvedi, Vasu Chaudhary, Shobitha Cherian, Rachna Nag Chowdhuri, Mohar Dey,
Laure Heidmann, Mridul Joshi, Sanjana Malhotra, Deepak Pradhan, Diksha Radhakrishnan,
Anoop Singh Rawat, Devinder Sharma, Vidhi Sharma, Niki Shrestha, Paul-Armand Veillon
and Meghna Yadav for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not
been peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that
accompanies official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Abhijit Banerjee, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Suresh Dalpath, Esther Duflo, John
Floretta, Matthew O. Jackson, Harini Kannan, Francine N. Loza, Anirudh Sankar,
Anna Schrimpf, and Maheshwor Shrestha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Selecting the Most Effective Nudge: Evidence from a Large-Scale Experiment on Immunization
Abhijit Banerjee, Arun G. Chandrasekhar, Suresh Dalpath, Esther Duflo, John Floretta, Matthew
O. Jackson, Harini Kannan, Francine N. Loza, Anirudh Sankar, Anna Schrimpf, and Maheshwor
Shrestha
NBER Working Paper No. 28726
April 2021
JEL No. C18,C93,D83,I15,O12,O15

                                           ABSTRACT

We evaluate a large-scale set of interventions to increase demand for immunization in Haryana,
India. The policies under consideration include the two most frequently discussed tools--
reminders and incentives--as well as an intervention inspired by the networks literature. We
cross-randomize whether (a) individuals receive SMS reminders about upcoming vaccination
drives; (b) individuals receive incentives for vaccinating their children; (c) influential individuals
(information hubs, trusted individuals, or both) are asked to act as "ambassadors" receiving
regular reminders to spread the word about immunization in their community. By taking into
account different versions (or "dosages") of each intervention, we obtain 75 unique policy
combinations. We develop a new statistical technique--a smart pooling and pruning procedure--
for finding a best policy from a large set, which also determines which policies are effective and
the effect of the best policy. We proceed in two steps. First, we use a LASSO technique to
collapse the data: we pool dosages of the same treatment if the data cannot reject that they had the
same impact, and prune policies deemed ineffective. Second, using the remaining (pooled)
policies, we estimate the effect of the best policy, accounting for the winner's curse. The key
outcomes are (i) the number of measles immunizations and (ii) the number of immunizations per
dollar spent. The policy that has the largest impact (information hubs, SMS reminders, incentives
that increase with each immunization) increases the number of immunizations by 44 % relative to
the status quo. The most cost-effective policy (information hubs, SMS reminders, no incentives)
increases the number of immunizations per dollar by 9.1%.

Abhijit Banerjee                                    Esther Duflo
Department of Economics, E52-540                    Department of Economics, E52-544
MIT                                                 MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge,                  77 Massachusetts Avenue Cambridge,
MA 02139                                            MA 02139
and NBER                                            and NBER
banerjee@mit.edu                                    eduflo@mit.edu

Arun G. Chandrasekhar                               John Floretta
Department of Economics                             J-PAL
Stanford University                                 jfloretta@povertyactionlab.org
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305                                  Matthew O. Jackson
and NBER                                            Department of Economics
arungc@stanford.edu                                 Stanford University
                                                    Stanford, CA 94305-6072
Suresh Dalpath                                      CIFAR, and also external faculty of the
Directorate of Health Services Haryana              Santa Fe Institute
Sector 6, Panchkula                                 jacksonm@stanford.edu
Haryana 134109
India
sureshdalpath@yahoo.com
Harini Kannan
J-PAL South Asia
Institute for Financial Management and Research
24 Kothari Road
Nungambakkam
Chennai, India 600 034
harini.kannan@ifmr.ac.in

Francine N. Loza
f.n.loza@gmail.com

Anirudh Sankar
Stanford Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building
579 Jane Stanford Way
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
anirudh.sankar91@gmail.com

Anna Schrimpf
Paris School of Economics
48 Boulevard Jourdan
Paris 75014
France
schrimpf@povertyactionlab.org

Maheshwor Shrestha
1818 H St, NW
MC9-256
Washington, DC 20433
United States
mshrestha1@worldbank.org
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                    1

                                        1. Introduction

   Immunization is recognized as one of the most effective and cost-effective ways to pre-
vent illness, disability, and death. Yet, worldwide, close to 20 million children every year
do not receive critical immunizations (UNICEF and WHO, 2019). Resources devoted to
routine immunization have risen substantially over the past decade (WHO, 2019). There
is mounting evidence, however, that despite efforts to make immunization more widely
available, insufficient parental demand for immunization has contributed to a stagnation
in immunization coverage. This has motivated experimentation with "nudges," such as
small incentives in cash or kind,1 symbolic social rewards,2 SMS reminders,3 and the use
of influential individuals in society or in the social network as "ambassadors."4
   There is evidence, gathered from varied contexts, that all of these strategies may
improve the take up of immunization at low cost (in some cases even reducing the cost
per immunization ). But to guide policy, we need to know which of these nudges is the
most effective (i.e., leads to the largest increase in immunization), and which is the
most cost-effective (i.e., leads to the largest increase in immunization per dollar spent).
Moreover, there may be different dosage variants within each strategy. For example
monetary incentives could be high or low, and they could also be constant or increasing
with each shot. Finally, policies may work best in tandem or counteract each other.
Hence, what we really need to know is which combination of nudges works best. In this
paper, we run an experiment and develop a methodology to answer this question.
   The most common way to compare policies is to perform meta-analyses of the litera-
ture: collect estimates from different papers, put them on a common scale, and compare
them. This is the type of exercise routinely performed by Campbell Collaborative, the
Cochrane review, and J-PAL, to name some examples. This is useful, but an issue with
this approach is that both the populations and the interventions vary across studies,
which makes it difficult to interpret any difference purely as the result of the intervention
rather than a different experimental population. Moreover, if different interventions are
tested in different contexts, identifying interactions between them is impossible. Thus,
where possible, running a single large scale experiment in a relevant context and directly
comparing different treatments, is desirable before launching a program at scale.
   However, as the number of options increases, one runs into two issues. First, there are
often a large number of possible interventions or variants of interventions and an even
larger number of interactions between them. Since sample sizes are generally limited,

1
 See Banerjee et al. (2010); Bassani et al. (2013); Wakadha et al. (2013); Johri et al. (2015); Oyo-Ita
et al. (2016); Gibson et al. (2017).
2
  See Karing (2018).
3
  See Wakadha et al. (2013); Domek et al. (2016); Uddin et al. (2016); Regan et al. (2017).
4
  See Alatas et al. (2019); Banerjee et al. (2019).
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                             2

the researchers face an awkward choice. On the one hand, they can severely restrict
the number of interventions (or combinations) that they test (McKenzie, 2019). This
presumes that the researchers a priori know which small subset of policies are likely
to have an effect, which is what they want to study in the first place. On the other
hand, they can include all unique policy combinations but then end up with very low
statistical power. In practice, what researchers often do to test multiple variants on
interventions and mixes between them, is to only report the un-interacted specifications
or pool different versions of the policies. But Muralidharan, Romero, and Wuthrich
(2019) point out that this popular method of selection can be seriously misleading, for
both conceptual and statistical reasons. Second, even if the number of policy options
is sufficiently small to be estimated in the available sample, any estimate of the "best"
policy risks being biased upwards, since it was selected for being the best (Andrews,
Kitagawa, and McCloskey, 2019).
   In this paper, we propose and implement a new approach--a smart pooling and prun-
ing procedure --to deal with these problems, under bounds on the number of combina-
tions that have an impact and on how many policies are such that intensities matter.
   First, we select candidate policies and estimate their impact. The first step is to repre-
sent the policy combinations in a manner amenable to pooling. To do so, we incorporate
information about the structure of the policies: some involve different dosages ­ or ver-
sions ­ of the same treatment, while some are fundamentally different. Only different
dosages of the same underlying intervention may be pooled. This imposes important
limitations on the possible collapsing of policies and ensures their interpretability. While
this involves careful manipulation when there are many intensities and interaction, the
intuition for this approach is simply to represent the treatment variables under the form
"any dose of treatment A" and "high dose of treatment A", and all the relevant interac-
tions, rather than "low dose of A" and "high dose of A", (assuming two possible dosages
for treatment A).
   We then use a version of LASSO to determine which variants can be pooled and
which policies are irrelevant and can, therefore, be pruned. Before applying LASSO,
we must however further transform the data, to address the issue that the candidate
treatment variables are correlated with each other. For example, the variable "any
dose of treatment A" is mechanically correlated with "high dose of treatment A." More
generally, multiple dummies will be "on" for the same observation, which introduces
correlation in the design matrix. The amount of correlation violates the condition of
irrepresentability necessary for LASSO to work (Zhao and Yu, 2006): in essence, the
correlation implies that regardless of the number of observations, there will always be a
substantial risk that LASSO picks the wrong variable.
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                    3

   Fortunately, this problem can be addressed by pre-conditioning the design matrix
using a Puffer transformation, developed in Rohe (2014) and Jia and Rohe (2015). We
show that our setting, a cross-randomized RCT with varying dosages, is one where the
Puffer transformation works especially well, since while the variables are correlated with
each other, we can prove that their correlation is sufficiently bounded. Finally, we apply
the post-LASSO procedure of Belloni and Chernozhukov (2013) to estimate the effect
of the selected policy bundles. Their results (and related literature) imply that we have
consistent estimates of this restricted set of relevant (potentially pooled) policies.
   Second, we estimate the effect of the best policy in this set. This is subject to a winner's
curse: namely, precisely because the best policy has the maximum effect relative to all
other alternatives, it is also likely to be selected as best per the data when there is a
positive random shock. Therefore, a naive estimate of the effect of a best policy will be
too large and hence an unadjusted estimator of it will be upward biased (Andrews et al.,
2019). Using a method proposed by Andrews et al. (2019), and leveraging our pruning
of the set of policies from the first stage, we correct for this bias and deliver appropriate
estimates for the best policy.
   Although our approach combines existing techniques from statistics and econometrics
for model selection and subsequent inference, the overall procedure is new and policy
relevant, and the proposed estimators enjoy the properties of Belloni and Chernozhukov
(2013) (consistency) and Andrews et al. (2019) (approximate unbiasedness) under rea-
sonable assumptions. Both the steps in our procedure are important. Smartly pooling
and pruning the various policy options aids both with estimation directly, as well as with
problems when estimating the effect of the best policy. In particular, since the winner's
curse adjustment penalizes the best policy effect more when the set of policies being
compared is larger (as the conditional expectation of the positive shock such that the
policy with the maximum effect comes out on top in the data increases in the number
of alternatives), both pooling and pruning reduce the number of policies in the horse
race and guard against over-penalizing the effect of the best policy. In particular, the
penalization can be large when the second-largest effect is close to the maximal effect,
and pooling these different dosages avoids this issue.5
   Our approach thus provides a theoretically sound method to pick the most effective
policy out of a large number of candidates without sacrificing power, without cherry-
picking and without imposing strong priors. The intention to deploy the two-step algo-
rithm, as well as the policies that could turn out to be candidates for pooling, can be
specified in a pre-analysis plan, which avoids specification search. The ultimate result
5When  a pooled policy is recommended as the best policy, one can in principle deploy any dosage among
the menu of dosages pooled together. This offers flexibility in the policy recommendation: for example,
the cheapest dosage on the menu may be chosen.
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                            4

is a reliable estimate of the impact of the most effective or cost-effective policy, which
can be conveyed to policymakers.
   Our empirical application is a large-scale experiment covering seven districts, 140
Primary Health Centers (PHCs), 2,360 villages involved in the experiment including
915 at risk for all the treatments, and 295,038 children in the resulting data base, which
we conducted in collaboration with the government of Haryana, India. For several years,
the government of Haryana had developed various strategies to make reliable supply of
immunization services available to rural areas, but the take-up of immunization remained
low.
   Part of the low demand reflects deep-seated doubts about the effectiveness of immu-
nization, its side effects, or the motives of those trying to immunize children (Sugerman
et al., 2010; Alsan, 2015; Martinez-Bravo and Stegmann, 2018). However, another part
of the low take-up, even when immunizations are free and available, reflects a combi-
nation of relative indifference, inertia, and procrastination. In surveys we conducted in
Haryana, many parents reported being in favor of immunization (in our context in rural
India, 90% believed it was beneficial and 3% believed that it was harmful). Nonetheless,
a large fraction of children received the first vaccine but did not complete the schedule,
which is consistent with high initial motivation but difficulty with following through.
We therefore experimented with nudges that have been shown to be effective in other
contexts. The goal was to find the best combination and dosage of those nudges.
   The experiment was a cross-randomized design of three main nudges: providing mon-
etary incentives, sending SMS reminders, and seeding ambassadors. The ambassadors
were either selected randomly or through a nomination process. In the latter case, a
small number of randomly selected villagers are asked to identify those members of their
village who are either particularly trusted or are information hubs for their community,
or both. To identify information hubs, we asked these respondents to name the com-
munity members best positioned to spread information most wildly. In previous work,
Banerjee et al. (2019), we have called this person a "gossip," and we have shown that
they are, indeed, effective in spreading information.
   For each of these nudges, the experiment included several variants. We varied the level
and schedule of the incentives, the number of people receiving reminders, and mode of
selecting the ambassadors, leading to a large number (75) of finely differentiated policy
bundles.
   We first prune and pool this large set of policies using our "smart" selection machinery
to identify a best policy, and then derive the winner's curse-adjusted estimate of the best
policy. For the immunization outcome, the policy set stemming from smart selection
contains four distinct policies. The best policy is that which combines three nudges:
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                           5

first, there are incentives for the child's caregiver that increase with each administered
vaccine; second, SMS reminders are sent to the caregiver about the next scheduled
vaccination; and third, the information about when an immunization camp will happen
is diffused through community ambassadors who are information hubs. Correcting for
the winner's curse, the best policy is estimated to increase the number of immunizations
by 44% (p < 0.05). We find that low and high incentives are equally effective, and high
or low level of SMS coverage are equally effective. Picking the cheapest of these options,
our data recommends information hub seeding, "low-value" (INR 250) but increasing
incentives and SMS reminders to 33% of caregivers.
   The budget-constrained policymaker may care more about the number of immuniza-
tions per dollar, a measure of cost-effectiveness, although of course, a policy maker may
be willing to pick a policy that is more expansive than the status quo per shot given,
as long as it increases immunizations, and remain cheaper, per live saved, than other
possible use of the funds. Smart pooling robustly selects one policy as more cost effec-
tive than the status quo: the one that combines either information hubs or information
hubs with SMS reminders without incentives. Accounting for winner's curse, this pol-
icy increases the number of immunizations per dollar by 9.1% (p < 0.05). Once again,
our data suggests that low and high levels of SMS coverage, as well as information and
trusted information hubs, be pooled.
   A substantive finding from this analysis is that using information hubs magnifies the
effect of other interventions. Neither incentives nor SMS reminders are selected on their
own, but are selected in combination with information diffusion via information hubs.
Conversely, the information hubs are not selected for efficacy on their own, but only when
combined with SMS reminders with or without incentives that grow with the number of
shots (we speculate some reasons why this might be the case in the Conclusion). This
underscores the danger in designing experiments that only include the un-interacted
treatments (as suggested by Muralidharan et al. (2019)) in a setting where is no strong
a priori reason to rule out interaction effects: in our setting one would have concluded
from this kind of experiment that no intervention works, when there are in fact very
effective interventions.


                 2. Context, Experimental Design, and Data

2.1. Context. This study took place in Haryana, a populous state in North India,
bordering New Delhi. In India, a child between 12 and 23 months is considered to be
fully immunized if he or she receives one dose of BCG, three doses of Oral Polio Vaccine
(OPV), three doses of DPT, and at least one dose of a measles vaccination. India is
one of the countries where immunization rates are puzzlingly low. According to the
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                           6

2015-2016 National Family Health Survey, only 62% of children were fully immunized
(NFHS, 2016). This is not because of lack of access to vaccines or health personnel. The
Universal Immunization Program (UIP) provides all vaccines free of cost to beneficiaries,
and vaccines are delivered in rural areas­even in the most remote villages. Immunization
services have made considerable progress over the past few years and are much more
reliably available than they used to be. During the course of our study we found that
the monthly scheduled immunization session was almost always run in each village.
   The central node of the UIP is the Primary Health Centre. PHCs are health facilities
that provide health services to an average of 25 rural and semi-urban villages with
about 500 households each. Under each PHC, there are approximately four sub-centres
(SCs). Vaccines are stored and transported from the PHCs to either sub-centerss or
villages on an appointed day each month, to a mobile clinic where the Auxiliary Nurse
Midwife (ANM) administers vaccines to all eligible children. A local health worker, the
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA), is meant to help map eligible households,
inform and motivate parents, and take them to the immunization session. She receives
a small fee for each shot given to a child in her village.
   Despite this elaborate infrastructure, immunization rates are particularly low in North
India, especially in Haryana. According to the District Level Household and Facility
Survey, the full immunization coverage among 12-23 months-old children in Haryana fell
from 60% in 2007-08 to 52.1% in 2012-13 (DLHS, 2013).
   In the district where we carried out the study, a baseline study revealed even lower
immunization rates (the seven districts that were selected were chosen because they
have low immunization). About 86% of the children (aged 12-23 months) had received
at least three vaccines. However, the fraction of children whose parents had reported
they received the measles vaccine (the last in the sequence) was 39%, and only 19.4% had
received the vaccine before the age of 15 months, whereas the full sequence is supposed
to be completed in one year.
   After several years focused on improving the supply of immunization services, the
government of Haryana was interested in testing out strategies to improve household
take-up of immunization, and in particular, their persistence over the course of the full
immunization schedule. With support from USAID and the Gates Foundation, they
entered into a partnership with J-PAL to test out different interventions. The final
objective was very much to pick out the best policy for a possible scale up throughout
the state.
   Our study took place in seven districts where immunization was particularly low. In
four districts, the full immunization rate in a cohort of children older than the one we
consider, was below 40%, as reported by parents (which is likely a large overestimation
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                            7

of the actual immunization rate, given that children get other kinds of shots and parents
often find it hard to distinguish between them, as noted in Banerjee et al. (2021)).
Together, the districts cover a population of more than 8 million (8,280,591) in more
than 2360 villages, served by 140 PHCs and 755 SCs. The study covered all these PHCs
and SCs, and are thus fully representative of the seven districts. Given the scale of the
project, our first step was to build a platform to keep a record of all immunizations.
Sana, an MIT-based health technology group, built a simple m-health application that
the ANMs used to register and record information about every child who attended at
least one camp in the sample villages. Children were given a unique ID which made
it possible to track them across visits and centers. Overall, 295,038 unique children
were recorded in the system, and 471,608 vaccines were administered. Data from this
administrative database is our main source of information on immunization. We discuss
the reliability of the data below. More details on the implementation are provided in
the publicly available progress report (Banerjee et al., 2021).

2.2. Interventions. The study evaluates the impact of several nudges on the demand
for immunization: small incentives, targeted reminders, and local ambassadors, all im-
plemented in 2017.

2.2.1. Incentives. When households are indifferent or have a propensity to procrastinate,
small incentives can offset any short term cost of getting to an immunization camp and
lead to a large effect on immunization. Banerjee et al. (2010) shows that small incentives
for immunization in Rajasthan (a bag of lentils for each shot and a set of plate for
completing the course) led to a large increase in the rates of immunization. Similar
results were subsequently obtained in other countries, suggesting that incentives tend
to be effective (Bassani et al., 2013; Gibson et al., 2017). In the Indian health system,
households receive incentives for a number of health behavior, including hospital delivery,
pre-natal care visits, and, in some states (like Tamil Nadu), immunization.
   The Haryana government was interested in experimenting with incentives. The in-
centives that were chosen were mobile recharges for pre-paid phones, which can be done
cheaply and reliably on a very large scale. Almost all families have at least one phone
and the overwhelming majority of the phones are pre-paid. Mobile phone credits are of
uniform quality and fixed price, which greatly simplify procurement and delivery.
   A small value of mobile phone credit was given to the caregivers each time they brought
their child to get immunized. Any child under the age of 12 months receiving one of the
five eligible shots (i.e., BCG, Penta-1, Penta-2, Penta-3, or Measles-1), was considered
eligible for the incentives intervention. Mobile recharges were delivered directly to the
caregivers' phone number that they provided at the immunization camp. Seventy (out
of the 140) PHCs were randomly selected to receive the incentives treatment.
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                           8

  In Banerjee et al. (2010), only one reward schedule was experimented with. It involved
a flat reward for each shot plus a set of plates for completing the immunization program.
This left many important policy questions pending: does the level of incentive make a
difference? If not, cheaper incentives could be used. Should the level increase with each
immunization to offset the propensity of the household to drop out later in the program?
  To answer these questions, we varied the level of incentives and whether they increased
over the course of the immunization program. The randomization was carried out within
each PHC, at the subcenter level. Depending on which sub-center the caregiver fell
under, she would either receive a:
   (1) Flat incentive, high: INR 90 ($1.34 at the 2016 exchange rate, $4.50 at PPP)
       per immunization (INR 450 total).
   (2) Sloped incentive, high: INR 50 for each of the first three immunizations, 100 for
       the fourth, 200 for the fifth (INR 450 total).
   (3) Flat incentive, low: INR 50 per payment (INR 250 total).
   (4) Sloped incentive, low: INR 10 for each of the first three immunizations, 60 for
       the fourth, 160 for the fifth (INR 250 total).
   Even the high incentive levels here are small and therefore implementable at scale, but
they still constitute a non-trivial amount for the households. The "high" incentive level
was chosen to be roughly equivalent to the level of incentive chosen in the Rajasthan
study: INR 90 was roughly the cost of a kilogram of lentils in Haryana during our study
period. The low level was meant to be half of that (rounded to INR 50 since the vendor
could not deliver recharges that were not multiple of 10). This was meaningful to the
households: INR 50 corresponds to 100 minutes of talk time on average. The provision of
incentives was linked to each vaccine. If a child missed a dose, for example Penta-1, but
then came for the next vaccine (in this case, measles), they would receive both Penta-1
and measles and get the incentives for both at once, as per the schedule described above.
   To diffuse the information on incentives, posters were provided to ANMs, who were
asked to put them up when they set up for each immunization session. The village
ASHAs and the ANMs were also supposed to inform potential beneficiaries of the in-
centive structure and amount in the relevant villages. However, there was no systematic
large scale information campaign, and it is possible that not everybody was aware of the
presence or the schedule of the incentives, particularly if they had never gone to a camp.

2.2.2. Reminders. Another frequently proposed method to increase immunization is to
send text message reminders to parents. Busy parents have limited attention and re-
minders can put the immunization back at the "top of the mind." Moreover, parents
do not necessarily understand that the last immunization in the schedule (measles) is
for a different disease and is at least as important as the previous ones. SMSs are also
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                  9

extremely cheap and easy to administer in a population with widespread access to cell
phones. Even if not everyone gets the message, the diffusion may be reinforced by social
learning, leading to even faster adoption.6
   The potential for SMS reminders is recognized in India. The Indian Academy of Pedi-
atrics rolled out a program in which parents could enroll to get reminders by providing
their cell phone number and their child's date of birth. Supported by the Government
of India, the platform planned to enroll 20 million children by the end of 2020.
   Indeed, text messages have already been shown to be effective to increase immuniza-
tion in some contexts. For example, a systematic review of five RCTs finds that reminders
for immunization increase take up on average (Mekonnen et al., 2019). However, it re-
mains true that text messages could potentially have no effect or even backfire if parents
do not understand the information provided and feel they have no one to ask (Banerjee
et al., 2018). Targeted text and voice call reminders were sent to the caregivers to re-
mind them that their child was due to receive a specific shot. To identify any potential
spillover to the rest of the network, this intervention followed a two step randomization.
First, we randomized the study sub-centers into three groups: no reminders, 33% re-
minders, and 66% reminders. Second, after their first visit to that sub-center, children's
families were randomly assigned to either get the reminder or not, with a probability
corresponding to the treatment group for their sub-centers. The children were assigned
to receive/not receive reminders on a rolling basis.
   The following text reminders were sent to the beneficiaries eligible to receive a re-
minder. In addition, to make sure that the message would reach illiterate parents, the
same message was sent through an automated voice call.

    (1) Reminders in incentive-treatment PHCs:
             "Hello! It is time to get the «name of vaccine» vaccine administered for
             your child «name». Please visit your nearest immunization camp to get this
             vaccine and protect your child from diseases. You will receive mobile credit
             worth «range for slope or fixed amount for flat» as a reward for immunizing
             your child."
    (2) Reminders in incentive-control PHCs:
             "Hello! It is time to get the «name of vaccine» vaccine administered for your
             child. Please visit your nearest immunization camp to get this vaccine and
             protect your child from diseases."



6See,e.g., Rogers (1995); Krackhardt (1996); Kempe, Kleinberg, and Tardos (2003); Jackson (2008);
Iyengar, den Bulte, and Valente (2010); Hinz, Skiera, Barrot, and Becker (2011); Katona, Zubcsek, and
Sarvary (2011); Jackson and Yariv (2011); Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duflo, and Jackson (2013); Bloch
and Tebaldi (2016); Jackson (2017); Akbarpour, Malladi, and Saberi (2017).
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                           10

2.2.3. The Immunization Ambassador: Network-Based Seeding. The goal of the immu-
nization ambassador intervention was to leverage the social network to spread informa-
tion. In particular, the objective was to identify influential individuals who could relay
to villagers both the information on the existence of the immunization camps, and, wher-
ever relevant, the information that incentives were available. Existing evidence shows
that people who have a high centrality in a network (e.g., they have many friends who
themselves have many friends) are able to spread information more widely in the commu-
nity (Katz and Lazarsfeld, 1955; Aral and Walker, 2012; Banerjee et al., 2013; Beaman
et al., 2018; Banerjee et al., 2019). Further, members in the social network are able to
easily identify individuals, whom we call information hubs, who are the best placed to
diffuse information as a result of their centrality as well other personal characteristics
(social mindedness, garrulousness, etc.)(Banerjee et al., 2019).
   This intervention took place in a subset of 915 villages where we collected a full census
of the population (see below for data sources). Seventeen respondents in each village
were randomly sampled from the census to participate in the survey, and were asked
to identify people with certain characteristics (more about those later). Within each
village, the six people nominated most often by the group of 17 were recruited to be
ambassadors for the program. If they agreed, a short survey was conducted to collect
some demographic variables, and they were then formally asked to become program
ambassadors. Specifically, they agreed to receive one text message and one voice call
every month, and to relay it to their friends. In villages without incentives, the text
message was a bland reminder of the value of immunization. In villages with incentives,
the text message further reminded the ambassador (and hence potentially their contacts)
that there was an incentive for immunization.
   While our previous research had shown that villagers can reliably identify informa-
tion hubs, a pertinent question for policy unanswered by previous work is whether the
information hubs can effectively transmit messages about health, where trust in the
messengers may be more important than in the case of more commercial messages.
   There were four groups of ambassador villages, which varied in the type of people that
the 17 surveyed households were asked to identify. The full text is in Appendix I.



   (1) Random seeds: In this treatment arm, we did not survey villages. We picked six
       ambassadors randomly from the census.
   (2) Information hub seed: Respondents were asked to identify who is good at relaying
       information.
   (3) Trusted seed: Respondents were asked to identify those who are generally trusted
       to provide good advice about health or agricultural questions
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                            11

   (4) Trusted information hub seed: Respondents were asked to identify who is both
       trusted and good at transmitting information

2.3. Experimental Design. The government was interested in selecting the best pol-
icy, or bundle of policies, for possible future scale up. We were agnostic as to the relative
merits of the many available variants. For example, we did not know whether the incen-
tive level was going to be important, nor did we know if the villagers would be able to
identify trusted people effectively and hence, whether the intervention to select trusted
people as ambassadors would work. However, we believed that there could be significant
interactions between different policies. For example, our prior was that the ambassador
intervention was going to work more effectively in villages with incentives, because the
message to diffuse was clear. We therefore implemented a completely cross-randomized
design, as illustrated in Figure 1.
   We started with 2,360 villages, covered by 140 PHCs, and 755 sub-centers. The 140
PHCs were randomly divided into 70 incentives PHCs, and 70 no incentives PHCs (strat-
ifying by district). Within the 70 incentives PHCs, we randomly selected the sub-centers
to be allocated to each of the four incentive sub-treatment arms. Finally, we only had
resources to conduct a census and a baseline exercise in about 900 villages. We selected
about half of the villages from the coverage area of each subcenter, after excluding the
smallest villages. Only among the 915 villages did we conduct the ambassador random-
ization: after stratifying by sub-center, we randomly allocated the 915 villages to the
control group (no ambassador) or one of the four ambassador treatment groups.
   In total, we had one control group, four types of incentives interventions, four types
of ambassador interventions, and two types of SMS interventions. Since they were fully
cross-randomized (in the sample of 915 villages), we had 75 potential policies, which is
large even in relation to our relatively large sample size. Our goal is to identify the most
effective and cost-effective policies and to provide externally valid estimates of the best
policy's impact, after accounting for the winner's curse problem. Further, we want like
to identify other effective policies and answer the question of whether different variants
of the policy had the same or different impacts.

2.4. Data.

2.4.1. Census and Baseline. In the absence of a comprehensive sampling frame, we con-
ducted a mapping and census exercise across 915 villages falling within the 140 sample
PHCs. For conducting the census, we visited 328,058 households, of which 62,548 house-
holds satisfied our eligibility criterion (children aged 12 to 18 months). These exercises
were carried out between May and November 2015. The data from the census was used
to sample eligible households for a baseline survey. We also used the census to sample
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                 12

the respondent of the ambassador identification survey (and to sample the ambassadors
in the "random seed" villages). Around 15 households per village were sampled, result-
ing in data on 14,760 households and 17,000 children. The baseline survey collected data
on demographic characteristics, immunization history, attitudes and knowledge and was
conducted between May and July 2016. A village-level summary of baseline survey data
is given in Appendix Table H.

2.4.2. Outcome Data. Our outcomes of interest are the number of vaccines administered
for each vaccine every month, and the number of fully immunized children every month.
We focus the main analysis of this paper on the number of children who received the
measles vaccines in each village every month: this is the last vaccine in the immunization
schedule and the ANMs check the immunization history and administer missing vaccines
when a child is brought in for this vaccine. Thus, this is a good proxy for a child being
fully immunized.
   For our analysis, we use administrative data collected by the ANM using the e-health
application on the tablet, and stored on the server, to measure immunization. At the
first visit, a child was registered using a government provided ID (or in its absence,
a program-generated ID) and past immunization history, if any. In subsequent visits,
the unique ID was used to pull-up the child's details and update the data. Over the
course of the program, about 295,038 children were registered, yielding a record of
471,608 immunizations. We use the data from December 2016 to November 2017. We
do this because of a technical glitch in the system­the SMS intervention was discontinued
from November 2017, although the incentives and information hub interventions were
continued a little longer, through March 2018.
   Since this data was also used to trigger SMS reminders and incentives, and for the
government to evaluate the nurses' performance,7 it was important to assess its accuracy.
Hence, we conducted a validation exercise, comparing the administrative data with
random checks, as described in Appendix G. The data quality appears to be excellent.
Finally, one concern (particularly with the incentive program) is that the intervention led
to a pattern of substitution, with children who would have been immunized elsewhere
(in the PHC or at the hospital) choosing to be immunized in the camp instead. To
address this issue, we collected data immediately after the intervention on a sample of
children who did not appear in the database (identified through a census exercise), to
ascertain the status of their immunization. In Appendix F, we show that there does
not appear to be a pattern of substitution, as these children were not more likely to be
immunized elsewhere.
7Aggregated monthly reports generated from this data replaced the monthly reports previously compiled
by hand by the nurses.
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                    13

   Below, the dependent variable is the number of measles shot given in a village in
a month (each month, one immunization session is held at each site). On average, in
the entire sample, 6.16 measles shot were delivered per village every month (5.29 in the
villages with no intervention at all). In the sample at risk for the ambassador intervention
(which is our sample for this study) 6.94 shots per village per month were delivered.

2.5. Interventions Average Effects. In this section, we present the average effects of
the interventions using a standard regression without interactions.
  We begin by comparing average results for the incentive and SMS interventions in the
entire sample and the ambassador sample. In the entire sample, we run the following
regression:

ydsvt =  +  Incentives +  SMSs +  Ambassadorv + Ambassador Samplev + dt +                             dsvt

where ydsvt is the number of measles shot given in month t in village v in sub-center (SC)
s, and district d. Ambassador Samplev is a dummy indicating that a village is part of
the Ambassador sample, and Ambassadorv is a vector of the four possible ambassador
interventions (randomly chosen, nominated as "information hub," nominated as "trusted
information hub," and nominated as "trusted"). Incentives is a vector of incentive
interventions (low slope, high slope, low flat, high flat), and SMSs is a vector of SMS
interventions (33% or 66%). dt is a set of district-time dummies (since the intervention
was stratified at the district level), and dsvt represents the error term.
   In the sample of census villages that will be used for the rest of the analysis (which
are the villages where the ambassador intervention was also administered), we run the
same specification, but leave out the Ambassador Sample dummy:

             ydsvt =  +  Incentives +  SMSs +  Ambassadorv + dt +                    dsvt .

In all specifications, we weight these village-level regressions by village population, and
standard errors are clustered at the SC level.8
   The results are presented graphically in Figure 2 for the expanded sample (Panel A)
and the census villages (Panel B). Incentives and SMS had very similar impacts in both
samples. The only intervention that appears to have a significant impact is the "high
slope" incentives, which increases the number of immunization relative to control by
1.74 in the full sample, and 1.97 in the ambassador study sample. The low slope has
a smaller positive effect, but always insignificant, and the SMS interventions have no
impact.

8Thisis the highest level at which a treatment is administered, so clustering at this level should yield
the most conservative estimate of variance. In practice clustering at the village level or SC level does
not make an appreciable difference.
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                              14

   The results of the ambassador intervention, in panel B (already reported in Banerjee
et al. (2019)) show that, on average, using information hubs ("gossips" in that paper) as
ambassadors has positive effects on immunization: 1.89 more children receive a measles
vaccine on a base of 7.32 in control in this sample (p = 0.04). This is near-identical to
the effect of the high-powered, sloped incentive, though this intervention is considerably
cheaper. In contrast, none of the other ambassador treatments­random seeding, seeding
with trusted individuals, or seeding with trusted information hubs­have benefits statis-
tically distinguishable from zero (p = 0.42, p = 0.63, and p = 0.92 respectively) and
the point estimates are small, as well.
   The conclusion from this first set of analyses is that financial incentives can be effective
to boost demand for immunization, but only if they are large enough and increase
with each immunization. Of the two cheaper interventions, the SMS interventions,
promoted widely in India and elsewhere, seem disappointing. In contrast, leveraging
the community by enrolling local ambassadors, selected using the cheap procedure of
asking a few villages who are good information hubs, seems to be as effective as using
incentives. It leads to an increase of 26% in the number of children who complete the
schedule of immunization every month. This alone could increase full immunization rate
in those districts from 39% (our baseline full immunization rate, as reported by parents)
to nearly 49%.
   This analysis does not fully answer the policymaker's question, however. It could
well be that the interventions have powerful interactions with each other, which has
two implications: first, the main effect, as estimated, does not tell us what the impact
of the policy would be in Haryana if implemented alone (because as it is, they are a
weighted average of a complicated set of interacted treatments). Second, it is possible
that the government could do better by combining two (or more) interventions. For
example, our prior in designing the information hub ambassador intervention (described
in our proposal for the project)9 was that it would have a positive interaction effect with
incentives, because it would be much easier for the information hubs to relay hard infor-
mation (there are incentives) than a vaguer message that immunization is useful. The
problem, however, is that there are a large number of interventions and interactions: we
did not--nor was it feasible to--think through ex-ante all of the interactions that should
or should not be included, which is why in Banerjee et al. (2019), we only reported the
average effects of each different type of seeds in the entire sample, without interactions.
In the next section, we propose a disciplined approach to select which ones to include,
and to then estimate the impact of the "best" policy.


9https://doi.org/10.1257/rct.1434-4.0
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                   15

                                          3. Estimation

3.1. Environment. We have a randomized controlled trial with M cross-randomized
arms. Each arm has R ordered dosage intensities: {none, intensity 1, ..., intensity R - 1}.
Although R is here considered fixed, the logic extends to the case where R varies across
treatment arms. The total number of treatment combinations is K := RM . Every one
of n observational units, villages in our setting and henceforth referred to as such, is
randomized to one treatment combination.
   Our first assumption bounds the growth rate of the number of treatment combinations,
and therefore arms and dosage intensity variants, relative to the number of observations.
                                                               1
Assumption 1. R  3, and n, K < n and K = O(n ) for some 0 <  < 2 .

   The condition R  3 makes sure that there are at least two non-zero dosage variants
of each treatment arm.10 K < n ensures there are no more treatment combinations than
observations in every finite sample under consideration.
   Let Ti,k be a dummy for whether treatment combination k was assigned to village
i. Thus, Ti,k is 1 for exactly the treatment combination k that was assigned to it, and
0 otherwise. T  {0, 1}n,K is then the matrix capturing the treatment status. T·,k
(without the i) denotes the n-length column vector (dummy variable) corresponding to
the treatment combination k .
   The regression of interest is

(3.1)                                       y = T +

where y  Rn×1 is the outcome of interest and   RK,1 is the vector of treatment effects.
  For ease of exposition, we assume homoskedastic errors, which is restrictive but in
keeping with the literature on the techniques utilized below (Rohe, 2014; Jia and Rohe,
2015).

Assumption 2.        i    N (0,  2 In ) with  2 > 0 fixed in n.

   Only a subset S of treatment combinations have a non-zero effect on the outcome of
interest:
                                 S := {k : k = 0}.
Treatments are assumed to have either no effect or have sufficiently large (positive or
negative) influence on the outcomes. That is, the non-zero efficacies are assumed to
exceed a threshold.11
10This is obviously for notational convenience, as will become clearer below. The discussion of pooling
dosages is moot if there are no dosages to pool, so this is effectively without loss of generality.
11The uniform lower bound is stronger than needed­see Zhao and Yu (2006) or Jia and Rohe (2015) for
                                                                                     1-c
a weaker requirement allowing slowly declining effects of treatments as n grows: n 2 minkS |k |  M
                      SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                       16

Assumption 3. |S | < K and minkS |k | > c > 0 for c fixed in n.

  In what follows we have two goals:
    (1) Consistently estimate the effects of the relevant policies.
    (2) Find the best policy k = argmaxkS k , and estimate the best policy effect k .
  We proceed in two steps. First, we estimate the set of relevant policies S . Second,
we use post-estimation to both consistently estimate the policy effects (Belloni and
Chernozhukov, 2013) and estimate the effect of the best policy (Andrews et al., 2019).

3.2. Estimating Relevant Policies. To estimate the set of relevant policies, we de-
velop a smart pooling and pruning approach. We pool dosages if they have no differential
effect on outcomes and remove irrelevant treatment combinations. This improves per-
formance of the best policy, which tends to underperform when there are many potential
alternatives, and especially, many alternatives that are very similar to it.

3.2.1. Smart Pooling and Pruning. One way to estimate equation (3.1) is to use LASSO.
Under the above assumptions, the estimated support set S   ^ will equal S with probability
tending to one. However, in the basic specification, two different dosages of the same
treatment arm are treated exactly like any two arbitrary treatments. So, LASSO may
select both (or both of their interactions with the other treatments) since they have very
similar effects. For instance, in our setting, it may be the case that information hubs
work equally well whether a 33% or a 66% reminder rate is used, nor does it matter
whether high or low sloped incentives are used; the higher dosages of reminders and
incentives do not increase efficacy. However, all the four variants of the information hub
treatment (i.e., where it is combined with high or low reminder rate, high or low sloped
incentives) will have equal claims to be chosen by LASSO.
   In this case, if information hubs work equally well, irrespective of the reminders or
incentives used, the policymaker would like to know this for two reasons. First, if the
granular policies are essentially the same--an information hub policy--then insisting on
granularity reduces power. Second, when adjusting for the winner's curse in estimating
the effect of the best policy, both the number of alternatives and the gap in treatment
effect between the best and second-best policy determines how conservatively we need
to shrink our estimated effect.
   A more sophisticated approach may be to run LASSO on (3.1) and then attempt to
pool policies ex-post. This presents its own challenges. The researcher needs to orga-
nize their selected unique policy combinations into collections of pairwise and groupwise
for some constants c  (0, 1) and M > 0 independent of n. In our case  = c. Even that requirement is to
ensure that all relevant policies are sufficiently relevant enough relative to the rate at which information
accumulates. It is cleaner to study the case with uniform bound; we proceed accordingly.
                       SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                 17

comparisons consistent with pooling goals. There can be an enormous number of com-
parisons (see the Hasse diagram in Appendix B, Figure B.1 to see the complexity of even
a simplified example). Therefore, many hypothesis tests, with adjustments for multiple
comparisons and false discovery rates, must be conducted. This may be complex to
implement and, further, it is not immediately clear what the statistical properties of
post-estimation from this procedure would be.
   Our approach is to transform the problem in such a way that the specification natively
executes the pooling and pruning in the process of estimation, and the procedure is
consistent. To provide a structure that will help LASSO eliminate irrelevant variations
between interventions (if that is what the data supports), it is useful to transform (3.1)
to separate the marginal impacts of different levels of intensity from the base effect
of a particular combination of treatments. It is important that we only collapse policy
variants that differ only in treatment dosages, something which can be pre-specified. We
do not collapse fundamentally different treatments into the "short" models discussed in
Muralidharan et al. (2019).
   First, every treatment combination k has an associated treatment profile P (k ), which
is a unique element of the 2M combinations of treatment arms without regard to in-
tensity. In other words, it captures which treatment arms are "active" for a treatment
combination. We say that treatment combinations k and k share the same treatment
profile if P (k ) = P (k ).

Example 1. Consider an example where village i is assigned the treatment combination
k = (No Seeding, low-value flat incentives, 33% reminders), while village j is assigned k =
(No Seeding, low-value flat incentives, 66% reminders). Then P (k ) = P (k ), because k
and k share the same treatment profile (No Seeding, any flat incentives, any reminders).

  Second, we can consider a partial ordering of treatment combinations with respect
to their intensities. Specifically, for treatment combinations k, k , we can say k  k if
the intensities of k in each arm weakly dominate that of k . In other words, k has a
weakly higher dosage in each arm than k .12 Then, we define a profile and dosage matrix
X  {0, 1}n,K as follows:

                               Xi = 1(k (i)        and P (k (i)) = P ( ))

where k (i) is the unique treatment combination that i is assigned to. In other words, i
gets a 1 for all treatment combinations that share k (i)'s treatment profile and are weakly
dominated in intensity by k (i), and zero otherwise.


12Clearly,   some treatment combinations are not comparable, which is why this is a partial order
                    SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                18

Example 1 (continued). The treatment combination

              k (i) = (No Seeding, low-value flat incentives, 33% reminders)

is weakly dominated by the treatment combination

              k (j ) = (No Seeding, low-value flat incentives, 66% reminders)

For village i, Xik = 1 exactly for k = k (i). However, for village j , Xik = 1 for both
k = k (j ) and k = k (i).
  The column vector X·,k(i) stands for all villages assigned treatments satisfying (No
Seeding, at least low-value flat incentives, at least 33% reminders), while the column
vector X·,k(j ) stands for all villages assigned treatments satisfying (No Seeding, at least
low-value flat incentives, 66% reminders)

  We study the following smart pooling and pruning specification

(3.2)                                     y = X + .

It is an invertible linear transformation of (3.1).
   This transformation is useful for two reasons. First, as defined here, k is either the
baseline effect of that particular treatment profile (for the lowest intensity treatment
combination within that profile) or the marginal impact of treatment k 's intensity pro-
file as a dosage relative to the next lower intensity within this treatment profile (for
treatments with higher than the minimum intensity). In the experiment we only have
two nonzero dosages, so there is only the baseline impact or the marginal impact of
the higher dosage. If we estimate    ^ k = 0 for some k that is not the baseline level for
that treatment, this indicates that this particular marginal dosage has zero impact and
that the two policy variants may not have distinct effects and therefore may be pooled.
Second,   ^ k = 0 may also imply that one or more   ^ = 0, meaning that even the baseline
level of the treatment has no impact and thus, potentially, this specification also prunes
in addition to pooling.

Example 1 (continued). Returning to the example above, this formulation implies that
if the marginal value of more reminders, given this treatment profile, is non-zero then
we would expect for there to be a non-zero coefficient k(j ) on Xk(j ) . Otherwise, the
coefficient is expected to be zero and the two intensities can be pooled for this treatment
profile. We can substitute for T·,k(i) , T·,k(j ) a new treatment variable T·,k(i)k(j ) = T·,k(i) +
T·,k(j ) . This new treatment pools together villages i and j , i.e., Ti,k(i)k(j ) = Tj,k(i)k(j ) =
1.

  We apply a LASSO-based procedure to (3.2) to estimate S , the support of this
equation (i.e., the variables that are not eliminated by LASSO). We then operate a final
                      SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                      19

transformation of S to generate Spool , the collection of mutually exclusive pooled policy
combinations that are represented by .
   An important practical detail is how to make sure Spool is obtained correctly--that
is, pool only those treatment combinations deemed to have identical treatment effects,
and take a pooling decision on every single treatment combination. With just a few
treatment intensities and arms, these can be eye-balled from S , because it is easy to
see what is the "main effect" and what is "marginal." When the number of dosages and
treatment arms increases, however, the partial ordering of intensities gets more involved
and one might unintentionally mis-pool by simply eye-balling it. In Appendix B we
propose a general algorithm (Algorithm 2) for recovering Spool for any R, M and S , and
prove that when S is correctly estimated, the derived Spool correctly pools and covers
the support of S .


3.2.2. Estimation of S : Puffer-preconditioned LASSO. A natural place to start to esti-
mate S would be to apply LASSO to (3.2). However, this approach is not sign consis-
tent.13 Sign consistency fails because the matrix X fails an irrepresentability criterion,
a necessary condition for consistent estimation (Zhao and Yu, 2006). Irrepresentability
bounds the acceptable correlations in the design matrix. Intuitively, it requires that
regressions of the variables that are not in the support on those that are have small
coefficients. Formally, the L1 norm on those coefficients must be less than 1. Other-
wise, an irrelevant variable is "representable" by relevant variables, which makes LASSO
erroneously select it with non-zero probability, regardless of sample size.
   The smart pooling specification (3.2) fails irrepresentability by construction because
of correlation within some treatment profiles. For example the smart pooling covariate
where all the M arms are "on" with highest intensity, i.e., Xk for k = (R - 1, ..., R - 1),
is representable by other covariates. A simulation in Appendix C provides a proof by
example, in particular, in a computationally reasonable range of R and M .
   In our case, the failure of irrepresentability is because of the way in which the treat-
ments are represented, but this does not preclude transforming the data into a form
that is consistently estimable. In particular, to estimate S consistently, we appeal to
a technique from Jia and Rohe (2015). The procedure is analogous to weighted least
squares, where the weighting is what the authors call a Puffer transformation. It elim-
inates the correlation in the design matrix and recovers irrepresentability. It does so
at the expense of inflating variance in the error, but the efficiency loss is the cost of
being able to implement LASSO. We demonstrate that this cost is not too high owing

13Sign consistency refers to estimating the signed support. It is technically a slightly stronger condition
than support consistency, but this is standard in the literature.
                      SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                     20

to the structure of the cross-randomized RCT in the sense that the procedure delivers
consistent estimates of the support.
  The weighting is constructed as follows. Let X = U DV denote the singular value
decomposition of X . The Puffer transformation 14 is F = U D-1 U and the regression is

(3.3)                                     F Y = F X + F

where if the original  N (0,  2 ) per Assumption 2, F  N (0,  2 U D-2 U T ). As Jia and
Rohe (2015) note, the new matrix F X satisfies irrepresentability because it is orthonor-
mal: (F X ) (F X ) = I , which is sufficient (Jia and Rohe (2015), Bickel et al. (2009)).
The relevant and irrelevant variables do not exhibit excess correlation by construction.
   To understand the reason it works recall that the orthonormal matrices U and V
can be viewed as rotations of Rn and RK respectively, while D rescales the principal
components of X . D is the diagonal matrix of singular values, ordered from largest
to smallest. The transformation F preserves the rotational elements of X without the
rescaling D. Thus, F X has a singular value decomposition F X = U V . The new
singular values are all set to unity--the transformation normalizes or "cancels out" D.
   Now, the i-th singular value of X captures the residual variance of X explained by
the i-th principal component of X after partialing out the variance explained by the first
i - 1 principal components. When there is correlation inside X , less than K principal
components effectively explain the variation in X , and so the later (and therefore lower)
singular values shrink toward zero. By normalizing the singular values to unity, the
Puffer transformation F effectively inflates the lowest singular values of X so that each
principal component of the transformed F X explains the variance in F X equally. In
this sense, F X is de-correlated, and for K < n, mechanically irrepresentable. The cost
is that this effective re-weighting of the data also amplifies the noise associated with the
observations that would have had the lowest original singular values.15, 16
   The reason why LASSO is particularly amenable to the Puffer transformation in
our specific setting of the cross-randomized experiment with varying dosages is that
the smart pooling design matrices are highly structured. In particular, the assignment
probabilities to the various unique treatments are given, and as a result, the correlations
within the X matrix are bounded away from 1. This has the implication that the minimal
14This is named after the pufferfish as it inflates an otherwise ellipsoid loss function contour set to be
more spherical, much like the fish.
15As Jia and Rohe (2015) point out, from the perspective of LASSO, if the amplification is too great
it "can overwhelm the benefits [of the transformation]." Depending on the assumptions of the data
generating process, it can hinder LASSO efficiency in the finite sample at best and destroys LASSO
sign consistency, at worst.
16In K > n cases­not studied here and not having a full characterization in the literature­even irrepre-
sentability is not immediate and the theory developed is only for special cases (a uniform distribution
on the Stiefel manifold) and a collection of empirically relevant simulations (Jia and Rohe, 2015).
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                  21

singular value is bounded below so that under standard assumptions on data generation,
LASSO selection is sign consistent. While this is guaranteed for a sample size that grows
in fixed K , the more important test is whether it works when K goes up with n; we need
to show that the Puffer transformation does not destroy the sign consistency of LASSO
selection as the minimal singular value of X goes to zero as a function of K . We show
that the Puffer transformation continues to work even when K grows without bound
with n (but K is still less than n), subject to the limit on its growth rate captured by
Assumption 1. Lemma A.1 bounds the rate at which the minimal singular value of X
can go to zero as a function of K . Proposition 3.1 below relies on this lemma to then
prove that the Puffer transformation insures irrepresentability and consistent estimation
by LASSO in our context.17
                                                             1-2
Assumption 4. A sequence n  0 is taken such that n  0 and 2
                                                          nn     =  (log(n)).

Proposition 3.1. Let ^ be the estimator of (3.3) by LASSO:
                                                           2
                             ^ := argmin F y - F Xa
                                                           2   + n a 1 .
                                     aRK

                                   ) = sign())  1.
Assume 1, 2, 3, and 4. Then P(sign(^

  Thus, with probability tending to one, using LASSO we correctly recover the support
S which tells us which marginal differences across intensities are relevant and therefore
how to prune and pool for post-estimation.

3.3. Post-Estimation: Policy Effects and the Effect of the Best Policy. Having
estimated the support S wpa1, we return to our original goals: (1) estimating the effects
of the relevant policies; (2) estimating the effect of the best policy.

3.3.1. Consistent Estimation of Policy Effects. The first step is to estimate policy ef-
fects. We do this in the usual post-LASSO way, mapping back to the unique treatment
specification with a unique dummy for each relevant policy. This is similar to the unique
policy specification (3.1) except that (1) treatment combination variables may be pooled
(union of two or more variables in T ), and (2) |Spool | < K (reflecting the pruning), where
Spool is the collection of pooled policies inverted from estimating S . Let Tpool be the
unique treatment variables from the pruned set Spool of pooled policies.
   We are interested in the regression

(3.4)                                        ^pool  +
                                           y=T

17In practice Rohe (2014) recommends a variation of the Puffer transformation called PufferN that bet-
ter accommodates heteroskedasticity induced by the transformation, which we omit from the exposition
for parsimony but use in our estimation.
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                    22

We can proceed to post-model selection estimation with OLS following Belloni and
Chernozhukov (2013).18 Let ^ be the post-LASSO estimator, so OLS on the estimated
support.

Corollary 3.1. Assume 1, 2, 3, and 4. Then ^ p  .

3.3.2. The Effect of the Best Policy. Another policy relevant issue is the recommendation
of a "best policy" together with an estimate of the effect of the best policy. To select
the best policy, we scan the post-LASSO estimates of policies in S   ^pool . While intuitively
maxkS  ^pool ^k appears to be the effect of the best policy, Andrews et al. (2019) points
out that this suffers from a winner's curse in the finite sample. There are two reasons
why a policy may be deemed best. First, it may have the highest effect. Second, it may
have drawn higher random shocks. As a result, the expected effect of the best policy
using the naive OLS (in this case post-LASSO) estimator will be upward biased.
   The estimation strategy in Andrews et al. (2019) corrects the conventional estimate         ^k
                                                                                                ^
ex-post to construct an approximately median unbiased estimator (for the policy chosen
to be the best) and appropriate confidence intervals with desired coverage. Loosely
speaking, the winner's curse adjusted estimator takes the estimated best policy and
downward adjusts the estimate based on the effect of the second-best policy. Our smart
pooling and pruning procedure helps avoid needlessly conservative estimates from this
correction.
   Specifically, from the corresponding estimated set of pooled policies S                   ^=
                                                                              ^pool , select k
argmaxkS    ^pool ^k based on post-LASSO estimates, which have an asymptotically normal
distribution under our assumptions (Belloni, Chernozhukov, Chetverikov, and Wei, 2018)
and therefore, provide a starting point for the application of the Andrews et al. (2019)
technique wpa1. For this k      ^, construct the hybrid estimator  hyb
                                                                  ^k   described in Section
                                                                   ^
5.2 of Andrews et al. (2019) with nominal size  and median bias tolerance /2. Let
                X                                           
min = min (       n
                    ) be the minimum singular value of the n-normalized design matrix of
smart pooling variables.

Corollary 3.2. Assume 1, 2, 3, and 4. Apply the Puffer-preconditioned LASSO to
estimate the smart pooling specification (3.4). Then with probability at least
                                                       n2 min
                                                          2
                                    1 - 2K exp -              ,
                                                        2 2
 hyb
^k
 ^   is approximately median unbiased (with absolute median bias bounded by    2
                                                                                 ) with
                                    1-
confidence intervals with coverage 1- , conditional on k
                                                       ^ falling within a simultaneous
confidence interval of level 1 -  .
18The possible redundancy in Spool amounts to including a few zero efficacy policies which do not affect
the theoretical validity of this estimator.
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                             23

  A summary of the overall procedure is presented in Algorithm 1.


 Algorithm 1: Estimating Treatment Effects by Smart Pooling and Pruning
      (1) Given treatment assignment matrix T , calculate the treatment profile and
          marginal dosage intensity matrix X .
      (2) Estimate S^ := {k :   ^ k > 0} by estimating (3.2) through a Puffer transformed
          LASSO.
      (3) Calculate pooled and pruned support S     ^pool from S^ using Algorithm 2 in
          Appendix B.
      (4) Estimate pooled and pruned treatment effects of unique (relevant) policies,  ,
          using regression (3.4).
      (5) For the best policy S               ^ = argmax ^ 
                               ^pool , select k
                                                          kSpool ^k , construct the hybrid
                     hyb
          estimator ^k
                     ^   with nominal size  and median bias tolerance /2.




3.4. Simulations. In Appendix C, we conduct several simulations to both demonstrate
the effectiveness of the smart pooling and pruning estimator (in Algorithm 1) and com-
pare it to various natural alternatives to demonstrate the value of each step.
   We begin by looking at the first step: whether the estimator consistently recovers
the support S of the specification (3.2). We find that the smart pooling and pruning
estimator does consistently recover the support. In contrast, applying a naive LASSO
to this equation yields an inconsistent estimate of the support and, further, the support
accuracy appears to be bounded from above irrespective of the number of observations
(in this case 75%). This is because of the failure of irrepresentability, which is a necessary
condition for LASSO to be sign consistent, and without the Puffer transformation, the
procedure fails.
   Next, we turn to the second step: identification and estimation of the effect of the
best policy. We show that our estimator consistently recovers the best policy--this is
clearly true by the above--but also has a near-perfect rate of selecting the best policy
even with few observations. The smart pooling and pruning procedure estimates (3.4)
while the alternative is using a naive LASSO on (3.1)--the regression with all unique
policy combinations. The distinction is that when studying unique policies, the former
has already pooled dosages that are not distinct in addition to pruning irrelevant ones,
whereas the latter only does the pruning. Given these estimates, we apply the winner's
curse adjustment and look at the estimates of the effect of the best policy. Once again
we show that the smart pooling and pruning procedure uniformly outperforms the naive
LASSO on the unique policy specification: for all observation levels the MSE of the
effect of the best policy is lower for our estimator.
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                 24

                                           4. Results

4.1. Identifying effective policies.

4.1.1. Method. We adapt the smart pooling and pruning specification (3.2) for our case.
The interventions "information hubs," "slope," "flat," and "SMS" are found in two in-
tensities.19 The smart pooling specification therefore looks like


       ydsvt = 0 + SM S SMSs + H,SM S High SMSs
           + Slope Slopes + H,Slope High Slopes + F lat Flats + H,F lat High Flats
           + R Randomv + H Info Hub (All)v + T Trustv + T H Trusted Info Hubv
           + X Xsv + vdt +     dsvt ,

where we have explicitly listed some of the variables in "single arm" treatment profiles.
Xsv is a vector of the remaining 64 smart pooling variables in "multiple arm" treatment
profiles, and vdt is a set of district-time dummies.
   Our estimation follows the recommended implementation in Rohe (2014), which uses
a sequential backward elimination version of LASSO (variables with p-values above some
threshold are progressively deselected) on the PufferN transformed variables (this aids
in correcting for the heteroskedasticity induced by the Puffer transformation). We select
penalties  for both regressions (number of immunizations and immunizations per dollar)
to minimize a Type I error, which is particularly important to avoid in the case of policy
implementation.20 This is because it is extremely problematic to have a government
introduce a large policy based on a false positive.
              ^ , an estimate of the true support set S of the smart pooling specification.
   This gives S
We then generate a use of unique pooled policy set S       ^pool (following the procedure we
outline in Algorithm 2 in Appendix B). Next, we run the pooled specification (3.4) to
                                                                        hyb
obtain post-LASSO estimates       ^ of the pooled policies as well as  ^k
                                                                        ^ , the winner's curse
adjusted estimate of the best policy.

4.1.2. Results. The results are presented in Figures 3 and 4. Figure 3 presents the post-
LASSO estimates where the outcome variable is the number of measles vaccines per
month in the village. Figure 4 presents the post-LASSO estimates where the outcome
19In the case of information hubs, "trust" adds intensity to the information hub.
20 Rohe (2014) notes a bijection between a backwards elimination procedure based on using Type I
error thresholds and the penalty in LASSO. We take  = 0.48 and  = 0.0014 for the number of
immunizations and immunizations per dollar outcomes, respectively. Both of these choices map to
the same Type I error value (p = 5 × 10-13 ) used in the backwards elimination implementation of
LASSO selected to essentially eliminate false positives. Appendix D repeats the exercise for a number
of alternative penalties.
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                            25

variable is the number of measles vaccines per dollar spent. In each, a relatively small
subset of policies is selected as part of S ^pool out of the universe of 75 granular policies
(16% of the possible options in Figure 3 and 35% in Figure 4).
   In Figure 3, two of the four selected pooled policies are estimated to do significantly
better than control: information hubs seeding with sloped incentives (of both low and
high intensities) and SMS reminders (of both 33% and 66% saturation) are estimated
to increase the number of immunizations by 55% relative to control (p = 0.001), while
trusted seeds with high-sloped incentives and SMS reminders (of both saturation levels)
are estimated to increase immunizations by 44% relative to control (p = 0.009). The
policy of high sloped incentives with SMS reminders has a positive effect but is noisy,
while the policy of trusted information hubs with sloped incentives (of any intensity)
and SMS reminders (either level of saturation) is solidly zero (p = 0.515). The selection
of this last policy in S^pool is an example of S^pool choosing a superset of the true support
S ; this particular policy shares the same treatment profile as the best policy in this
data but has zero impact. Finally, while incentives help, a very robust result is that
flat incentives never emerge as an effective policy, in any combination (this is consistent
with the fact that they did not have a positive effect, on average).
   These two effective policies increase the number of immunizations, relative to the
status quo, at the cost of a greater cost for each immunization (compared to standard
policy). These policies induce 36.0 immunizations per village per month per $1,000
allocation (as compared with 43.6 immunizations per village per month in control). The
reason is that that the gains from having incentives in terms of immunization rates is
smaller than the increase in costs (especially because the incentives must be paid to
all the infra-marginal parents). Two things are worth noting to qualify those results,
however. First, in (Chernozhukov et al., 2018), we show that in the places where the
full package treatment is predicted to be the most effective (which tends to be the
places with low immunization), the number of immunizations per dollar spent is not
statistically different in treatment and control villages. Second, immunization is so cost
effective, that this relatively small increase in the cost of immunization may still mean
a much more cost-effective use of funds than the next best use of dollars on policies to
fight childhood disease (Ozawa et al., 2012).
   Nevertheless, a government may be interested in the most cost-effective policy, if they
have a given budget for immunization. We turn to policy cost effectiveness in Figure 4.
The most cost-effective policy (and the only policy that reduces per immunization cost)
compared to control is the combination of information hub seeding (trusted or not) with
SMS reminders (at both 33% or 66% saturation) and no incentives, which leads to a
9.1% increase in vaccinations per dollar (p = 0.000).
                    SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                               26

4.2. Estimating the Impact of the Best policy. To estimate the impact of the best
policy, we first select the best policy from S  ^pool based on the post-LASSO estimate.
                                                                                 
Then, we attenuate it using the hybrid estimator with  = 0.05 and  = 10             = 0.005,
which this is the value used by Andrews et al. (2019) in their simulations. The hybrid
confidence interval has the following interpretation: conditional on policy effects falling
within a 99.5% simultaneous confidence interval, the hybrid confidence interval around
the best policy has at least 95% coverage.
   Table 1 presents the results. In column 1, the outcome variable is the number of
measles vaccines given every month in a given village. We find that for the best policy in
the sample (information hub seeds with sloped incentives at any level and SMS reminders
at any saturation) the hybrid estimated best policy effect relative to control is 3.26 with
a 95% hybrid confidence interval of [0.032,6.25]. This is lower than the original post-
LASSO estimated effect of 4.02. The attenuation is owing to a second best policy (trusted
seeds with high sloped incentives with SMS reminders at any saturation) "chasing" the
best policy estimate somewhat closely.21 Nevertheless, even accounting for winner's
curse through the attenuated estimates and the adjusted confidence intervals, the hybrid
estimates still reject the null. Thus, the conclusion is that accounting for winner's curse,
this policy increases immunizations by 44% relative to control.
   While policymakers may chose this policy if they are willing to bear a higher cost to
increase immunization, there may be settings where cost effectiveness is an important
consideration. In column 2, the outcome variable is the number of vaccinations per
dollar. Accounting for winner's curse through hybrid estimation, for the best policy of
information hubs (all variants) and SMS reminders (any saturation level), the hybrid
estimated best policy effect relative to control is 0.004 with a 95% hybrid confidence
interval of [0.003,0.004]. Notably, this appears almost unchanged from the naive post-
LASSO. This is because no other pooled policy with positive effect is "chasing" the
best policy in the sample; the second-best policy is the control (status quo), which is
sufficiently separated from the best policy so as to have an insignificant adjustment for
winner's curse. Thus, adjusting for winner's curse, this policy increases the immuniza-
tions per dollar by 9.1% relative to control.
   One concern with these estimates is that they are sensitive to the implied LASSO
penalty  chosen. To check the robustness of our results, we consider alternative values
of the . Note that as the  decreases, we incur increasing probability of Type I error
(false non-zero estimates) in model selection. This error can manifest in two ways in
model selection: (a) spurious policies can be selected as the second-best policy, or (b)
spurious policies can be selected as the best policy. Of these (a) is less serious in that it
21The increased attenuation from a more closely competing second-best policy emerges from the for-
mulas for conditional inference given in Section 3 of Andrews et al. (2019).
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                           27

may only make our winner's curse estimates more conservative. Case (b) of a fluke best
policy is the more serious error. Appendix D presents our results for a number of less
stringent penalties (allowing for greater Type I error). For the number of immunizations
per dollar, the best policy and associated winner's curse adjusted-effect estimates are
extremely robust. With decreasing , we find that the best selected policy is always
the same, and while the winner's curse estimates do go down, following the possibility
(a) mentioned above, for almost all the  except the smallest  = 0.00045, the hybrid
estimator consistently rejects the null (p < 0.05). For the number of immunizations,
however, we do see sensitivity to model selection parameters to the extent that a granular
policy of no seeds combined with high sloped incentives and low SMS reminders emerges
as the best policy for   0.42. Although we cannot be sure, we have reason to believe
that this is a spurious best policy arising from model selection error of type (b)­we
observe that when this policy first emerges, the hybrid estimator (and even the naive
OLS estimator) already rejects the null (p < 0.05).


                                     5. Conclusion

   While immunization is one of the most effective and cost-effective method to prevent
illness, disability, and disease, millions of children continue to go without it every year.
The COVID-19 epidemic risks making the situation even worse: during the pandemic,
vaccine coverage has dipped to levels not seen since the 1990s (Bill and Melinda Gates,
2020). Swift policy action will be critical to ensure that this dip is temporary, and
children who missed immunizations during the pandemic get covered soon.
   To study effective policies to encourage immunization, we conducted a large policy
experiment in 2360 villages in India covering 295,038 children. Strategies available to
policymakers include conventional instruments such as reminders and incentives, each
of which can be designed in a number of ways (e.g., with different coverage rates, lev-
els of incentives, shape of the incentive curve), as well as a new policy, derived from
insights from social network analysis (ambassadors from the community to encourage
immunization take-up). Again, there are several variants such as recruiting information
hubs, trusted individuals, individuals in the intersection of both, and random members
of society. All told, our experiment covers 75 policies which exhausts all combinations
of these arms. That is, we look at every possible policy combination available to the
policymaker contemplating choosing one of these instruments with the goal of scaling it
up.
   We develop a blueprint, a smart pooling and pruning procedure, to perform policy
analysis in this context, in a data-driven manner. First, we assume that only a sparse
set of policy combinations meaningfully affects the outcome of interest (here the number
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                 28

of immunizations or the number of immunizations per dollar). Furthermore, there may
not necessarily be appreciable differences in the effects of variants in policies differing
only in their intensity profiles. By applying the appropriate transformation to represent
the data in a manner amenable to pooling and pruning, and then using the Puffer
transformation, we are able to consistently recover the collection of relevant policies and
obtain consistent estimates of these pooled policies (and confidence intervals) following
the post-LASSO procedure described in Chernozhukov et al. (2015). This allows us to
identify which policies matter and what kind of flexibility it affords the policymaker.
For example, we can see in a data-driven way if high and low incentives tend to have the
same effect, which would allow the policymaker to choose lower and cheaper incentives.
   Second, we estimate the impact of the best policy in the sense of maximizing either
the number of vaccines or number of vaccines per dollar. To do so requires overcoming
the winner's curse. Because the policy deemed to be the best is one that, by definition,
in the sample has to have an effect bigger than all the other policies, it is more likely
to have benefitted from a larger random shock as well and therefore the estimate of its
effect will be upward biased. We use the techniques in Andrews et al. (2019) to overcome
this and construct (nearly) median unbiased estimates for the number of vaccines (or
number of vaccines per dollar) for the best policy. We estimate the best policy in either
case to be one where the policymaker uses information hubs and sends SMS reminders
to 33% of the community. If we give up on cost effectiveness, we should add to these
two sloped incentives at the low amount. From the cost effectiveness perspective simply
using information hubs and a low saturation of SMS reminders emerges as the best
policy, and is more cost effective than the status quo of no policy.
   One possible interpretation, especially given that the most effective ambassador is the
information hub (recall this is the person best placed to circulate information according
to the community) is that the ambassador ensures widespread diffusion about the pres-
ence of the incentives (in incentives villages) and is able to explain and de-mystify the
content of the personalized reminders (in SMS villages, even without incentives).22 In
either case, the ambassador has something quite concrete to discuss with the people they
talk to (which is not the case in villages without SMS or incentives, perhaps explaining
why they have no effect in this case). All told, this suggests that the social network can
be used in creative and cost-effective ways to amplify the effect of other policies.
   There are three main takeaways. First, from the perspective of public health policy,
standard tools that have previously been championed (e.g., SMS reminders) may not be
particularly effective and others such as high sloped incentives may not be cost-effective
22Banerjee, Breza, Chandrasekhar, and Golub (2018) find that complex information circulated to influ-
ential people can lead to better understanding and action than complete broadcasting, because people
may feel insecure asking questions.
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                            29

at large scale, such as at a state or national level (although Chernozhukov et al. (2018)
find it may be cost effective in pockets of low immunization villages, where it is predicted
to be most effective). But using such instruments in combination, particularly with
policy insights from social network analysis, yields effective, and cost-effective policies.
   Second, the results are consistent with recent literature pointing to the importance of
leveraging networks to diffuse information in a variety of economic contexts. Here, this
principle suggests that policymakers can benefit tremendously from identifying informa-
tion hubs to accelerate take-up. These perspectives typically are not in a policymaker's
toolkit, but the literature increasingly points to the necessity to incorporate such lessons.
   Third, there is a temptation when doing a policy experiment to pare down the number
of treatments one is willing to evaluate for power concerns and because selective ex-post
pooling can cause biases. However, this has the downside that it requires the policymaker
to be somewhat sure of the set of effective policies in the first place. But that assumes the
conclusion: if one could already pick the best four policies out of 75 feasible ones, testing
out policies may be second order. On the other hand, if there was genuine uncertainty
about what works, which is how the problem was presented to us in this case, ex ante
paring down the options may get us the wrong answer. In particular, the suggestion
of avoiding all interactions in this setting (made in Muralidharan et al. (2019)), would
have led to the conclusion that nothing is effective.
   To manage the rapidly increasing number of treatment bundles policymakers may
consider, we suggest instead a data-driven approach wherein under a natural assumption
that most policies are unlikely to be effective, we can use machine learning to identify
the sparse set of policies that meaningfully affect the outcome of interest. Given this, we
can estimate the effect of the best policy in terms of the outcome of interest, accounting
for the winner's curse. This is a straightforward procedure and one that could easily
be specified in a pre-analysis plan. The researcher can gain power by incorporating
prior knowledge of the policies that are likely to "pool" together (in this instance, these
are doses of a treatment) in the smart pooling specification, without making a prior
assumption that they have to pool. This structure can easily be pre-specified, and
beyond that the researcher does not need to take a stance on the possible effects of a
number of interactions that are very hard to predict in advance.




                                       References

Akbarpour, M., S. Malladi, and A. Saberi (2017):                                 "Diffusion,
 Seeding, and the Value of Network Information," Available                       at SSRN:
 https://ssrn.com/abstract=3062830. 6
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                       30

Alatas, V., A. G. Chandrasekhar, M. Mobius, B. A. Olken, and C. Pal-
 adines (2019): "When Celebrities Speak: A Nationwide Twitter Experiment Promot-
 ing Vaccination In Indonesia," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 4
Alsan, M. (2015): "The effect of the tsetse fly on African development," American
 Economic Review, 105, 382­410. 1
Andrews, I., T. Kitagawa, and A. McCloskey (2019): "Inference on winners,"
 Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 1, 3.1, 3.3.2, 4.2, 21, 5, ??, A,
 C.2.2, C.3, C.4
Aral, S. and D. Walker (2012): "Creating social contagion through viral product
 design: A randomized trial of peer influence in networks," Management Science. 2.2.3
Banerjee, A., E. Breza, A. G. Chandrasekhar, and B. Golub (2018): "When
 Less is More: Experimental Evidence on Information Delivery During India's Demon-
 etization," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 2.2.2, 22
Banerjee, A., A. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2013):
 "Diffusion of Microfinance," Science, 341, DOI: 10.1126/science.1236498, July 26 2013.
 6, 2.2.3
Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. O. Jackson (2019):
 "Using Gossips to Spread Information: Theory and Evidence from Two Randomized
 Controlled Trials," The Review of Economic Studies. 4, 1, 2.2.3, 2.5
Banerjee, A., A. Chandrashekhar, E. Duflo, S. Dalpath, J. Floretta,
 M. Jackson, H. Kannan, A. Schrimpf, and M. Shrestha (2021): "Evaluating
 the impact of interventions to improve full immunisation rates in Haryana, India," .
 2.1
Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and D. Kothari (2010): "Improv-
 ing immunisation coverage in rural India: clustered randomised controlled evaluation
 of immunisation campaigns with and without incentives," Bmj, 340, c2220. 1, 2.2.1
Bassani, D. G., P. Arora, K. Wazny, M. F. Gaffey, L. Lenters, and Z. A.
 Bhutta (2013): "Financial incentives and coverage of child health interventions: a
 systematic review and meta-analysis," BMC Public Health, 13, S30. 1, 2.2.1
Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and A. M. Mobarak (2018): "Can
 network theory-based targeting increase technology adoption?" Tech. rep., National
 Bureau of Economic Research. 2.2.3
Belloni, A. and V. Chernozhukov (2013): "Least squares after model selection in
 high-dimensional sparse models," Bernoulli, 19, 521­547. 1, 3.1, 3.3.1, A
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, D. Chetverikov, and Y. Wei (2018): "Uni-
 formly valid post-regularization confidence regions for many functional parameters in
 z-estimation framework," Annals of statistics, 46, 3643. 3.3.2, A
                 SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                      31

Bickel, P. J., Y. Ritov, A. B. Tsybakov, et al. (2009): "Simultaneous analysis
  of Lasso and Dantzig selector," The Annals of statistics, 37, 1705­1732. 3.2.2
Bill and F. Melinda Gates (2020): "COVID-19: A Global Perspective: 2020 Goal-
  keepers Report," . 5
Bloch, Francis and, M. O. and P. Tebaldi (2016): "Centrality Measures in
  Networks," http://ssrn.com/abstract=2749124. 6
Chernozhukov, V., M. Demirer, E. Duflo, and I. Fernandez-Val (2018):
  "Generic machine learning inference on heterogenous treatment effects in randomized
  experiments," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research. 4.1.2, 5
Chernozhukov, V., C. Hansen, and M. Spindler (2015): "Post-selection and
  post-regularization inference in linear models with many controls and instruments,"
  American Economic Review, 105, 486­90. 5, C.1, 28
DLHS (2013): "District Level Household and Facility Survey-4," . 2.1
Domek, G. J., I. L. Contreras-Roldan, S. T. OâLeary, S. Bull, A. Fur-
  niss, A. Kempe, and E. J. Asturias (2016): "SMS text message reminders to
  improve infant vaccination coverage in Guatemala: A pilot randomized controlled
  trial," Vaccine, 34, 2437­2443. 3
Gibson, D. G., B. Ochieng, E. W. Kagucia, J. Were, K. Hayford, L. H.
  Moulton, O. S. Levine, F. Odhiambo, K. L. O'Brien, and D. R. Feikin
  (2017): "Mobile phone-delivered reminders and incentives to improve childhood im-
  munisation coverage and timeliness in Kenya (M-SIMU): a cluster randomised con-
  trolled trial," The Lancet Global Health, 5, e428­e438. 1, 2.2.1
Hinz, O., B. Skiera, C. Barrot, and J. U. Becker (2011): "Seeding Strategies
  for Viral Marketing: An Empirical Comparison," Journal of Marketing, 75:6, 55­71.
  6
Iyengar, R., C. V. den Bulte, and T. W. Valente (2010): "Opinion Leadership
  and Social Contagion in New Product Diffusion," Marketing Science, 30:2, 195­212.
  6
Jackson, M. O. (2008): "Average Distance, Diameter, and Clustering in So-
  cial Networks with Homophily," in the Proceedings of the Workshop in Internet
  and Network Economics (WINE 2008), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, also:
  arXiv:0810.2603v1, ed. by C. Papadimitriou and S. Zhang, Springer-Verlag, Berlin
  Heidelberg. 6
------ (2017): "A Typology of Social Capital and Associated Network Measures," SSRN
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=3073496. 6
                 SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                       32

Jackson, M. O. and L. Yariv (2011): "Diffusion, strategic interaction, and social
  structure," Handbook of Social Economics, San Diego: North Holland, edited by Ben-
  habib, J. and Bisin, A. and Jackson, M.O. 6
Jia, J. and K. Rohe (2015): "Preconditioning the Lasso for sign consistency," Elec-
  tronic Journal of Statistics, 9, 1150­1172. 1, 3.1, 11, 3.2.2, 3.2.2, 15, 16, A
Johri, M., M. C. Pe   ´rez, C. Arsenault, J. K. Sharma, N. P. Pai, S. Pahwa,
  and M.-P. Sylvestre (2015): "Strategies to increase the demand for childhood vac-
  cination in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis,"
  Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 93, 339­346. 1
Karing, A. (2018): "Social Signaling and Childhood Immunization: A Field Experi-
  ment in Sierra Leone," University of California, Berkeley. 2
Katona, Z., P. P. Zubcsek, and M. Sarvary (2011): "Network Effects and Per-
  sonal Influences: The Diffusion of an Online Social Network," Journal of Marketing
  Research, 48:3, 425­443. 6
Katz, E. and P. Lazarsfeld (1955): Personal influence: The part played by people
  in the flow of mass communication, Free Press, Glencoe, IL. 2.2.3
Kempe, D., J. Kleinberg, and E. Tardos (2003): "Maximizing the Spread of
  Influence through a Social Network," Proc. 9th Intl. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery
  and Data Mining, 137â146. 6
Krackhardt, D. (1996): "Strucutral Leverage in Marketing," in Networks in Market-
  ing, ed. by D. Iacobucci, Sage, Thousand Oaks, 50­59. 6
Martinez-Bravo, M. and A. Stegmann (2018): "In Vaccines We Trust? The
  Effects of the CIA's Vaccine Ruse on Immunization in Pakistan," Tech. rep., CEMFI.
  1
McKenzie, D. (2019): "Be careful with inference from 2-by-2 experiments and ther
  cross-cutting designs," [Online; accessed Octobrer 19, 2019]. 1
Mekonnen, Z. A., K. A. Gelaye, M. C. Were, K. D. Gashu, and B. C.
  Tilahun (2019): "Effect of mobile text message reminders on routine childhood
  vaccination: a systematic review and meta-analysis," Systematic reviews, 8, 1­14.
  2.2.2
Muralidharan, K., M. Romero, and K. Wuthrich (2019): "Factorial designs,
  model selection, and (incorrect) inference in randomized experiments," . 1, 3.2.1, 5
NFHS (2016): "National Family Health Survey-4 State Fact Sheet for Haryana," . 2.1
Oyo-Ita, A., C. S. Wiysonge, C. Oringanje, C. E. Nwachukwu, O. Oduwole,
  and M. M. Meremikwu (2016): "Interventions for improving coverage of childhood
  immunisation in low-and middle-income countries," Cochrane Database of Systematic
  Reviews. 1
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                        33

Ozawa, S., A. Mirelman, M. L. Stack, D. G. Walker, and O. S. Levine (2012):
  "Cost-effectiveness and economic benefits of vaccines in low-and middle-income coun-
  tries: a systematic review," Vaccine, 31, 96­108. 4.1.2
Regan, A. K., L. Bloomfield, I. Peters, and P. V. Effler (2017): "Random-
  ized controlled trial of text message reminders for increasing influenza vaccination,"
  The Annals of Family Medicine, 15, 507­514. 3
Rogers, E. (1995): Diffusion of Innovations, Free Press. 6
Rohe, K. (2014): "A note relating ridge regression and ols p-values to preconditioned
  sparse penalized regression," arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.7405. 1, 3.1, 17, 4.1.1, 20
Sugerman, D., A. Barskey, M. Delea, I. Ortega-Sanchez, D. Bi, K. Ral-
  ston, P. Rota, K. Waters-Montijo, and C. Lebaron (2010): "Measles out-
  break in a highly vaccinated population, San Diego, 2008: role of the intentionally
  undervaccinated." Pediatrics, 125, 747­755. 1
Uddin, M. J., M. Shamsuzzaman, L. Horng, A. Labrique, L. Vasudevan,
  K. Zeller, M. Chowdhury, C. P. Larson, D. Bishai, and N. Alam (2016):
  "Use of mobile phones for improving vaccination coverage among children living in
  rural hard-to-reach areas and urban streets of Bangladesh," Vaccine, 34, 276­283. 3
UNICEF and WHO (2019): "Progress and challenges with achieving universal immu-
  nization coverage: 2018 estimates of immunization coverage WHO," . 1
user1551 (https://math.stackexchange.com/users/1551/user1551) (2017):
  "Find the uniform lower bound of the smallest eigenvalue of a certain matrix," Math-
  ematics Stack Exchange, https://math.stackexchange.com/q/2438656 (version:
  2017-09-21). 25
Wakadha, H., S. Chandir, E. V. Were, A. Rubin, D. Obor, O. S. Levine,
  D. G. Gibson, F. Odhiambo, K. F. Laserson, and D. R. Feikin (2013): "The
  feasibility of using mobile-phone based SMS reminders and conditional cash transfers
  to improve timely immunization in rural Kenya," Vaccine, 31, 987­993. 1, 3
WHO (2019): "Situation Analysis of Immunization Expenditure," . 1
Zhao, P. and B. Yu (2006): "On model selection consistency of Lasso," Journal of
  Machine learning research, 7, 2541­2563. 1, 11, 3.2.2
SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES   34

                  Figures




       Figure 1. Experimental Design
           SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                       35




                              (a) Full Sample




                          (b) Ambassador Sample

Figure 2. Effects on the number of measles vaccinations relative to con-
trol (5.29 in Panel A and 7.32 in Panel B) by reminders, incentives, and
seeding policies, for entire sample controlling for inclusion in ambassador
sample in Panel A and restricted to the ambassador sample in Panel B.
The specification is weighted by village population, controls for district-
time fixed effects, and clusters standard errors at the sub-center level.
                                                                                                                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES
Figure 3. Effects of the smartly pooled and pruned combinations of reminders, incentives, and seeding policies
on number of measles vaccinations relative to control (7.32). The specification is weighted by village population,
controls for district-time fixed effects, and clusters standard errors at the sub-center level.




                                                                                                                     36
                                                                                                                         SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES
Figure 4. Effects of the smartly pooled and pruned combinations of reminders, incentives, and seeding policies
on the number of measles vaccines per $1 relative to control (0.0436 shots per $1). The specification is weighted
by village population, controls for district-time fixed effects, and clusters standard errors at the sub-center level.




                                                                                                                         37
                      SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                         38

                                                 Tables

                                       Table 1. Best Policies

                                              (1)                                  (2)
                                         # Measles Shots                  # Measles Shots per $1

WC Adjusted Treatment Effect               3.26                             0.004
Confidence Interval (95%)               [0.32,6.25]                    [0.003, 0.005]
Control Mean                               7.32                            0.0435
Observations                                204                              814
Optimal Policy               (Information Hubs, SMS, Slope) (Information Hubs POOLED, SMS)
Notes: Estimation using Andrews et al. (2019); hybrid estimation with  = 0.05,  = 0.005. The spec-
ifications are weighted by village population and account for district-time fixed effects as well as variance
clustered at the sub-center level.
                       SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                         39

                                      Appendix A. Proofs

Proof of Proposition 3.1. According to Theorem 1 of Jia and Rohe (2015), if minj S |j | 
2n , then ^ =s  with probability greater than

                                                      n2 min2
                                 f (n) := 1 - 2K exp -          ,
                                                         2 2
                              X                                             
where, recall, min = min (     n
                                 ) is the minimum singular value of the n-normalized
design matrix. By Assumption 3, the uniform lower bound (in absolute value) of the
nonzero { } determines a lower bound to the nonzero parameters {} as well, since
these specifications are related by an invertible linear transformation. Since by Assump-
tion 4, n  0, for sufficiently high n minj S |j |  2n . Theorem 1 applies and
sign(^
     ) = sign() with probability greater than f (n).

  It will be convenient to re-express f (n) as follows:
                                                              n2  2
                                                                n min
                              f (n) = 1 - 2 exp log(K ) -             .
                                                               2 2
And applying Lemma A.1, for sufficiently high n:
                                                       n2 n
                               f (n)  1 - 2 exp log(K ) -     .
                                                      2 2 K 2
Per Assumption 1, K = O(n ), it follows that for sufficiently high n:
                                           n1-2 2n                        n1-2 2n
          f (n)  1 - 2 exp  log(n) -           2
                                                    1 - 2 exp  log( n ) -     2
                                                                                  .
                                             2                              2
By Assumption 1, 0 <  < 1      2
                                  = n1-2 =  (log(n)) and by Assumption 4, since
    1-2
2nn      =  (log(n)), it follows that limn f (n)  1. Since also f (n)  1, it follows
that f (n)  1 and the proof is complete.


Lemma A.1. For the smart pooling design matrix X , for R  3, wpa1 the lowest
                                                          X                         X
singular value of n normalized design matrix, i.e., min (  n
                                                             ), has the value min (  n
                                                                                       )=
                       -M
          2   R- 3
                 2 
                        2
                                                X       1 23
 4R sin       R- 1 2
                            . Thus, wpa1, min (  n
                                                   ) > (K ).
                 2

Proof of Lemma A.1. It will be useful to index the design matrix X by R and M , i.e.
                                   1                              2  XR,M
X = XR,M . Let CR,M = limn n         XR,M XR,M . Then limn min      (   n
                                                                          ) = min (CR,M ),
i.e., the lowest eigenvalue of CR,M . We will characterize this eigenvalue.

The combinatorics of the limiting frequencies of "1"s in smart pooling variables imply
that CR,M is a block diagonal matrix with structure
                                                                                    1
23This   is a conservative bound; the optimal uniform lower bound is   1    1       2
                                                                       K ( 4M   )       .
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                       40

                                                                                  
                                            B      0                 ···    0
                                             R,M                                  
                                          1 
                                            
                                              0  BR,M -1             ···    0     
                                                                                  
                                 CR,M   =   
                                             .      .                ..     .     
                                          K .       .                   .   .
                                             .      .                       .
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                              0    0                 · · · BR,1
where BR,M -1 implies this block is found in CR,M -1 (pertaining to an RCT with one
less cross-treatment arm), etc. More than one block of BR,M -1 , BR,M -2 , ... BR,1 is
found in CR,M , but only BR,M determines the minimum eigenvalue.
   The combinatorics of variable assignments also implies that
    (1) BR,M is an (R - 1)M × (R - 1)M matrix with recursive structure BR,M = BR,1 
        BR,M -1 , where  is the Kronecker product.24
    (2) BR,1 is an (R - 1) × (R - 1) matrix  with recursive structure
                    R-1 R-2         ···    1
                                            
                   R - 2
                                            
                                            
         BR,1 =  .                           and B2,1 = [1].
                    . .           BR-1,1 
                                            
                                                         
                             1
                                                            -1
                                                R- 3
                                                   2 
Sublemma 1. min (BR,1 ) = 4 sin2                R- 1 2
                                                   2

Proof. The key insight of the argument25 is that BR,1 -1 is the (R - 1) × (R - 1) tridiagonal
matrix:
                                                                            
                                              1 -1
                                                                
                                             -1 2 -1            
                                                                
                                             
                                                    ... ...     
                                  BR,1 -1   =
                                                - 1
                                                                
                                                                
                                                    .     .
                                                                
                                             
                                                      . . . . -1
                                                                
                                                          -1 2
                                                     j- 1
                                                        2 
Which has known eigenvalues µj = 4 sin2              R- 1 2
                                                                 for j = 1, 2, ..., R - 1. Thus, given that
                                                        2
the inverse of a matrix's eigenvalues are the inverse matrix's eigenvalues, min (BR,1 ) =
                    -1
           R- 3
              2 
 4 sin2    R- 1 2
                         .
              2



(Resuming the proof of Lemma A.1) Per the multiplicative property of the eigenvalues
of a Kronecker product, together with the fact that all matrices in question are positive
definite, it immediately follows that min (BR,M ) = min (BR,1 )min (BR,M -1 ), which in
24Thanks to Nargiz Kalantarova for noticing this Kronecker product and its consequent implication for
min (BR,M ).
25The argument is provided on Mathematics Stackexchange (user1551 (https://math.stackexchange.
com/users/1551/user1551), 2017).
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                         41

turn implies min (BR,M ) = min (BR,1 )M . Since by Sublemma 1, min (BR,1 ) < 1, BR,M
is the block determining the rate with the smallest eigenvalue, and therefore, given that
the eigenvalues of a block diagonal matrix are the eigenvalues of the blocks:

                                                              3                -M
                   1             1             M         2 R- 2 
      min (CR,M ) = min (BR,M ) = (min (BR,1 )) = 4R sin
                   K             K                         R- 1
                                                              2
                                                                2
where the last equality uses Sublemma 1. The Lemma follows.

Proof of Corollary 3.1. By Proposition 3.1, S^ = S wpa1, which by inverting the linear
map, implies that S ^pool = Spool wpa1 and by Proposition B.1, we have that S  Sp ool.
The assumptions of Corollary 2 (to Theorem 5) of Belloni and Chernozhukov (2013)
apply and therefore n ^ p  (where we take the convention that the treatment effect is
set to 0 for any unique treatment combination that is excluded from S^pool but in S , and
that event happens wpa0).

Proof of Corollary 3.2. By Theorem 2.1 of Belloni, Chernozhukov, Chetverikov, and Wei
(2018), the post-regularized estimator is asymptotically normally distributed. Therefore,
wpa1,
                                                n2 min
                                                     2
                                 1 - 2K exp -            ,
                                                  2 2
the joint normality of the estimates of the pruned and pooled treatment effects hold. By
Corollary 2 of Andrews et al. (2019), the result follows. What remains is to check the
remaining Assumptions 2-4 required for the corollary to hold. Assumption 2, concerning
the uniform Lipschitz structure, follows from the bounded moments (mechanical, as
these are independent treatments) in the OLS structure of the problem. Assumption
3, concerning the uniform consistency of the variance estimator, again follows since the
sample variance can be used. Assumption 4 bounds from above and below the entries of
the variance-covariance matrix and holds given independent treatment assignment.
                    SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                 42

                           Appendix B. Pooling Procedure

  Recall that every treatment combination k (of a set K of size K = RM ) has a treatment
profile P (k ), which captures which treatment arms are "active" irrespective of intensity
(dosage) of the arm. Recall, furthermore, the partial ordering of treatment combinations
where k  k is used when the intensities of k in each arm weakly dominate that of k .
The invertible transformation between the smart pooling specification (3.2) and unique
policies (3.1) implies the following relationship between parameters:

(B.1)                                k =                      k
                                           k k,P (k)=P (k )

As this suggests, the zeros in k equate two or more coefficients j , and therefore pool
treatment combinations within a treatment profile (i.e., pools dosages).26 Alternatively,
one can adopt the perspective that the nonzero k distinguishes two or more coefficients
j , and therefore disaggregates treatment combinations within a treatment profile. In
this section, we construct the pooling/disaggregation generically using S , the support
of the smart pooling specification (3.2). The end result is a set Spool of pooled policies.

B.1. A Guiding Example. To lend intuition for this construction, let us fix a guiding
example, with a particular R, M , a treatment profile, and the subset of the smart pooling
support S  S relevant to this profile.

Example 2. Consider a two-arm experiment of four intensities each (three non-zero
intensities), i.e., M = 2, R = 4. Consider the treatment profile where both treatment
arms are "active." Each treatment combination k within this profile (i.e., dosage) can be
denoted [r1 , r2 ], where ri  R is the intensity in the i-th arm. The partial ordering of
treatment combinations can be depicted in the following Hasse diagram in Figure B.1,
where a line upwards from x to y implies the latter marginally dominates the former
(y > x and there is no z s.t. y > z > x). Thus for example [2, 1] has a line upwards to
both [2, 2] and [3, 1], while [2, 2] and [3, 1] are incomparable.

  Now we can consider an example of the subset of support S  S of treatment
combinations in the smart pooling specification (3.2) relevant to this treatment profile.




26Notethat this includes pooling with the omitted category, which is of course just finding that one
more j = 0 and pruning away this set
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                          43


                                              [3, 3]


                                     [2, 3]            [3, 2]


                            [1, 3]            [2, 2]            [3, 1]


                                     [1, 2]            [2, 1]


                                              [1, 1]


                             Figure B.1. Hasse Diagram


Example 2 (continued). Let S  S = {[1, 2], [2, 1]} be the supported smart pooling
vectors within this treatment profile, and let [1,2] = 100 , [2,1] = 200 (chosen large for
clarity in exposition). Now, consider the sets A[1,2] and A[2,1] of treatment combinations
that weakly dominate each of [1, 2] and [2, 1] respectively. We can depict these directly
on the Hasse diagram in Figure B.2. With reference to the parameter relationship (B.1),


                          A[2,1]                                  A[1,2]
                                              [3, 3]


                                     [2, 3]            [3, 2]


                            [1, 3]            [2, 2]            [3, 1]


                                     [1, 2]            [2, 1]


                                              [1, 1]


                  Figure B.2. Hasse Diagram with A[2,1] and A[1,2]
                    SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                              44

these will determine treatment effects j within this treatment profile. Here are three
examples:
   (1) For j = [1, 3], per the parameter relationship (B.1), j = 100. This is seen
       visually by noting that only A[1,2] "encircles" [1, 3]
   (2) For j = [3, 1], per the parameter relationship (B.1), j = 200. This is seen
       visually by noting that only A[1,2] "encircles" [3, 1]
   (3) For j = [2, 2], per the parameter relationship (B.1), j = 100 + 200 = 300. This
       is seen visually by noting that both A[1,2] and A[2,1] "encircle" [2, 2]

   We showed that the calculation of three coefficients j depends on what "enricles" the
treatment combination, and it is now clear that the distinct (mutually disjoint) "regions
of encirclement" determine all the coefficients j within this profile (and therefore all
pooling/disaggregation within this profile).

Example 2 (continued). The three "regions of encirclement" are A[1,2]  Ac         [2,1] ("A[1,2]
                     c
alone encircles"), A[1,2]  A[2,1] ("A[2,1] alone encircles"), and A[1,2]  A[2,1] ("both A[1,2]
and A[2,1] encircle"). They are depicted in Figure B.3. These regions of encirclement


                          A[2,1]                                  A[1,2]
                                              [3, 3]
                                                                    A[1,2]  A[2,1]

                                     [2, 3]            [3, 2]


                            [1, 3]            [2, 2]            [3, 1]


                                     [1, 2]            [2, 1]

                  A[1,2]  Ac
                           [2,1]                                    Ac
                                                                     [1,2]  A[2,1]
                                              [1, 1]


       Figure B.3. Hasse Diagram with A[2,1] and A[1,2] with complements and
       intersections.


determine regions of equitreatment effects j , and therefore the pooled policies.
   (1) For any j  A[1,2]  Ac                              c
                           [2,1] , j = 100. Thus A[1,2]  A[2,1] = {[1, 2], [1, 3]} is a pooled
       policy.
                    SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                  45

   (2) For any j  Ac                                        c
                          [1,2]  A[2,1] , j = 200. Thus A[1,2]  A[2,1] = {[2, 1], [3, 1]} is a pooled
       policy.
   (3) For any j  A[1,2]  A[2,1] , j = 100 + 200 = 300. Thus A[1,2]  A[2,1] =
       {[2, 2], [2, 3], [3, 2], [3, 3]} is a pooled policy.
   And thus we generate the set of pooled policies for this treatment profile using the
relevant subset S  S of the smart pooling support.

B.2. The General Construction. The approach in the guiding example fully gener-
alizes for any treatment profile and for any R, M . Given the estimated support S       ^ of the
smart pooling specification (3.2), let [S   ^ ] denote its partition into sets of support vectors
with the same treatment profile. Each S  [S         ^ ] is thus a set of treatment combinations
{k1 , ...kn }. For each ki  {k1 , ...kn }, define the set:

(B.2)                     Aki = {k  K|P (k ) = P (ki ) and k  ki }

The pooled policies are the mutually disjoint "regions of encirclement" generated through
intersections:

(B.3)                                 A = Aa         an
                                           k1  ...  Akn
                                            1



where ai  {1, c}, and Ac denotes the complement of the set A. We are only interested
in those intersections A which are non-empty, and we furthermore exclude consideration
of the intersections of complements Ac k1  ...  Akn .
                                                     c

   The estimated set of pooled policies S  ^pool is the collection of all such sets A. Algo-
                                     ^pool procedurally. The following proposition verifies
rithm 2 describes this generation of S
its main properties, namely that when S    ^ is selected correctly (1) all treatment com-
binations that are pooled have equitreatment effects and (2) all non-zero policies are
accounted for.

                                                                            ^ = S .
Proposition B.1. Assume the support from (3.2) is correctly selected, i.e., S
                         ^pool = Spool . Then
Call the implied pooling S
   (1) For every A = Aa         an
                      k1  ...  Akn in Spool , and for every k  A,
                       1



(B.4)                                     k =             ki
                                                i|ai =1

       where the parameters  are from the original specification (3.1) and the parame-
       ters  are from the smart pooling specification (3.2). This justifies the statement
       that A pools treatment combinations with the same treatment profile and with the
       same treatment effects.
   (2) Spool is a superset of the support S of granular policies from (3.1). That is, if
       treatment combination k is such that k = 0, then A  Spool s.t. k  A.
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                          46

Proof of Proposition B.1. Consider an arbitrary S  [S  ^ ] where S = {k1 , ...kn }, an
                          a1        an
arbitrary nonempty A = Ak1  ...  Akn in Spool , and an arbitrary k  A. Membership
in A immediately implies that:
   (1) i  {1, ..., n}, P (k ) = P (ki )
   (2) i such that ai = 1, k  ki
   (3) i such that ai = c, k ki
Furthermore, if k  is a vector such that P (k  ) = P (k ) but k  / {k1 , ..., kn }, then by
definition of S , k = 0. Thus from the parameter relationship (B.1) we have:

(B.5)                                     k =             ki .
                                                i|ai =1

Thus, part (1) follows.

   For part (2), consider any k = 0. By (B.1), there must be a vector k s.t. P (k ) =
P (k ) and k = 0. Necessarily k  S , so in particular, k  S = (k1 , ...kn )  [S   ^ ].
                   a1         an
Then k  A = Ak1  ...  Akn for some (a1 , ..., an ), since these sets together form a
disjoint union of Ak1  ...  Akn .


 Algorithm 2: Pooling Procedure
  input : Estimated support S        ^ from the smart pooling specification (3.2)
  output: Estimated pooled policies S       ^pool for pooled specification (3.4)
  Partition S ^ into [S ^ ] per the treatment profile mapping P (.) ;
             ^pool -  ;
  Initialize S
  for S  [S  ^ ] do
      discover S = {k1 , ..., kn };
      generate {Ak1 , ..., Akn };
      for each (a1 , ..., an )|ai  {1, c} do
          generate A = Aa                an
                              k1  ...  Akn ;
                               1


          if A =  and A = Ak1  ...  Ac
                                   c
                                              kn then
              S^pool - S   ^pool  A;
          end
      end
  end
  return S  ^pool
                   SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                             47

                               Appendix C. Simulations

C.1. Smart pooling without Puffering, (3.2), fails irrepresentability. Consider
the smart pooling covariate where all M arms are "on" with highest intensity, i.e., Xk
for k  = (R - 1, ..., R - 1). We will show that this covariate is "representable" by the other
covariates. Intuitively, this means too much of this covariate is explained by the others.
Formally, the L1 norm of the coefficients (excluding intercept) from a regression of this
covariate over the others is too great (it exceeds > 1). That is, if an OLS regression
finds:

                                 Xk  = ^0 +            ^k Xk .
                                                       
                                              kK,k=k

   Xk is representable by the other covariates if kK,k=k |    ^k | > 1.
   We demonstrate this through a proof by example. A simulation establishes that
Xk is representable (and therefore that the specification fails irrepresentability) for a
computationally reasonable range of R and M . We see that the patterns imply that
irrepresentability fails even more dramatically for larger R and M .
   In this simulation, we choose large n = 10, 000 so that the propensities of "1" within
each covariate have stabilized. We consider two kinds of regressions: an "unstandard-
ized" regression where the raw smart pooling covariates are regressed, and a "standard-
ized" regression where the smart pooling covariates are first standardized by the L2
norm. The latter corresponds to a preprocessing step that LASSO packages typically
apply before LASSO selecting; we would like to know if irrepresentability fails even in
this case. Indeed, we see the L1 norms are greater than 1 in both cases, and irrepre-
sentability fails.

         R M L1 norm (standardized vars) L1 norm (unstandardized vars)
         3 2                        1.73                          1.26
         3 3                        3.67                          2.32
         3 4                        7.66                           4.2
         4 2                        1.77                          1.24
         4 3                        3.98                          2.43
         4 4                        8.27                          4.14
         5 2                        1.87                          1.28
         5 3                        3.78                          2.29
         5 4                        7.90                          4.70
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                  48

C.2. Comparisons of Smart Pooling and Pruning with alternatives. We show
that the smart pooling and pruning estimator selects the support S of (3.2) consistently
(whereas the naive LASSO does not) and then show that the overall estimator outper-
forms (in terms of estimating the best policy effect) an estimator using naive LASSO on
the set of unique policies (with out pooling) as in (3.1).
   In what follows, we consider results on simulated design matrices of (3.2) with the
following common setup:
    (1) Fix R = 3, M = 4 and  := var( ) = 1
    (2) The simulation results are plots of performance m      ^ (n) against sample size n, where
        n is logarithmically spaced between 1000 and 10000.27
    (3) These scores m ^ (n) are generically computed as follows.
         (a) A set C of true supports of (3.2) is drawn based on a conditionally random
                                                                 i
             logic that will be specified. Each member S            C is a particular support or
                                                                                            i
             "configuration" (3.2). Each configuration has fixed support size |S              | = M.
                                 i
             Furthermore, if S      = (k1 , k2 , .., kM ) in some given order, we assign coeffi-
                                   j -1
             cients kj = 1 + M -1  . That is, these nonzero coefficients are linearly
             spaced between  and 2 . Thus each configuration fully specifies the set of
             coefficients  for (3.2).
                         i
        (b) For each S      C , a set SS i (n) of simulations (design matrices) is generated

             per the coefficients specified by the configuration, and the Gaussian noise,
             with sample size n. For each simulation s         ^(n)  SS    i (n), it is scored by a

             metric m(^ s(n)) that will be specified.
         (c) These scores are aggregated over simulations SS          i (n), and then aggregated

             again over configurations C , to produce the aggregated performance score
             m^ (n).

C.2.1. Smart Pooling and Pruning outperforms LASSO in pooling policies. We demon-
strate that the first step in the smart pooling and pruning procedure consistently recovers
the support S whereas the naive LASSO fails to do so. This is owing to the aforemen-
tioned violation of irrepresentability, which is overcome using the Puffer transformation.
                                                                    i
   Here we draw randomly chosen support configurations C where S      is entirely within the
treatment profile where all arms are "active": this is where we expect excess correlation,
as the irrepresentability failures in Appendix Section C.1 shows. Ex-ante, we do not
assume anything about the locus of the true support, so any model selection procedure
must be consistent for this "worst case" possibility.

27We  logarithmically space for computational ease, as simulations become computationally intensive at
high n
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                         49

   We demonstrate that the preprocessed smart pooling and pruning estimator (with
                                                                                  i
sequential elimination implementation of LASSO) consistently selects the model S    but
the naive strategy of directly applying to LASSO to (3.2) does not. To evaluate each
simulation s                                      ^ (^
            ^(n), given model selection estimator S  s(n)), it is scored by the support
selection accuracy

                                            ^
                                           |S i
                                                 s(n))  S
                                                (^       i
                                                           |
                              m(^
                                s(n)) :=                     .
                                            ^ i
                                           |S (^         i
                                                 s(n))  S |
  This is a value between 0 and 1 that increases with support coverage, and is 1 iff the
support is correctly selected. It is aggregated by taking averages over the simulations
per configuration, and then averaged again over the configurations.

                                    1            1
                        ^ (n) :=
                        m                                             m(^
                                                                        s(n)).
                                   |C|   C   |SSi (n)|
                                                       S    i   (n)
                                                           S

  In the below simulation result, we draw five support configurations, and 20 simulations
                                                       i
per configuration, i.e., |C| = 5 and |SSi (n)| = 20, S
                                                        C , n.




       Figure C.1. A comparison of average support accuracies between the
       smart pooling and pruning estimator and a direct implementation of
       LASSO on (3.2) using Chernozhukov et al. (2015). There are 20 simu-
       lations per support configuration per n, for five support configurations.


  From Figure C.1, we can clearly see that only our preprocessed smart pooling and
pruning estimator is support consistent, converging to 100% average accuracy, while a
                     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                             50

direct application of LASSO is not, as m  ^ (n) does not exhibit a clear monotonic pattern
and never exceeds 75% average accuracy.28
   Besides being consistent, even when the smart pooling and pruning estimator fails to
select the correct support (for lower n), it still tends to select the correct best policy. To
see this, we define a best policy inclusion scoring function:

                        ^
             
                c1        i                                                          i
                c2
                     if S   (n) pools together a subset of the true best policy per S  ,
m(^
  s(n)) =                   ^ i
                     and S (n) pools together c1 policies in the best policy while S    i
                                                                                          pools c2 policies
             
                0    otherwise.
   This is again a value between 0 and 1 that increases with best policy inclusion, and
is 1 iff the best policy is selected and pooled perfectly. m ^ (n) is computed the same as
before (with the same C and SS    i (n). Plotting together the average best policy inclusion

and average support accuracy for the pooling and pruning estimator:




         Figure C.2. A plot of average support accuracy and best policy inclusion
         for the smart pooling and pruning estimator. There are 20 simulations per
         support configuration per n, for 5 support configurations.

  We see that average best policy inclusion is near perfect even when there are support
errors at low n, and indeed reaches 100% coverage in simulations very quickly for modest
increases in n.

C.2.2. Smart Pooling and Pruning outperforms LASSO on unique policies. The previous
simulations show that our model selection procedure with the Puffer transformation is
28Note  that in both LASSO implementations, the LASSO parameter  increases with n. In the case
of a direct
       application      of LASSO using Chernozhukov et al. (2015),  is calculated via the formula
 = 2c n   ^ -1 (1 - 0.1/(2K )).
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                           51

the right way to pool. We can also demonstrate the importance of pooling in the first
place, which is the second step. After all, the alternative is to simply apply the naive
LASSO on (3.1).
   Indeed, the relevant counterfactual is applying LASSO as a pruning (but not pool-
ing) step on the specification (3.1) of unique, finely differentiated policies, which are
determined by (3.2) by an invertible linear transformation.
   A key reason this alternate strategy is worse is that the efficiency of the hybrid es-
timator of Andrews et al. (2019) can degrade, which happens because the attenuation
from winner's curse increases the closer the second-best estimate is to the best. By not
pooling, it can over-penalize the estimator by running a best policy against a negligi-
bly smaller second-best dosage variant, leading to needlessly conservative estimates. A
simulation attests to this.
   Here, there will be a single configuration C , which we can call S . M - 1 covariates of
X are randomly sampled where at least one treatment arm is "inactive"; these will be
less relevant for winner's curse adjustments, because the coefficients are bounded above
          M -2
by 1 + M    -1
                 < 2 . The interesting action is the M -th coefficient k , which we will
assign 2 . We assign this to k = (1, 1, .., 1), i.e., where Xk indicates "at least some
nonzero dosage". By the invertible transformation between (3.2) and (3.1), all unique
policies with the treatment profile where all arms are "active" will have true treatment
effect exactly 2 . Again, ex-ante we cannot assume the locus of S , so it suffices to
consider this the "worst case" possibility.
   For each simulation s^(n), it is scored (conditional on a model selection procedure) by
its error with respect to the true treatment effect:

                                              hyb
                                  m(^
                                    s(n)) := ^k
                                              ^   - 2.
And thus m
         ^ (n) is simply the estimated MSE:
                                          1
                            ^ (n) :=
                            m                               m2 (^
                                                                s(n)).
                                       |SS (n)| S
                                                    S (n)


In the below simulation result, we fix the number of simulations per n as |SS (n)| = 20
for all n.
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                          52




       Figure C.3. A comparison of the MSE of the hybrid estimator of An-
       drews et al. (2019) for winner's curse adjusted best policy estimation,
       between the smart pooling and pruning estimator and a naive strategy of
       applying LASSO to the unique policy specification (3.1). There are 20
       simulations per n.

   Clearly, although both estimators are consistent, the hybrid estimator that pools as
well as prunes outperforms the other. That this is primarily from the relative penaliza-
tions from winner's curse, and not model selection issues, can be verified via a secondary
simulation, with the exact same set up but where we condition on the true support of
(3.2) and (3.1). The winner's curse estimate without pooling increases MSE because we
are effectively running best policies "against themselves" (minor dosage variant with the
same effect).




       Figure C.4. A comparison of the MSE of the hybrid estimator of An-
       drews et al. (2019) for winner's curse-adjusted best policy estimation,
       conditional on selecting the true support in (3.2) and (3.1). There are
       20 simulations per n.
          SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                   53

                     Appendix D. Robustness




Figure D.1. Sensitivity of best-policy estimation for #immunizations
per LASSO penalty  for a sequential elimination version of LASSO on
PufferN (X, Y )




Figure D.2. Sensitivity of best-policy estimation for #immunizations
per $ per LASSO penalty  for a sequential elimination version of LASSO
on PufferN (X, Y )
          SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                  54

     ONLINE APPENDIX: NOT FOR PUBLICATION
                 Appendix E. Appendix Figures




Figure E.1. National Immunization Schedule for Infants, Children, and
Pregnant Women.
     SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES            55




Figure E.2. Overview of Survey Data Collection Activities.
                       SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                                   56

                               Appendix F. Substitution Patterns

          Table F.1. Incentive Treatment Effects for Non-Tablet Children from
          Endline Data

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                  At Least 2    At Least 3     At Least 4     At Least 5     At Least 6      At Least 7               Measles 1
                     (1)               (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)                     (7)
High Slope         -0.158        -0.052          -0.076         -0.196         -0.187         -0.027                   -0.135
                   (0.062)       (0.072)         (0.093)        (0.106)        (0.101)        (0.105)                  (0.108)

High Flat          -0.021        -0.024          -0.091         -0.078         -0.053          0.102                    0.185
                   (0.088)       (0.063)         (0.078)        (0.155)        (0.152)        (0.167)                  (0.143)

Low Slope           0.090         0.175           0.104         -0.026         -0.152         -0.079                    0.051
                   (0.064)       (0.060)         (0.085)        (0.099)        (0.080)        (0.077)                  (0.100)

Low Flat            0.004         0.069          -0.010         -0.110         -0.005         -0.079                   -0.102
                   (0.076)       (0.096)         (0.122)        (0.176)        (0.160)        (0.173)                  (0.148)

Control Mean         0.69          0.54            0.4           0.31           0.17            0.11                    0.39
Total Obs.           1179          1165           1165           1042           1042            706                     613
Zeros Replaced         0             0              0              0              0               0                       0
Note:             Specification includes District Fixed Effects, and a set of controls for seeds and reminders. Control mean shown
                  in levels, and standard errors are clustered at the SC Level


          Table F.2. Seeds Treatment Effects for Non-Tablet Children from End-
          line Data

                                                                                Dependent variable:
                             At Least 2      At Least 3     At Least 4     At Least 5     At Least 6     At Least 7               Measles 1
                                 (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)                      (7)
Random                         -0.101         -0.045         0.0003         -0.143          0.015          0.058                   -0.017
                               (0.059)        (0.066)        (0.088)        (0.122)        (0.102)        (0.102)                  (0.101)

Information Hub                -0.040         -0.121         -0.025         -0.112          0.018         -0.105                   -0.092
                               (0.082)        (0.080)        (0.113)        (0.135)        (0.123)        (0.073)                  (0.119)

Trusted                         0.034         -0.033          0.111          0.027          0.147         -0.011                    0.106
                               (0.070)        (0.073)        (0.100)        (0.128)        (0.118)        (0.107)                  (0.111)

Trusted Information Hub        -0.103         -0.082         -0.031         -0.209         -0.099         -0.057                   -0.344
                               (0.075)        (0.079)        (0.100)        (0.113)        (0.086)        (0.082)                  (0.099)

Control Mean                    0.78            0.66           0.5            0.58           0.3            0.22                    0.62
Total Obs.                      469             461            461            389            389            251                     231
Zeros Replaced                    0               0             0               0             0               0                       0
Note:                        Specification includes District Fixed Effects, and a set of controls for incentives and reminders. Contro
                             shown in levels, and standard errors are clustered at the SC Level
                      SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                                           57

        Table F.3. Reminders Treatment Effects for Non-Tablet Children from
        Endline Data

                                                               Dependent variable:
                 At Least 2   At Least 3   At Least 4    At Least 5   At Least 6     At Least 7             Measles 1
                    (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)                       (7)
33%                0.079         0.093        0.070        0.033         0.019        -0.138                   0.011
                  (0.058)       (0.066)      (0.085)      (0.104)       (0.094)       (0.080)                 (0.086)

66%                0.031         0.096        0.042       -0.074        -0.073        -0.044                  -0.097
                  (0.053)       (0.055)      (0.069)      (0.091)       (0.079)       (0.067)                 (0.084)

Control Mean        0.64         0.48         0.34          0.28         0.19           0.13                   0.46
Total Obs.          1179         1165         1165          1042         1042           706                    613
Zeros Replaced        0            0            0             0            0              0                      0
Note:            Specification includes District Fixed Effects, and a set of controls for seeds and incentives. Control mean shown
                 in levels, and standard errors are clustered at the SC Level
                  SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                        58

                          Appendix G. Data Validation

   A household survey was conducted to monitor program implementation at the child-
level--whether the record entered in the tablet corresponded to an actual child, and
whether the data entered for this child was correct. This novel child verification ex-
ercise involved J-PAL field staff going to villages to find the households of a set of
randomly selected children which, according to the tablet data, visited a session camp
in the previous four weeks. Child verification was continuous throughout the program
implementation, and the findings indicate high accuracy of the tablet data. We sampled
children every week to ensure no additional vaccine was administered in the lag between
them visiting the session camp and the monitoring team visiting them. Data entered in
the tablets was generally of high quality. There were almost no incidences of fake child
records, and the child's name and date of birth were accurate over 80% of the time. For
71% of children the vaccines overlapped completely (for all main vaccines under age of
12 months). Vaccine-wise, on average, 88% of the cases had matching immunization
records. Errors seem genuine, rather than coming from fraud: they show no systematic
pattern of inclusion or exclusion and are no different in any of the treatment groups.
                SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                         59

                       Appendix H. Baseline Statistics

        Table H.1. Selected Baseline Statistics of Haryana Immunization

                                                                  Population-Weighted Average
Baseline Covariates­Demographic Variables
(Village Level Averages)
Fraction participating in Employment Generating Schemes                      0.045
Fraction Below Poverty Line (BPL)                                            0.187
Household Financial Status (on 1-10 scale)                                   3.243
Fraction Scheduled Caste-Scheduled Tribes (SC/ST)                            0.232
Fraction Other Backward Caste (OBC)                                          0.21
Fraction Hindu                                                               0.872
Fraction Muslim                                                              0.101
Fraction Christian                                                           0.001
Fraction Buddhist                                                               0
Fraction Literate                                                            0.771
Fraction Unmarried                                                            0.05
Fraction of Adults Married (living with spouse)                              0.504
Fraction of Adults Married (not living with spouse)                          0.002
Fraction of Adults Divorced or Seperated                                     0.001
Fraction Widow or Widower                                                    0.039
Fraction who Received Nursery level Education or Less                         0.17
Fraction who Received Class 4 level Education                                0.086
Fraction who Received Class 9 level Education                                0.158
Fraction who Received Class 12 level Education                               0.223
Fraction who Received Graduate or Other Diploma level Education              0.081
Baseline Covariates­Immunization History of Older Cohort
(Village Level Averages)
Number of Vaccines Administered to Pregnant Mother                           2.271
Number of Vaccines Administered to Child Since Birth                         4.23
Fraction of Children who Received Polio Drops                                0.998
Number of Polio Drops Administered to Child                                  2.989
Fraction of Children who Received an Immunized Card                          0.877
Number of Observations
Villages                                                                     903
              SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                         60

                Appendix I. Information Hub Questions

(1) Random seeds: In this treatment arm, we did not survey villages. We picked six
    ambassadors randomly from the census.
(2) Information hub seed: Respondents were asked to identify who is good at relaying
    information.
       We used the following script to ask the question to the 17 households:
         "Who are the people in this village, who when they share information,
         many people in the village get to know about it. For example, if they
         share information about a music festival, street play, fair in this village,
         or movie shooting many people would learn about it. This is because
         they have a wide network of friends, contacts in the village and they
         can use that to actively spread information to many villagers. Could
         you name four such individuals, male or female, that live in the village
         (within OR outside your neighbourhood in the village) who when they
         say something many people get to know?â
(3) "Trust" seed: Respondents were asked to identify those who are generally trusted
    to provide good advice about health or agricultural questions (see appendix for
    script)
       We used the following script to elicit who they were:
         "Who are the people in this village that you and many villagers trust,
         both within and outside this neighbourhood? When I say trust I mean
         that when they give advice on something, many people believe that it
         is correct and tend to follow it. This could be advice on anything like
         choosing the right fertilizer for your crops, or keeping your child healthy.
         Could you name four such individuals, male or female, who live in the
         village (within OR outside your neighbourhood in the village) and are
         trusted?"
(4) "Trusted information hub" seed: Respondents were asked to identify who is both
    trusted and good at transmitting information
         "Who are the people in this village, both within and outside this neigh-
         bourhood, who when they share information, many people in the village
         get to know about it. For example, if they share information about a
         music festival, street play, fair in this village, or movie shooting many
         people would learn about it. This is because they have a wide network of
         friends/contacts in the village and they can use that to actively spread
         information to many villagers. Among these people, who are the people
         that you and many villagers trust? When I say trust I mean that when
      SMART POOLING AND PRUNING TO SELECT POLICIES                          61

they give advice on something, many people believe that it is correct
and tend to follow it. This could be advice on anything like choosing
the right fertilizer for your crops, or keeping your child healthy. Could
you name four such individuals, male or female, that live in the village
(within OR outside your neighbourhood in the village) who when they
say something many people get to know and are trusted by you and
other villagers?"
