                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    DIGITAL COLLATERAL

                                           Paul Gertler
                                           Brett Green
                                        Catherine Wolfram

                                       Working Paper 28724
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28724


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 2021, Revised May 2021




This research was supported by USAID, CGAP and IFC (as part of the HIFI program), and
JPAL's Post-Primary Education program and UC Berkeley's Lab for Inclusive FinTech (LIFT).
We are very grateful to Jenya Kahn-Lang, Renping Li, Sanghamitra Mukherjee, Derek Wolfson,
Hilary Yu, and especially Robert Pickmans for excellent research assistance. Laura Steiner
provided exceptional project management, and we are also grateful to the whole team at IPA
Uganda. We are also grateful to Efraim Benmelech (discussant), David Levine, Isabel
Macdonald, David Sraer, and Antoinette Schoar for useful comments and suggestions as well as
participants at the Harvard/Yale/Berkeley EEE seminar, NBER Corporate Finance Meetings, the
University of British Columbia, Columbia University, and University of California, Merced. The
experiment described in this paper is registered at the AEA RCT Registry under the code
AEARCTR-0004191. The protocol was granted IRB approval by the University of California at
Berkeley under the code 2018-10-11516. The authors declare that they have no financial or
material interests in the results discussed in this paper. The views expressed in this article do not
necessarily represent the views of the United States or the U.S. Department of the Treasury. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Paul Gertler, Brett Green, and Catherine Wolfram. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Digital Collateral
Paul Gertler, Brett Green, and Catherine Wolfram
NBER Working Paper No. 28724
April 2021, Revised May 2021
JEL No. G20,I22,O16

                                          ABSTRACT

A new form of secured lending utilizing "digital collateral" has recently emerged, most
prominently in low and middle income countries. Digital collateral relies on "lockout"
technology, which allows the lender to temporarily disable the flow value of the collateral to the
borrower without physically repossessing it. We explore this new form of credit both in a model
and in a field experiment using school-fee loans digitally secured with a solar home system. We
find that securing a loan with digital collateral drastically reduces default rates (by 19 pp) and
increases the lender's rate of return (by 38 pp). Employing a variant of the Karlan and Zinman
(2009) methodology, we decompose the total effect and find that roughly one-third is attributable
to (ex-ante) adverse selection and two-thirds is attributable to (interim or ex-post) moral hazard.
Access to a school-fee loan significantly increases school enrollment and school-related
expenditures without detrimental effects to households' balance sheet.

Paul Gertler                                     Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business                          Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley               University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720                               Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER                                         and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu                        wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu

Brett Green
Olin School of Business
Washington University
St. Louis, MO
b.green@wustl.edu
1         Introduction
There is a general consensus that households in low and middle income countries (LMICs)
have insufficient access to credit. While 20 years ago economists were optimistic that
microfinance would fill this void, most of the evidence suggests that microfinance loans do
not have transformative effects on the average borrower (Banerjee et al., 2015; Meager,
2019).
        Traditional microfinance loans are typically unsecured and characterized by high in-
terest rates, large transaction costs, and low uptake. In contrast, more than 80% of total
household debt in the US is secured by a physical asset.1 Using collateral to secure debt
helps overcome economic frictions, thereby expanding the supply of credit and reducing
the cost of credit provision. Yet, secured debt is much less prevalent in very poor coun-
tries. Why? First, property rights are difficult to establish and enforce in economies with
weak legal institutions, which translates to a high cost of repossessing collateral for cred-
itors. This is especially true for households in remote areas, where the costs associated
with locating collateral, physically repossessing it, and subsequently redeploying it are
prohibitive. Second, the primary source of income for many households in LMICs is self-
employment, which is subject to more frequent shocks than households whose primary
source of income is from formal sector wages. As such, they are more likely to default for
nonstrategic reasons and may choose to avoid the risk of having assets repossessed.
        In this paper, we argue that collateral need not be physically repossessed in order to
serve a useful role in access to credit. Recent technological innovations have facilitated the
use of digital collateral without the need for costly and inefficient physical repossession.
An emerging example is pay-as-you-go financing (PAYGO). The typical PAYGO contract
requires a nominal down payment to take possession of an asset, followed by frequent,
small payments made via a mobile payment system. PAYGO financing crucially relies
on an embedded "lockout technology" that allows the lender to remotely, cheaply, and
temporarily disable the flow of services from the asset. In other words, the lender can
digitally repossess the asset without the need to repossess it physically. Digital collateral
    1
    Source: "Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit," Federal Reserve of the Bank of New York
(2020), https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC 2020Q2.pdf.


                                                1
has several technological advantages: disabling the flow of services is cheap and easily
reversible. Borrowers unable to make a payment do not lose the asset, rather they are
simply unable to consume the flow of services from the asset until they start paying
again. These advantages allow for a richer space of financial contracts involving flexible
repayment schedules (e.g., pay per usage) and temporary (digital) repossession for non-
payment.2
       We explore this new form of financial contracting within a stylized model and a field ex-
periment. In the model, firms can produce a good at a constant marginal cost. Households
have a private value for consuming the good that is realized after they take possession
of it. Due to their limited wealth and financial constraints, households cannot afford to
purchase the good outright. In order to recoup their costs, firms must offer financing to
households. But households cannot credibly commit to repay out of future income. Thus,
firms offer a contract that is collateralized by the good: if the household does not repay
the loan then the firm repossesses the good.
       In the model, repossessing collateral plays two roles: (i) the lender recovers something
of value, thereby insuring them against default, and (ii) the household loses something of
value, thereby providing them incentive to repay or decline the loan offer. In most models
of collateralized lending, these two implications are inherently bundled. They need not
be. In both our model and experimental setting, repossessing digital collateral imposes a
cost on households who fail to repay but does not necessarily involve recovery value for
the lender.This decoupling is especially valuable when the lender's faces a high cost of
repossession rendering the recovery role of little (net) value.
       Much like traditional collateral, securing loans with digital collateral reduces the firms'
cost of providing financing via two channels relative to unsecured credit. First, it provides
households with an incentive to repay the loan when they can afford to do so, thereby the
moral hazard problem of strategic default. Second, when combined with a downpayment,
digital collateral serves as a screening mechanism to overcome adverse selection. That
is, a borrower that knows she is more likely to face a negative income shock will have
   2
    These features are in contrast to the typical secured loan that involves a fixed repayment schedule
and permanent (physical) repossession in default.



                                                  2
less incentive to accept a digitally secured loan. By reducing moral hazard and adverse
selection, lenders can offer more financing to credit-worthy borrowers at terms they find
acceptable.
   In spite of the two aforementioned attributes, a stronger (or more effective) lockout
technology--which enables collateral to be digitized--does not necessarily increase wel-
fare. Stronger lockout destroys more surplus (i.e., household utility) when it is employed,
which can offset the welfare gains of the credit expansion. As a result, an intermediate de-
gree of lockout can be welfare maximizing. This finding is consistent with the temporary
and relatively lenient nature in which the lockout technology is employed in the typical
PAYGO contract compared to traditional secured lending.
   We conduct a field experiment to identify the impact of digital collateral on market
frictions and economic outcomes. To conduct the experiment, we partnered with Fenix
International, the largest solar-home system (SHS) provider in Uganda. The SHS provides
a household with access to a modest amount of electricity without being connected to the
grid. Fenix offers PAYGO financing for their SHS. They also offer follow-up loans for
good payers, where the SHS is re-used as digital collateral to secure the loan. Our study
examines the effects of digital collateral with Fenix's most popular follow-up product, a
cash loan that is offered to customers near the beginning of each school term when school
fees are due.
   Our experimental design randomizes the sample into three treatment groups and a
control group. In the first treatment, the customer is offered a loan secured with digital
collateral. In the second treatment, the customer is offered an unsecured loan. In the
third treatment, a customer is offered a secured loan, but if the customer accepts the
loan, he or she is (positively) "surprised" and receives an unsecured loan. The "surprise"
group is used to disentangle adverse selection from moral hazard a la Karlan and Zinman
(2009).
   Our experiment yields five main results. First, customer interest and take-up rates
are high. More than 12% of the over 27,000 customers who received an SMS about the
loan indicated they were interested. Of the 2,200 customers who were offered a loan
after expressing interest, 47% took up the offer and received a loan. These high take-up


                                             3
rates suggest the loan terms were attractive to customers and help to alleviate credit
constraints. Second, consistent with our hypothesis that digital collateral reduces adverse
selection, the take-up rate was about 6 percentage points (pp) lower for customers offered
a (digitally) secured loan than those offered an unsecured loan (45% vs 51%).
   Third, digital collateral significantly increases loan repayment. Average repayment
increased by 11 pp when the loan was secured with digital collateral compared to an
unsecured loan. Furthermore, the fraction of households that fully repaid the secured loan
was 19 pp higher than the unsecured loans. About one-third of the total effect can be
attributed to adverse selection while two-thirds is driven by moral hazard. The reduction
in moral hazard was concentrated among higher risk borrowers (based on repayment
of previous loans), whereas the reduction in adverse selection was concentrated among
lower risk borrowers. From a profitability standpoint, digital collateral increased the
(annualized) internal rate of return on the loans by 38 pp.
   Our finding that moral hazard rather than adverse selection drives the majority of
the repayment increase is important because it suggests that credit provision is both
sustainable and acceptable to a large fraction of households, provided they are given the
right incentives. Therefore, the potential for digital collateral to expand access to credit
is significant. By contrast, if we had found that most of the increase in repayment was
due to adverse selection, then digital collateral serves primarily as a screening device and
only a select subset of households are both willing and profitable lending opportunities.
   Our fourth finding is that the school-fee loan had a positive impact on both enrollment
and school expenditures. Children in households that were offered a school-fee loan were
significantly more likely to be enrolled at school compared to children in the control
group. Accounting for loan take-up, the loans reduced the share of children who were
not enrolled by half (from 12% to 6%). In addition, households with loans increased
schooling related-expenditures by 44%. Increases in enrollment were concentrated among
males, but increases in expenditures were observed for both males and females.
   Fifth, the loans did not have significant effects on household balance sheets. Asset
purchases (sales) increased (decreased) moderately, but not significantly, and household
borrowing was largely unchanged. Our estimates are precise enough to rule out large


                                             4
negative impacts on household balance sheet.
      Altogether, our results suggest that digital collateral increases the share of customers to
whom a company can profitably offer loans. Moreover, these loans significantly increased
school enrollment and expenditures, suggesting that the customers did not have access to
other sources of financing to pay for school fees. While our findings are mostly positive,
securing loans with digital collateral is not without cost. First, there are costs to integrate
and install the lockout technology into a SHS. Second, there is an (ex-post) inefficiency
associated with locking devices. In our sample, the SHS was locked for 50 of the first 200
days from loan origination for the median household (Table 3). On one hand, this could
be viewed as a feature of the PAYGO contract; customers need not make payments on
days in which they do not require or have a low value for electricity, whereas borrowers
face permanent repossession if they fail to repay a traditional secured loan. On the other
hand, it suggests that there is potential room for improvement in the contract design.
      Our study helps to explain why digital collateral is being employed in a range of
emerging applications. For example, PayJoy, a FinTech firm based in San Francisco,
developed a lockout technology for smart phones and has been offering digitally secured
credit for the purchase of smart phones since 2016. Similar to Fenix's school-fee loan
product, they recently started to offer secured cash loans to customers who have completed
the payments on the initial loan by recollateralizing the smart phone. Payjoy has large
scale operations in Mexico, and a small but growing customer base in South Africa, India,
Indonesia, and Zambia. With the proliferation of smart devices, secured lending via digital
collateral could easily be extended to a wide range of devices such as laptops, refrigerators,
and televisions. Importantly, the capacity to reuse collateral for future loans (as it has
been by Fenix and PayJoy) expands the potential impact of the innovation as a vehicle
for affordable access to credit.
      A similar technology has been deployed in the United States for subprime auto loans.
Several firms have developed starter interrupt devices, which allow the lender to remotely
disable the ability to start the car if the borrower is not in good standing on the loan.
These devices have been installed in more than two million vehicles.3
  3
      See https://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/09/24/miss-a-payment-good-luck-moving-that-car.



                                                 5
        Finally, electric, telecommunication, and water companies have been using similar
contracts to finance last mile connection costs (Devoto et al., 2012; van den Berg and
Danilenko, 2014; Coville et al., 2021). In addition some utilities use their flow of services as
digital collateral to provide financing for other asset purchases. For example, TELMEX,
a Mexican telecom provides secured loans to customers for the purchase of computer
equipment using the customers' access to internet service as digital collateral.4 We believe
there is significant potential for utilities to further scale the use of digital collateral in
providing affordable access to credit in LMICs.



2         Related Literature
Our paper relates to several different literatures including corporate and household fi-
nance, microfinance, and education in development economics.


2.1         Collateral in Credit Markets

There is a large theoretical literature explaining the use of collateral in credit markets.
Our contribution to this literature is to explicitly model the repossession technology and
to understand how its properties impact equilibrium outcomes. Most relevant to our work
are the numerous papers that have illustrated how collateral can be useful to mitigate
inefficiencies associated with moral hazard, adverse selection, and limited enforcement. In
a model with adverse selection, Bester (1985) shows that the credit rationing in Stiglitz
and Weiss (1981) can be (partially) overcome through the use of collateral as a screening
device: better credit risks post more collateral and receive a lower interest rate, thereby
eliminating the need for rationing.5 Securing debt with collateral does not come without
cost: by assumption, posting collateral is more costly for riskier borrowers leading to
a single-crossing property that facilitates screening. Another explanation for the use of
collateral is to alleviate moral hazard problems: posting collateral makes it more costly
for a borrower to risk shift, shirk, or strategically default (Bester, 1987; Chan and Thakor,
    4
        See https://telmex.com/web/hogar/credito-telmex.
    5
        Similar findings obtain in Chan and Kanatas (1985); Bester (1987); Besanko and Thakor (1987a,b).



                                                     6
1987; Tirole, 2006).6
       There is also an extensive empirical literature on the role of collateral in credit markets.
Consistent with our experimental findings, a number of papers have found observational
evidence consistent with moral hazard (Berger and Udell, 1990, 1995; Jimenez et al.,
2006).
       There is also evidence that a more efficient repossession technology leads to credit
expansion. One source of inefficiency are liquidation costs after repossession. (Assun¸
                                                                                      ca~o
et al., 2013) shows that loan spreads dropped and credit expanded, but default rates
increased after a Brazilian reform that simplified the sale of repossessed cars. Benmelech
and Bergman (2009) finds that debts secured by more redeployable collateral exhibit lower
credit spreads, higher credit ratings, and higher loan-to-value ratios. Another source of
inefficiency are the costs associated with repossessing collateral after default due to weak
creditor rights. In countries with stronger creditor rights protection (and thus lower costs
of repossession), the credit markets are more developed, which may contribute to economic
growth (e.g., La Porta et al., 1998; Qian and Strahan, 2007; Djankov et al., 2007). The
potential economic benefits of collateral are therefore more significant in less developed
countries and countries with weaker creditor rights protection (Liberti and Mian, 2010;
Benmelech et al., 2020).
       Nevertheless, borrowing secured is not without cost. Exhausting pledgeable assets may
mean losing financial flexibility and giving up profitable future investment opportunities
(see, e.g., Acharya et al., 2007; Rampini and Viswanathan, 2010, 2013; Li et al., 2016;
Donaldson et al., 2019). By pledging collateral, a firm also limits its flexibility to sell
or redeploy assets to craft a better business operation. Indeed, Benmelech et al. (2020)
document a significant decline in secured debt (as a fraction of total debt) among US
firms over the twentieth century attributed in part to these reasons.
   6
    The theoretical literature also illustrates other roles for the use of collateral (or control rights) in-
cluding incomplete contracts ((Aghion and Bolton, 1992; Hart and Moore, 1994)), monitoring incen-
tives (Rajan and Winton, 1995), priority (Ayotte and Bolton, 2011), limited enforcement (Rampini and
Viswanathan, 2013), exclusivity (Donaldson et al., 2019), and as a commitment device (DeMarzo, 2019).




                                                     7
2.2      Microfinance

The effectiveness of microcredit as a tool to combat poverty appears to be more modest
than advocated by its early proponents and unlikely to be a major pathway out of poverty
for much of the population (Banerjee et al., 1994; Meager, 2019). Moreover, microfinance
institutions (MFIs) are struggling as the costs of making small loans to poor clients are
high due to mediocre repayment (Cull et al., 2018). We demonstrate that securing loans
with digital collateral can significantly reduce lending costs and remain both attractive
and seemingly beneficial to households.
   MFIs turned to joint liability lending as a means to address repayment issues. Under
joint liability small groups of borrowers are responsible for the repayment of each other's
loans. All group members are treated as being in default when at least one of them does
not repay and all members are denied subsequent loans. Because co-borrowers act as
guarantors they screen and monitor each other and in so doing reduce agency problems
between the MFI and its borrowers (Ghatak and Guinnane, 1999). Theory suggests that
joint liability may reduce adverse selection (Ghatak, 1999, 2000; Gangopadhyay et al.,
2005), ex-ante moral hazard by preventing excessively risky projects, shirking (Stiglitz,
1990; Banerjee et al., 1994; Laffont and Rey, 2003), and ex-post moral hazard by pre-
venting nonrepayment in case of successful projects (Besley and Coate, 1995; Bhole and
Ogden, 2010).
   However, the empirical evidence on the effectiveness of joint liability is mixed. At-
tanasio et al. (2015) find no differences in repayment rates between joint and individual
liability from a field experiment in rural Mongolia. Gine and Karlan (2014) examine
the impact of joint liability on repayment through two experiments in the Philippines.
They find that group liability did not affect repayment rates over the ensuing three years.
Carpena et al. (2012) exploit a natural experiment in which an Indian MFI switched from
individual to joint liability and find that joint liability significantly improved repayment
rates.
   The downsides to joint-liability lending are that it often involves frequent and time-
consuming repayment meetings, making it potentially onerous for borrowers. In addition,



                                             8
it exerts strong social pressure and can suppress efficient risk taking (Gin´
                                                                            e et al., 2010).
For these reasons, many MFIs (such as ASA, Grameen Bank II, and BancoSol) have
started to move from joint liability to individual lending (Cull et al., 2009).
   Finally, while collateralized lending is not common in microfinance, Jack et al. (2019)
use a field experiment to study the potential for asset collateralization to expand access
to credit in rural Kenya. They find that a reduction in the down payment on a water tank
from 25% to 4% led to a significantly increase in take-up with only a modest increase in
default rates, which they attribute almost entirely to selection rather than moral hazard.
This is in contrast with our findings that secured lending leads to a drastic increase in
repayment primarily driven by a reduction in moral hazard. These differences are likely
attributable to differences in study design and the contrast between traditional and digital
collateral. In Jack et al. (2019), all loans were secured by collateral--borrowers in default
faced physical repossession regardless of the treatment group. Whereas, in our study,
borrowers faced digital repossession when they were delinquent and not just in default,
but only if they were assigned to the secured treatment group.


2.3    Education in Developing Countries

Out-of-pocket costs are an important constraint to education in most African countries,
as families are asked to pay for things like school fees, books and supplies, lunch, uniforms
and transport (Williams et al., 2015). A number of recent observational studies find that
reducing or eliminating those costs improve enrollment and educational attainment in
                    scan et al., 2015; Moussa and Omoeva, 2020; Ajayi and Ross, 2020;
African countries (I¸
Adu Boahen and Yamauchi, 2017; Masuda and Yamauchi, 2018; Chicoine, 2019, 2020;
Delesalle, 2019; Valente, 2019; Moshoeshoe et al., 2019). Finally, a randomized controlled
trial of scholarships for students in Ghana, who had already passed the entrance exam
but lacked financing, increased secondary and tertiary attainment (Duflo et al., 2019).
   To our knowledge, our study is the first to demonstrate that loans are an effective
mechanism for increasing K-12 enrollment and school-related expenditures in LMICs.
However, for tertiary education, loans are common and have been studied in some middle
income countries such as Chile, South Africa and China (Solis, 2017; Gurgand et al.,

                                             9
2011). While loans have been effective in improving college enrollment, several studies
have found evidence of adverse effects on students graduating with debt (Cai et al., 2019;
Dearden, 2019). In contrast, our study does not suggest K-12 loans add undue burden to
households' balance sheets.



3         Model
In this section, we propose a stylized model of collateralized lending. Our primary con-
tribution is to decompose the repossession technology into two independent parameters
("lockout" and "recovery") in order to isolate and understand the role of each.
        Our main findings are as follows. First, using the lockout technology to secure a
loan increases borrower's repayment incentives thereby reducing the moral hazard prob-
lem. Second, lockout leads to positive selection : borrowers with sufficiently high (ex-ante)
income risk will be unwilling to accept a loan secured with digital collateral. In combina-
tion, these findings imply that the lockout technology makes it easier for firms to recover
production costs and increases the supply of credit. With a monopolist firm, stronger
lockout technology leads to less strategic default and repossession in equilibrium, which is
in contrast to the effect of a higher recovery value. Despite the aforementioned attributes,
a stronger lockout technology does not necessarily increase welfare.
        The model has two dates (0 and 1) and two types of agents (households and firms).
Households would like to purchase a durable good produced by firms, but have limited
wealth. Firms produce the good and can also provide financing for it. However, due
to incomplete markets (e.g., moral hazard, adverse selection), firms require collateral in
order to underwrite household debt.


Households. There is a unit mass of households, indexed by i  [0, 1]. Household i
derives utility from consuming the production good at date 1, denoted by v
                                                                         ~i , which is
                                          ¯]  R. Household i privately observes v
distributed according to F on support [v, v                                     ~i at the
beginning of date 1.7
    7
    A higher realization of v
                            ~i can be interpreted either as deriving from a shock leading to a particularly
high value for consuming the good or from a positive income shock and thus a lower marginal utility


                                                    10
    Each household has date-1 income denoted by y
                                                ~i . Households are heterogeneous with
respect to income risk. With probability qi , household i experiences an income shock
and y
    ~i = 0. With the complimentary probability, household i has sufficient income,
y
~i = y > v
         ¯, but may still choose to strategically default. Thus, higher qi correspond to
riskier households. Without loss of generality, assume that qi is increasing in i. Households
know their risk type. Let G and g denote the distribution and density of risk types in the
population, which has support [0, 1]. For simplicity, we assume that all households have
the same wealth wi = w for all i and that households are risk-neutral utility maximizers
with a discount factor normalized to 1.8


Firms. There are N  1 identical firms. Each firm has the technology to produce a good
that generates value for households at date 1. Each firm has a marginal production cost
c. Firms also have the ability to provide financing to their customers. At the beginning
of date 0, firms first decide whether to enter (pay c to produce the good). Conditional on
entry, firms design a contract, which is a pair (d, p), where d is the downpayment required
at date 0 to take possession of the good and p is the price of consuming the good at date
1. If a household takes possession at date 0, but does not make the payment at date 1,
then the firm "repossesses" the good.9


Repossession. Should the borrower fail to repay, repossession has two implications.
First, the lender recovers something of value. Second, the household loses something of
value, which provides an incentive to repay the loan conditional on accepting it and an
incentive for riskier borrowers to decline the loan offer.
    In most models of collateralized lending, these two roles, recovery and incentives, are
inseparable and characterized by a single parameter (e.g., Kiyotaki and Moore, 1997).
The lockout technology facilitates a decoupling of the two roles by providing incentives
from consumption of other goods.
    8
      Risk-neutrality simplifies the space of relevant contracts since there is no demand for intra- nor
inter-temporal consumption smoothing.
    9
      We take the form of contract as given because it is representative of what is used in practice by
PAYGO providers and in our experiment. If households are identical (e.g., qi = q for all i) or risk
is observable, then, under the Myerson's (1981) regularity condition, this contract is optimal within a
more general class of mechanisms in which the date-1 transfer and repossession are contingent on the
household's reported value.

                                                  11
without the cost and benefits associated with physical repossession. To separate the two
roles, we parameterize firms' repossession technology by the pair (, ), where  denotes
the effectiveness of recovery--it is the fraction of the production cost that the firm recovers
from repossession, and  denotes the effectiveness on incentives--the borrower enjoys only
the fraction 1 -  times her value of the good in repossession.10
       As discussed earlier, physical repossession is costly in economies with weak creditor
rights and limited enforcement. Therefore, a (traditional) collateralized loan, where the
asset is physically repossessed in default, is characterized by relatively low . A loan
collateralized with lockout involves no physical repossession in default (i.e.,  = 0), but
also little to no value for customers who default (i.e.,  close to 1). Our primary interest
will be to explore how an improvement in the lockout technology (i.e., increasing ) affects
household incentives and the equilibrium outcome.
       We make the following parametric assumptions.

Assumption 1 (Trade is efficient ex-ante). E[~
                                             vi ] > c.

Assumption 2 (Repossession is inefficient ex-post). v > c for all v  [v, v
                                                                         ¯].

       Given these assumptions, the first-best outcome is for all households to purchase the
good and for firms to never repossess the good. This outcome can be sustained as an
equilibrium even without lockout if households have sufficient wealth. Assumption 3 rules
out this possibility.

Assumption 3 (Households are financially constrained). w < c - v , but households that
do not experience a shock have sufficient wealth and income to afford the good: w + y > c.

       Finally, we impose the Myerson (1981) regularity assumption on the distribution of
household values, which is commonly used in auction theory and mechanism design.

Assumption 4 (Monotone virtual surplus). v - 1- F (v )
                                              f (v )
                                                       is monotonically increasing in v .
  10
    One can interpret  as the probability with which the good is successfully repossessed from the
borrower and (1 - )/ as the rate of depreciation or the cost of repossession the good (as a fraction of
c).




                                                  12
3.1    Household Behavior

We begin by considering the behavior of households taking the contract (d, p) as given.
Suppose that household i purchases the good at date 0. The household will repay at date
1 provided that (i) it does not experience an income shock, and (ii) that it's utility for
consuming the good is sufficiently high:

                                                       p
                                                ~i 
                                                v        .                              (1)
                                                       
The right hand side is decreasing in , meaning that a more effective lockout technology
leads to a higher probability of repayment.

Proposition 1 (Lockout Reduces Moral Hazard). Fixing a contract, a more effective
lockout technology (i.e., higher ) decreases the probability that household i strategically
defaults.

   Consider now the purchase decision of households. The expected date-1 surplus to
household i is given by

                                    v
                                    ¯
            Si (p)  (1 - qi )           max{v - p, (1 - )v }dF (v ) + qi (1 - )E(~
                                                                                 vi )
                                v


Household i will purchase the good if they can afford to do so and the surplus from
purchasing is non-negative. More concisely, household i will purchase the good if


                                          d  min{w, Si (p)}.                            (2)


Let Ui (d, p) = Si (p) - d denote household i's expected utility from purchasing the good.
Noting that Si (p) is decreasing in both qi and , we have the following result.

Proposition 2 (Lockout Reduces Adverse Selection). Fix a contract (d, p) such that
S1 (p) < d  w < S0 (p). Then, there exists q  (0, 1) such that only households with
income risk qi  q choose to purchase. Moreover, q is decreasing in .

   This results shows that in combination with a downpayment, lockout leads to positive


                                                  13
selection. Households with more credit risk prefer not to make a downpayment for the
good because they anticipate a higher chance of being locked out.


3.2     Firm Profits

The lowest utility type that strategically defaults when the price is p is
                                       
                                           p  v
                                        v
                                       
                                v (p) = p/ p  (v, v
                                                  ¯)                                      (3)
                                       
                                       v¯  p  v¯
                                       


   For any p, the probability that household i repays is (1 - qi )(1 - F (v (p))) and a firm's
expected revenue at date-1 from selling to household i is


                       Ri (p) = c + (1 - qi )(1 - F (v (p)))(p - c)


Date-1 revenue is increasing in both  and  and decreasing in qi . The profit from selling
to household i is
                               
                                d + R (p) - c if d  min{w, S (p)}
                                     i                      i
                    i (d, p) =                                                            (4)
                                     0        otherwise

3.3     Equilibrium

The equilibrium will naturally depend both on the degree of competition among firms as
well as whether firms can observe households' risk type. In this section, we consider both
the monopolistic and competitive equilibrium with observable household risk.


3.3.1   Monopolist Firm

When the firm is a monopolist, the contract offered to household i solves


                                 (di , pi )  arg max i (d, p)
                                                  d,p




                                             14
We decompose the problem into two steps. First, maximize profit conditional on selling
to household i. Then decide whether to sell to household i. Clearly, the firm's profit is
increasing in d. So it will be optimal to set di = min{w, Si (p)}. Thus, the firm's problem
can be written as
                             max (min{w, Si (p)} + Ri (p) - c)
                                 p


   Consider the problem of maximizing date-1 revenue with respect to the lowest type
that strategically defaults, v = p/. The marginal revenue to the firm of increasing v is


                          (1 - qi ) [(1 - F (v )) - f (v )(v - c)] .


and the first order condition is

                                               1 - F (v  )  c
                                         v -         
                                                           = ,                         (5)
                                                 f (v )     

which has a unique solution by Assumption 4. Notice that v  is independent of qi , and
increases with , but decreases with . Higher  or higher  both correspond to a "better"
repossession technology, but they have different effects on the marginal household type
who strategically defaults; higher  gives the firm more incentive to repossess which
always increases v  , whereas higher  decreases v  . Equation (5) is intimately linked to
the monopoly price. In particular, when households' financial constraints are severe, the
monopoly price is p  v  .

Lemma 1 (Monopoly Prices). Conditional on selling to household i, the solution to the
monopolist problem involves di = w and
                                         
                                               p        if w  Si (p )
                             pm
                              i      =
                                          S -1 (w) otherwise
                                           i


   When household wealth is small, the monopolist prioritizes date-1 revenue by charging
pi = p . When w > Si (p ), the firm charges less than p at date 1 in order to extract a
larger downpayment. Focusing on the first case, we have the following contrast between
the two roles of repossession.

                                                   15
Proposition 3 (Recovery vs Incentives). When the firm is a monopolist and household
wealth is sufficiently small, i.e., w < Si (p ):

      · More efficient recovery (higher ) leads to more strategic default and repossession.

      · More effective lockout (higher ) leads to less strategic default and less repossession.

      Higher  gives the firm more incentive to repossess the good and makes strategic
default less of a concern. So the firm sets a higher price and households default more
frequently. Stronger lockout has the opposite effect. It makes strategic default more
costly to the firm since it increases the wedge between the firm's payoff conditional on
repayment and the payoff conditional on default.
      If the implied profit from the contract in Lemma 1 is positive, then it is optimal for
the firm to sell to household i. Otherwise, the household will reject any offers that the
firm is willing to make.

Proposition 4 (Monopoly Quantities). The monopolist will sell to household i if and
only if either

     (i) w + Ri (p )  c when Si (p )  w, or

 (ii) w + Ri (Si-1 (w))  c otherwise.

      Noting that both Ri and Si are decreasing in qi , we can conclude that positive selection
also emerges as an equilibrium outcome.

Corollary 1. For any  > 0, there exists q  such that only households with qi < q  will
purchase the good.

      Since the downpayment is simply a transfer, we can ignore it when computing total
suplus. The total surplus in the economy is given by

                                         q
                              TS =           (Ri (pi ) + Si (pi ) - c)dG(qi ).
                                     0


                                                                           q
Total firm profit and consumer surplus are given by  =                    0
                                                                               i (di , pi )dG(qi ) and CS =
 q
 0
      Ui (di , pi )dG(qi ).

                                                     16
3.3.2     Competitive Firms

When firms compete for households, they offer the contract that maximizes each house-
hold's welfare subject to breaking even. That is, the contract offered to household i solves


                                   (di , pi )  arg max Ui (d, p)
                                                      d,p
                                                                                           (6)
                                          s.t. i (d, p)  0

Household expected utility is decreasing in both d and p. However, the deposit is purely a
transfer while a higher p destroys more surplus. Therefore, to maximize household utility,
firms minimize pi subject to breaking even.

Proposition 5 (Competitive Equilibrium). In a competitive equilibrium:

  1. The household purchases the good if and only if condition (i) or (ii) from Proposi-
        tion 4 is satisfied. Otherwise, there does not exist a contract such that both the firm
        breaks even and the household is willing to purchase.

  2. If the household purchases the good then dc          c
                                               i = w and pi is the lowest price such that

        Ri (pc
             i ) = c - w.


   Notice that the household purchases under the exact same conditions as when the firm
is a monopolist. Thus, Corollary 1 also holds with competitive firms and any implications
for total surplus apply to both settings. Of course, the price offered by competitive firms
is lower for all but the marginal household.


Parametric Example Suppose that both v
                                     ~i and qi are uniformly distributed on [0, 1].
                 1
Let  = 0 and c = 4 , and let w and  be free parameters. Then v  = 2
                                                                  1
                                                                    , p = 2
                                                                            , and

                                              1
                                     Ri (p ) = (1 - qi ),
                                              4

                                                1 (3 + qi )
                                    Si (p ) =     -         .
                                                2    8
There are two possible cases depending on  relative to c - w.

  (i) For  < 4(c - w), then q  = 0 meaning that no households purchase.

                                                 17
                                                                                                          4(c-w)
                    (ii) For   4(c - w), q  = 1 -                                                            
                                                                                                                   and the mass of households that purchase is
                                                             4(c-w)
                                              G(q  ) = 1 -      
                                                                    .


                                    0.4                                          0.015                                                               0.6                                          0.04
                   Total Quantity




                                                                                                                                    Total Quantity
                                    0.3                                                                                                                                                           0.03



                                                                   Firm Profit




                                                                                                                                                                                  Firm Profit
                                                                                        0.01                                                         0.4
                                    0.2                                                                                                                                                           0.02
                                                                                 0.005                                                               0.2
                                    0.1                                                                                                                                                           0.01

                                     0                                                    0                                                           0                                             0
                                          0         0.5        1                               0   0.5             1                                       0         0.5      1                          0   0.5   1


                             0.02                                                       0.03                                                                                                      0.06
Consumer Surplus




                                                                                                                            Consumer Surplus
                                                                                                                                               0.04
                                                                        Total Surplus




                                                                                                                                                                                  Total Surplus
                     0.015
                                                                                        0.02                                                   0.03                                               0.04
                             0.01
                                                                                                                                               0.02
                                                                                        0.01                                                                                                      0.02
                     0.005                                                                                                                     0.01

                                     0                                                    0                                                           0                                             0
                                          0         0.5        1                               0   0.5             1                                       0         0.5      1                          0   0.5   1


                                                                                                   1
                                              (a) Low household wealth, w =                        12 .                                                        (b) High household wealth, w = 1
                                                                                                                                                                                              6.


                                                    Figure 1: Illustrating the role of lockout with a monopolist firm.



                                     Quantity and profit is increasing in  as illustrated in the top panels of Figure 1.
Household welfare increases with  on the extensive margin (qi = q  ) as more households
get served. However, households that were already purchasing the good (qi < q  ) face
higher date-1 prices. As a result, aggregate household welfare can decrease with . This
possibility is clearly illustrated in Figure 1(b), where both household and total surplus
decreases for  large enough. Intuitively, a stronger lockout technology increases the
incentive to repay, but also destroys more value when the household defaults. This effect
is most pronounced on households with higher income risk as they are more likely to
default for non-strategic reasons.
                                     Perhaps surprisingly, the decrease in household welfare and total surplus can also
obtain when firms are perfectly competitive as illustrated in Figure 2(b). These findings
suggest that a more lenient repossession policy may be preferable. For example, the firm
could reposess the good only after a certain number of missed payments or only with
some probability less than one. Indeed, a key innovation of the PAYGO model is that the
punishment for missing a payment is not too severe. Failure to make a payment results

                                                                                                                       18
in a punishment that is proportional to the flow value of consuming the good rather than
the stock value (i.e., physical repossession).

                         0.4                                            1                                                 0.6                                            1
        Total Quantity




                                                                                                         Total Quantity
                         0.3                                           0.5                                                                                              0.5




                                                       Firm Profit




                                                                                                                                                        Firm Profit
                                                                                                                          0.4
                         0.2                                            0                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                          0.2
                         0.1                                          -0.5                                                                                             -0.5

                          0                                             -1                                                 0                                             -1
                               0         0.5      1                          0   0.5    1                                       0         0.5      1                          0   0.5   1


                                                                                                                    0.08                                               0.08
                   0.04                                               0.04
Consumer Surplus




                                                                                                 Consumer Surplus
                                                      Total Surplus




                                                                                                                                                       Total Surplus
                                                                                                                    0.06                                               0.06
                   0.03                                               0.03

                   0.02                                               0.02                                          0.04                                               0.04

                   0.01                                               0.01                                          0.02                                               0.02

                          0                                             0                                                  0                                             0
                               0         0.5      1                          0   0.5    1                                       0         0.5      1                          0   0.5   1


                                                                                 1
                                   (a) Low household wealth, w =                 12 .                                               (b) High household wealth, w = 1
                                                                                                                                                                   6.


                                          Figure 2: Illustrating the role of lockout with competitive firms.




3.4                                 Reusing digital collateral

The households in our experiment have already purchased the good and completed pay-
ments on the loan. The product that they are offered is a follow-up loan for school fees in
which some fraction of the households are required to (re)-pledge the SHS as collateral in
order to be eligible for the loan. It is straightforward to extend most of the results above
to this setting. Increasing  reduces both moral hazard and adverse selection. Yet, higher
 destroys more surplus after negative income shocks and therefore may reduce overall
welfare.
                           Unlike the model above, a downpayment on a follow-up loan is not necessary to get
positive selection--the act re-pledging collateral serves the role of the downpayment.
Nevertheless, a feature of the loan product offered in our experiment is that it requires
households to make a cash deposit (several days in advance) when the loan funds are
disbursed, which can serve as an additional screening device.11
                    11
                           To illustrate this claim, consider a three-date model, in which the household receives some income at


                                                                                            19
4     Experimental Setting
We test the effect of digital collateral on a school-fee loan product offered by Fenix Inter-
national, a solar home system technology company operating in Africa. As of mid-2019,
Fenix had more than half a million solar home system (SHS) customers across 6 countries
in Sub-Saharan Africa.12 They are the largest SHS provider in Uganda.13 Fenix's most
popular system is 10 Watts and is able to power LED lamps and a radio, and charge cell
phones.14 Fenix's solar home systems differ in several ways from the solar panels on homes
in the US and Western Europe. First, they are roughly two orders of magnitude smaller
than the typical solar panel installation on a US or Western European home. Second,
they are standalone systems, meaning they are not connected to a grid.
    Like most SHS providers, Fenix sells most of its units through a PAYGO model.15
Customers make a small down payment, less than $10, to take possession of the SHS.
Customers make small (usually daily or weekly) payments using mobile money until they
have paid off the loan. If a customer does not make a payment on time, the SHS will lock
(i.e., the battery will not discharge electricity) until the next payment is made.
    Fenix also uses the remote payment and locking technology to offer products upgrades
and additional loans. Their most popular follow-up product is a school-fee loan. These
are cash loans offered to the better-paying customers three times a year at the beginning
of school terms. As with the original SHS loan, customers make a small down payment
and then Fenix transfers money to the customer's mobile money account. The deposit
date 0, has an investment opportunity at date 1, and receives additional income at date 2. The household
owns a good that delivers value v ~ at date 2 and can be pledged as collateral for a loan at date 1. The firm
offers a contact (d, L, p), where d is the downpayment at date 0, L is the amount of the loan at date 1,
and p is the price the household must pay at date 2 in order to avoid repossession. If income is persistent
then being able to make the downpayment at date 0 is a positive signal about the household's ability
to repay the loan at date 2 and serves as an additional screening device above and beyond household's
willingness to pledge their collateral at date 1.
   12
      See https://www.fenixintl.com/blog/ (Date accessed: October 29, 2020).
   13
      See Table 8 of the Global Off-Grid Solar Market Report: Semi-Annual Sales and Impact Data, 2018.
Available at https://www.gogla.org/publications.
   14
      Fenix's biggest system is 34 Watts and can support a variety of small electrical appliances including,
a fan, speakers, and a custom built 18.5-inch television. Information about Fenix's system can be found
https://www.fenixintl.com/product/ (Date accessed: October 29, 2020).
   15
      Over 85% of solar home systems sold in the second half of 2018 were sold on PAYGO (see
Global Off-Grid Solar Market Report: Semi-Annual Sales and Impact Data, 2018. Available at
https://www.gogla.org/publications).



                                                     20
covers administrative fees and gives the customer a seven day grace period before the
device is subject to being locked. After the grace period, if the customer does not make a
daily payment, the system will lock and the customer will not be able to use it until they
make their next payment.
    Our study focused on a 300,000 Ugandan Shilling (UGX) loan ($81).16 Obtaining the
loan requires customers make a deposit of 20% (60,000 UGX, or $16).17 Several days after
making the deposit, the funds are disbursed to the customer via mobile money. Customers
receive seven free days of light after which they are responsible for making daily payments
of 3,000 UGX (less than $1) for 100 days. Most customers choose to pay for several days or
a week of light at a time rather than make daily payments. Fenix considers the loan to be
paid off as long as the customer makes nominal payments totaling $81 (not including the
deposit) within 145 days of the loan issue date. This arrangement implies that customers
who take longer to repay face a lower effective interest rate. For instance, a customer who
makes a payment every day pays an annual percentage rate (APR) of 168%, whereas a
customer who makes a payment only two out of every three days pays an APR of only
112%. Of course, the latter APR does not reflect the cost of losing access to the SHS on
locked days.
    Customers who do not pay off the loan within 45 days of the target repayment date
face interest charges of 2% per month on any remaining principal. In addition, failure
to repay the loan in a timely manner renders customers ineligible for futures loan offers.
After 180 days of no payments, the loan is considered to be in default and Fenix reserves
the right to repossess the SHS system. In practice, only a very small fraction of defaults
(less than 5%) result in physical repossession, which is consistent with our hypothesis that
the traditional repossession technology is expensive and ineffective in this setting.
  16
     All conversions from UGX to USD in this paper are at the 2019 average of 3,704 UGX to 1 USD.
Source: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.FCRF?locations=UG.
  17
     While down payments on collateralized loans are standard, a deposit in advance of a cash loan is an
uncommon practice. We explore the effects of this feature and potential mechanisms in Gertler et al.
(2021).




                                                  21
4.1       Background: Education and School Fees in Uganda

Formal schooling in Uganda starts at age 5. Primary school extends for seven years,
through age 12. Secondary school is for children aged 13-20. Primary and secondary-aged
children in Uganda have access to both government and privately run schools. In 2016,
the most recent year for which data are available, 80% of primary-aged students attended
government-run schools and 20% attended privately run schools. At the secondary level,
over 50% of children attend private schools.18 The government has offered a universal
primary education program since 1997, although in practice not all students have access
to subsidized primary education, and even those that do incur expenses for uniforms,
books, school lunches and other supplies.
       School fees and school related expenditures constitute a non-trivial portion of house-
hold expenses in Uganda. Conditional on enrollment, the median household spends 14%
of income on primary education and 21% of income on secondary education based on data
from the 2019 nationally representative Living Standards Measurement Survey. School
fees for both government and public schools are typically due three times per year. Two
of the three due dates are not proximate to harvest season, and hence are periods of low
income across rural Uganda. In one study, 53% of families reported having their children
sent home because they were unable to pay school fees (Intermedia, 2016).



5        Experimental Design
Figure 3 illustrates our experimental design. Our universe of eligible loan recipients
consisted of Fenix customers that repaid the initial loan on their solar home system and
did not have an outstanding school-fee loan. In May 2019 we sent an SMS message to the
27,081 eligible customers inviting them to reply if they were interested in a school-fee loan
and 3,300 customers (12%) responded. Table A.1, columns (1) and (2) uses administrative
data to compare our sample of Fenix customers to population-wide statistics from rural
Uganda based on the 2019 World Bank Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS).
  18
    Statistics from the Uganda Ministry of Education and Sports at http://www.education.go.ug/wp-
content/uploads/2019/07/FACT-SHEET-2016.pdf



                                               22
Fenix customers are more likely to be male and married and have more children than
the typical rural Ugandan head of household. They also are more likely to be employed
outside the agricultural sector and more likely to come from the (relatively more wealthy)
central region.
       We randomly allocated the interested customers into four groups - a control group, a
treatment group that was required to post their SHS as (digital) collateral to get the loan
("Secured"), a treatment group that did not have to post collateral ("Unsecured"), and
a treatment group that were offered a secured loan but were later informed they would
not have to post collateral ("Surprise Unsecured").19 The Surprise Unsecured group was
treated the same as the Secured group until after they had accepted the loan, at which
point these households were informed that they would in fact not have to post collateral
to get the loan.
       Following Karlan and Zinman (2009), this surprise allows us to separately identify
moral hazard and adverse selection. More specifically, we identify the pure moral hazard
effect by comparing repayment of the Secured group to the Surprise Unsecured group--
both received and accepted the secured loan offer. We identify the pure adverse selection
effect by comparing the Unsecured group to the Surprise Unsecured loans--neither group
was ultimately required to post collateral, but the latter group accepted the loan expecting
that they would have to post collateral.
       Our call center attempted to reach the households in each treatment group using the
phone number to which we had sent the SMS messages. In the treatment groups, the
call center reached over 80% of households. The call center explained that the customers
were eligible for a loan and asked if they were interested in proceeding. The Secured and
Surprise Unsecured treatment groups were informed they would have to post their SHS
as (digital) collateral to obtain the loan, whereas the Unsecured treatment group was
informed they would not have to post collateral.
       Field teams administered a baseline survey to the set of customers that were offered
a loan and the control group. In some cases, the field team reached households in the
  19
    The experiment also included a small group of customers that were given the choice between a secured
and unsecured loan, which we do not discuss in this paper.



                                                  23
Surprise Unsecured treatment group and revealed the surprise before the household had
made the deposit to finalize the loan. Thus, we observed a multi-stage decision process,
in which households first verbally accepted the loan terms, but then only about half of
those customers made the deposit. Given that some of the households in the surprise
group knew they would not have to post collateral before they made the second decision
(to pay the deposit), we separately considered only households that paid the deposit prior
to interaction with the field team as a robustness check.
    All households who received a loan were sent regular SMS payment reminders: on the
payment due date, if they were two days late, and again if they were one week late in
making a payment. This is standard practice for Fenix and is useful to rule out alternative
hypothesis as we will discuss in more detail below. We also conducted an endline survey
six months after the loans had been disbursed.



6     Experimental Results
We delineate our experimental results into three categories: (i) take-up rates, (ii) repay-
ment and profitability, and (iii) educational and balance sheet outcomes.


6.1    Take-up Rates

Take-up rates were high across all treatment groups. The bottom row of Figure 3 indicates
the share of households in each group that took the loan as a share of households that
the call center was able to reach. Consistent with our model, we see a clear indication
that requiring households to post digital collateral serves as a screening device: 45% of
households take the secured loan compared to 51% who take the unsecured loan.
    Table A.2 in the Appendix explores whether there are significant differences in the
baseline characteristics of the households that took up the loan across treatment groups.
Most baseline characteristics are statistically indistinguishable across the two groups,
suggesting that digital collateral is screening on characteristics that are not captured by
variables in administrative or survey data.



                                              24
6.2       Repayment and Profitability

Repayment We measure repayment as the household's cumulative payments towards
the principal divided by the total loan principal (i.e., the fraction of principal repaid).20
Figure 4(a) plots the fraction of principal repaid over time for customers in the three
treatment groups. Figure 4(b) plots the differences between the three groups.
       Consistent with our model's predictions, repayment in the Secured group is consis-
tently higher than repayment in either Unsecured group. Overall, digital collateral in-
creased repayment by 13 pp at both 100 days (from 46% to 59%) and 150 days (57%
to 70%). As discussed above, the moral hazard effect is derived by comparing repay-
ment in the Secured group to repayment in the Surprise Unsecured group; the selection
mechanisms were the same in these two groups as they both were told they would be
required to post digital collateral. This accounts for the bulk of the overall effect: 9 pp at
both 100 and 150 days. The adverse selection effect is derived by comparing repayment
in the Surprise group to the Unsecured group; both groups faced the same incentive to
repay conditional on taking-up the loan since neither was required to post collateral. This
accounts for 4-5 pp of the overall effect.
       Table 1, Panel A presents results from regression specifications of the following form:


                             rit = t + t  T reatment groupi +           it ,                        (7)

where rit is the repayment rate for household i after t days from loan origination. The
treatment effect is t , t is a constant, and     it   is an error term. The results in Table 1 reflect
Local Average Treatment Effects (LATE) estimates, accounting for imperfect compliance
(i.e., the fact that some customers who were supposed to be locked were unlocked for
some days and vice versa).21 The column labeled "Secured" captures the total effect of
  20
      Fenix credits commissions to customers who refer other customers to Fenix, and we include payments
from these commissions, although they account for less than 0.05% of total payments towards principal.
   21
      Altogether, fewer than 10% of the loan days were not in compliance. There were two general types
of imperfect compliance: (1) administrative errors at the beginning of the experiment, and (2) customers
who had additional transactions with Fenix over the study period, for example to upgrade their solar
home system, and were sometimes switched to the wrong locking arrangement. See Appendix A Tables
A.5 and A.6 for more details and for the Intent to Treat (ITT) estimates of the specifications reported
in Table 1, respectively.



                                                  25
securing loans with digital collateral. Specifications in this column include households in
the Secured and Unsecured groups, where T reatment groupi is equal to one for households
in the Secured group. Specifications in the column labeled "Adverse Selection" include
households in the Surprise and Unsecured groups, where T reatment groupi is equal to
one for households in the Surprise group. Specifications in the columns labeled "Moral
Hazard" include households in the Secured and Surprise groups, where T reatment groupi
is equal to one for households in the Secured group. The rows report the results at
t = 100, 150 and 200 from origination. The last column provides the p-values for the
hypothesis test that the moral hazard effect is equal to the adverse selection effect. The
standard errors indicate that the overall lockout effect is significant at the 1% level, the
moral hazard effect significant at the 5% level while the adverse selection effect is not
statistically significant.
    As an alternative measure of repayment, we consider the fraction of loans that have
completed payments in Table 1, Panel B. A loan is recorded as completed when the repay-
ment rate equals one. Our results convey a similar message under this alternative measure.
Lockout leads to a 19 pp increase in the completion rate after 200 days, with moral hazard
accounting for slightly more than two thirds of the effect and adverse selection accounting
for slightly less than one third of the total effect.


Profitability To understand how customer repayment translates to firm profitability,
we calculate the monthly internal rate of return (IRR) on loan portfolios.22 Table 2
summarizes the results, and shows that using digital collateral increased profitability by
3.2 pp (38 pp annualized). When we restrict attention to loans with perfect compliance
(see Table A.8), the increase in profitability is even larger 4.5 pp (54 pp annualized).
We sorted households into terciles based on their repayment history prior to taking the
school-fee loan (i.e., account percent locked).23 Loans in each tercile are formed into a
portfolio. The first tercile corresponds to households with the highest repayment rates
  22
     The internal rate of return is the discount rate such that the net present value of cash flows on the
portfolio is equal to zero.
  23
     Account percent locked is the percentage of days in which the household's SHS was locked due to
non-repayment of loans prior to taking the school-fee loan. While all had completed payments on the
original SHS loan, some took longer to do so and thereby were locked a higher percentage of days.


                                                   26
prior to taking the school-fee loan. Table 2 illustrates that digital collateral increased
profitability by more for the first two terciles (3.9 pp and 3.8 pp respectively) than it did
for the third tercile (1.8 pp).
       It is noteworthy that all of the unsecured loan terciles have a negative IRR and only
the first tercile of secured loans has a positive IRR. There are several takeaways from this
finding. First, the unsecured lending contract is not profitable even among households
who have previously been good repayers. Second, securing a loan with digital collateral
does not ensure profitability. Screening remains a necessary component of a sustainable
lending business. For the purposes of this study, we expanded Fenix's eligibility criterion
and increased the loan size. Under Fenix's usual business practices, (i) all school-fee
loans are secured, (ii) only households with above median repayment history (among our
sample of loans) would be eligible for a school-fee loan, and (iii) as first-time borrowers,
they would only be eligible for a loan one-third of the size.24 Thus, our findings are
consistent with Fenix's usual business practices being value maximizing.
       For more perspective on profitability, we calculated IRRs for school-fee loans that
Fenix had offered in prior school terms (in 2018) under their usual business practices,
again broken into terciles based on repayment history. As illustrated by the bottom row
of Table 2), the prior school-fee loans have significantly better repayment history and are
considerably more profitable. The monthly IRR is 6.6%, 6.0%, and 3.2% across the three
terciles with an average monthly IRR of 5.1%.


Heterogeneity across households Table 4 analyzes the treatment impact on repay-
ment rates and loan completion for households that were above and below median number
of days locked on the original SHS loan. This allows us to assess the extent to which
households with higher a priori risk levels had lower repayment and loan completion rates
because of selection or moral hazard. The coefficients on the interaction term in Table
4 suggest that digital collateral increased repayments and completion slightly more for
riskier households (with above median number of days locked on their original solar home
  24
    Our study offered 300,000 UGX ($81) loans to customers who had never had a school-fee loan, while
the prior school-fee loans were smaller (100,000 UGX, $27) for first-time borrowers. Fenix offers larger
loan sizes to customers after they have successfully paid off their first school-fee loan.


                                                  27
system loan). Interestingly, virtually all of the increase in repayment for higher risk house-
holds is due to moral hazard and not selection, whereas the opposite is true for lower risk
households.
       Second, we analyze heterogeneity in willingness to pay (WTP) for the electricity pro-
vided by the SHS. If we incorporated this heterogeneity into our model, it would predict
that households with a higher WTP would be less willing to accept a locked loan com-
pared to lower WTP households. Figure 5 analyzes loan take-up by respondent's stated
WTP for a extra day of access to their SHS.25 We group the responses into three cate-
gories and see that indeed households with the highest WTP are significantly less likely
to accept a secured loan compared to an unsecured loan, while households in the lower
two groups are equally likely to accept them. Also consistent with our model, we found
the effect on repayment is larger for households with above median WTP for solar (see
Table A.21). For instance, the effect of requiring digital collateral is 10 pp higher at 150
days for households with above (vs below) median willingness to pay.
       We also test robustness of our main estimates by exploring heterogeneity with respect
to how quickly households accepted the loan. In particular, some of the households in the
Surprise Unsecured group were notified by our field staff that they would not be required
to post collateral before completing the paperwork and making the deposit. It is possible
that the households who made the deposit after they were notified were different than the
households who accepted a secured loan.26 To understand by how much this potential
selection is driving our decomposition results, we re-estimated versions of the specifications
in Table 1 using only those households that completed the deposit before they were visited
by our field staff. These results are reported in Table A.7 in the Appendix. Interestingly,
the overall effect of digital collateral on repayment is almost two times as large among this
set of people, pointing to considerable heterogeneity. Nevertheless, the overall conclusion
that moral hazard explains the bulk of the effect remains.
  25
     Until recently, Fenix's systems did not record the number of hours of use by households, so we could
not use that as a revealed preference measure of value, although even average hours of usage would be
an imperfect measure.
  26
     Note that this potential selection does not impact the estimate of the overall effect.




                                                   28
6.3       Schooling and Household Balance Sheet Outcomes

While the results presented thus far clearly suggest that securing loans with digital col-
lateral increases repayment and firm profits, we are also interested in the impacts of the
loans on household-level outcomes. At a high level, access to credit may facilitate welfare-
enhancing investments for households (e.g., schooling). On the other hand, loans with
high interest rates, especially if they are misunderstood by customers, may have detri-
mental effects on households' balance sheet. We first examine schooling outcomes and
then present results on households' balance sheet.


Schooling outcomes As discussed in Section 4, the loans we study were offered in
May 2019, just before school fees were due for Term 2. The product was marketed as a
school-fee loan, though Fenix offered them to all eligible customers, regardless of whether
they had school-aged children. Yet, almost 90% of our sample households had school-aged
children and 92% who accepted a school-fee loan reported using it for education-related
expenditures.
       To understand whether the loans had an impact on schooling outcomes, we estimate
the following equations:


                                  yi =  +   Loan Offeri +         i                              (8)

                                  yi =  +   Loani + i ,                                          (9)


where yi is an outcome variable for household i. Equation (8) yields the intent to treat
(ITT) estimates, where Loan Offeri is an indicator for a household that was offered a
loan through one of the three (locked, surprise unlocked, unlocked) groups. Equation (9),
estimated by instrumenting for Loani with Loan Offeri , yields the local average treat-
ment effect (LATE) for households that accepted loans.27 In what follows, we focus on
discussing the LATE estimates, and the ITT estimates are reported in the Appendix.
       Table 5 reports results from estimates of (9) for several schooling-related outcomes.
  27
    We also estimated specifications that allowed the loan impacts to vary by treatment group but saw
no significant differences in the effect size across the treatment groups.



                                                 29
The first two columns report impacts on the share of 5 to 20-year-old children within a
household who are enrolled in school. The sample is restricted to households that had at
least one child in that age range at the endline survey. The results indicate that the loan
increased the fraction of households who enrolled all of their school-aged children by 6
pp. Given that 88 percent of children in the control group are enrolled, access to the loan
reduced the share of children who are not enrolled by just over half.28
       The third column on Table 5 analyzes the impact on monthly absences from school
for households that had at least one child enrolled. The coefficients are precisely esti-
mated and suggest no meaningful impact on days absent. The fourth column shows that
expenditures for school-related items (including school fees, uniforms, supplies, transport
and meals) increased by 34.6% for households who received a loan.29 The increase in
school-related expenditures corresponds to roughly 44% of the loan amount (net of the
deposit) or $29.7.
       Table 6 presents the LATE results on enrollment and expenditures by child, separating
outcomes for males and females. The unit of observation is now the child and not the
household. We therefore cluster standard errors at the household level for statistical
inference. This table indicates that the increased enrollment was concentrated among
male children, who have a lower base rate (control mean) of enrollment, possibly because
they were more likely to be working. The loan then may have not only been used to cover
school costs but also used to offset lost income from reduced child labor supply. The loan
was associated with a significant increase in school expenditures for both males (29 pp)
and females (46 pp) by a similar magnitude to the household-level results.
       In summary, Fenix's loans had an economically meaningful and statistically significant
impact on educational outcomes. These findings suggest that households did not have
another source of liquidity to use for schooling-related expenditures. The Living Standards
Measurement Survey (LSMS) reinforces this interpretation: only 3% of households in the
LSMS had a loan with a commercial bank, only 6% had other formal loans, and only 1%
  28
     Enrollment rates among households in our sample appear roughly comparable to enrollment rates
for the population. According to the Living Standards Measurement Survey, nationwide 91% of primary
school-aged children and 68% of secondary school-aged children are enrolled at school.
  29
     The estimated coefficient of the loan on log expenditures is 0.297. So, the percentage increase in
expenditures for households who received a loan is e0.297 - 1 = 34.6%.


                                                  30
had a loan with a microfinance institution.


Household balance sheet Table 7 reports results on household asset purchases, sales,
and borrowing in the six months prior to endline survey. The effect of the loan on
households balance sheet is not statistically significant effect in any category. Moreover,
based on the standard errors, we can rule out large negative impacts on households that
took loans, such as a significant increase in asset sales or reduction in purchases. We
repeated the analysis using endline asset, loans and balance sheet level variables in Table
8. The estimated effect of the loan on household net balance is small and is not statistically
different from zero. For additional perspectives on households' financial position, we
asked a series of questions about shocks households had experienced, including financial
shocks, and their ability to weather those shocks. The results are summarized in Table
A.11. Again, we see no systematic or significant differences between households that were
offered loans and the control group.



7     Discussion
We have interpreted digital collateral as providing a repayment incentive for households
that reduces both moral hazard and adverse selection. An alternative interpretation is
that getting locked simply serves as a reminder or a nudge to repay. Indeed, there is
evidence that payment reminders increase on-time repayment (Cadena and Schoar, 2011;
Medina, 2020). In our setting, this explanation is less plausible because all of the borrowers
(secured or unsecured) received frequent payment reminders. Fenix sent reminders to all
customers three days and one day before payment was due, on the day the payment was
due, when the customer was two days late, and when the customer was one week late.
    The estimated effect of digital collateral on reducing moral hazard is large and signif-
icant. Yet, it is possible that our estimate is biased downward for the following reason.
Fenix offers school-fee loans three times per year. In order to be eligible, the customer
must have completed payments on their prior school-fee loan (i.e., completed the loan
within 120 days). Thus, households with a high continuation value for a loan in the


                                              31
next term have a strong incentive to complete payments in a timely manner regardless of
whether digital collateral is applied.30 If the set of households with a high continuation
value overlaps with the set of households that responds to the incentives from lockout,
then our estimate is biased downward.
       To get a sense for the magnitude of the bias, suppose a fraction q of such households
have a high continuation value and complete payments within 120 days regardless of
whether or not lockout is applied. Absent this high continuation value, the true effect of
lockout on increasing loan completion is m.31 If continuation value and willingness to pay
are independently distributed, then we would estimate the (moral hazard) effect on loan
completion to be (1 - q )m. Under the assumption of independence, we can provide an
upper bound on m using the observation that 40% of households in the surprise unlocked
treatment complete the loan within 120 days. Thus, q is at most 0.4 and m is at most
two thirds larger than the effect size that we estimate.
       Our finding that adverse selection accounts for a smaller portion of the increase in
repayment than does moral hazard can partially be attributed to the fact that our sample
has already been screened via other measures. First, in order to be eligible for the school-
fee loan, customers must have already successfully completed payments on the initial SHS
loan. The adverse selection effect is likely to be larger on the initial loan. Second, eligible
school-fee loan customers are required to put down a 20% deposit before getting the school-
fee loan. In an experiment on a different sample of Fenix customers, we investigated the
role of the deposit and found evidence consistent with it serving as a screening device
(Gertler et al., 2021).
       In addition to reducing moral hazard and adverse selection, there are other potential
benefits of loans secured with digital collateral. First, the digitally collaterized contract
effectively functions as a commitment-savings device. Much like a typical fully amortiz-
ing mortgage contract, each payment that a customer makes covers both interest and
principal. The principal payment is akin to savings. This savings vehicle can be partic-
  30
     Consistent with this view, notice that Figure 4(c) exhibits a moderate increase in the rate of loan
completion right near the 120 day for all treatment groups.
  31
     Within the context of the model from Section 3, if we consider a locked loan to have  = 1 and an
unlocked loan to have  = 0, then m = 1 - F (p) is simply the fraction of households with vi greater than
the price.


                                                  32
ularly valuable to households who lack self control because there is an added incentive
to save (Laibson, 1994)--failure to do so means facing temporary repossession, and the
savings are illiquid and cannot be easily or immediately accessed (Laibson, 1997). Sec-
ond, if lenders lack commitment power to physically repossess collateral, they may face a
hold-up problem (Hart and Moore, 1998) from strategic borrowers who know they will be
tempted to renegotiate rather then incur repossession costs. By effectively lowering the
lender's repossession cost, the lockout technology provides a credible method to avoid the
hold-up problem.
       Finally, because repossessing digital collateral imposes a cost on borrowers without
any reciprocal benefit to lenders, it may raise ethical questions especially if the primary
reason for nonpayment is due to income shocks rather than strategic default. Are there
financial contracts that are too punitive for borrowers? Should governments regulate
certain contracts on ethical grounds?32 These are important questions, and our study aims
to provide evidence useful to inform answers. However, for the particular product in our
experiment, we do not believe they should be of much concern. First, as discussed earlier,
digital repossession in our setting is temporary and reversible, so it can be significantly
less punitive than physical repossession, a practice that is widely accepted. Second, the
magnitude of the cost imposed on households by digital repossession of their SHS is small
compared to those that are usually restricted on moral grounds (e.g., imprisonment or
bondage). Finally, the households in our study are familiar with the contractual terms
and appear to make informed decisions: households with a higher willingness to pay for
the service flow from the SHS were significantly less likely to take-up secured loans.



8        Conclusion
In this paper, we explore a novel form of financial contracting that uses lockout technol-
ogy to create digital collateral, which does not require physical repossession. Rather, the
lender temporarily disables the flow value of the collateral to the borrower when the bor-
  32
    An economic reason to regulate certain types of financial contracts is if the punishments impose
externalities on third-parties (Bond and Newman, 2009).



                                                33
rower misses a payment. We show that digitally collateralized loans exhibit significantly
higher repayment and are therefore substantially more profitable to the lender. About
one-third of the increase in repayment can be attributed to screening and about two-
thirds to reducing moral hazard. Access to these loans had positive effects on educational
outcomes and did not have negative effects on households' balance sheet.
   Our finding that moral hazard drives the majority of the repayment increase implies
that credit provision is both sustainable and acceptable to a large fraction of households,
provided they are given the right incentives. Therefore, the potential for digital collateral
to expand access to credit is significant. By contrast, if we had found that adverse
selection drove most of the increase in repayment, then digital collateral serves primarily
as a screening device and only a select subset of households provide profitable lending
opportunities.
   Our field experiment also demonstrates the potential for private institutions to offer
digitally collateralized loans to pay for schooling, resulting in increased enrollment and
expenditures without placing a long-term financial burden on the family. This result is
important as schooling-related costs are large relative to income and must be paid in
periods of low income for many households, especially those working in agriculture and
other informal jobs.
   There are numerous other potential applications in which digital collateral could be uti-
lized to provide cheaper access to credit, which appear especially promising in economies
with an underdeveloped banking and financial system. With the proliferation of smart
devices, secured lending via digital collateral could easily be extended to a wide range
of devices such as smartphones,laptops, refrigerators, automobiles, and televisions. Im-
portantly, the capacity to reuse collateral for future loans (as it has been by Fenix and
PayJoy) expands the potential impact of the innovation as a vehicle for affordable ac-
cess to credit. Many utility companies (e.g., electric, telecommunication, and water) are
able to remotely disable service and thus natural candidates for offering credit secured
by access to the flow of services they provide. We believe there is significant potential
for utilities to further scale the use of digital collateral in providing affordable access to
credit in LMICs.


                                             34
References
Acharya, V., H. Almeida, and M. Campello (2007): "Is Cash Negative Debt? A
 Hedging Perspective on Corporate Financial Policies," Journal of Financial Intermedi-
 ation, 16, 515­554.
Adu Boahen, E. and C. Yamauchi (2017): "The Effect of Female Education on
 Adolescent Fertility and Early Marriage: Evidence from Free Compulsory Universal
 Basic Education in Ghana," Journal of African Economies, 27, 227­248.
Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1992): "An Incomplete Contracts Approach to Financial
 Contracting," The Review of Economic Studies, 59, 473­494.
Ajayi, K. and P. Ross (2020): "The Effects of Education on Financial Outcomes:
 Evidence from Kenya," Economic Development and Cultural Change, 69, 253 ­ 289.
Assunc ~ o, J. J., E. Benmelech, and F. S. S. Silva (2013): "Repossession and the
      ¸a
 Democratization of Credit," The Review of Financial Studies, 27, 2661­2689.
Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart
 (2015): "The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mon-
 golia," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 90­122.
Ayotte, K. and P. Bolton (2011): "Optimal Property Rights in Financial Contract-
 ing," The Review of Financial Studies, 24, 3401­3433.
Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): "Six randomized evaluations of
 microcredit: Introduction and further steps," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 7, 1­21.
Banerjee, A. V., T. Besley, and T. W. Guinnane (1994): "Thy Neighbor's Keeper:
 The Design of a Credit Cooperative with Theory and a Test," The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, 109, 491­515.
Benmelech, E. and N. K. Bergman (2009): "Collateral pricing," Journal of Financial
 Economics, 91, 339 ­ 360.
Benmelech, E., N. Kumar, and R. Rajan (2020): "The Decline of Secured Debt,"
 Working Paper 26637, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Berger, A. and G. Udell (1990): "Collateral, loan quality and bank risk," Journal
 of Monetary Economics, 25, 21­42.
------ (1995): "Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm Finance," The
  Journal of Business, 68, 351­81.
Besanko, D. and A. Thakor (1987a): "Collateral and Rationing: Sorting Equilibria
 in Monopolistic and Competitive Credit Markets," International Economic Review, 28,
 671­89.
------ (1987b): "Competitive equilibrium in the credit market under asymmetric infor-
  mation," Journal of Economic Theory, 42, 167­182.
Besley, T. and S. Coate (1995): "Group lending, repayment incentives and social
 collateral," Journal of Development Economics, 46, 1­18.


                                         35
Bester, H. (1985): "Screening vs. Rationing in Credit Markets with Imperfect Informa-
 tion," American Economic Review, 75, 850­55.
------ (1987): "The role of collateral in credit markets with imperfect information,"
  European Economic Review, 31, 887­899.
Bhole, B. and S. Ogden (2010): "Group lending and individual lending with strategic
 default," Journal of Development Economics, 91, 348­363.
Bond, P. and A. F. Newman (2009): "Prohibitions on punishments in private con-
 tracts," Journal of financial intermediation, 18, 526­540.
Cadena, X. and A. Schoar (2011): "Remembering to pay? Reminders vs. financial
 incentives for loan payments," Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cai, Y., B. Chapman, and Q. Wang (2019): "Repayment burdens of mortgage-
 style student loans in China and steps toward income-contingent loans," Economics of
 Education Review, 71, 95 ­ 108, higher Education Financing: Student Loans.
Carpena, F., S. Cole, J. Shapiro, and B. Zia (2012): "Liability Structure in Small-
 Scale Finance: Evidence from a Natural Experiment," The World Bank Economic
 Review, 27, 437­469.
Chan, Y.-S. and G. Kanatas (1985): "Asymmetric Valuations and the Role of Col-
 lateral in Loan Agreements," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 17, 84­95.
Chan, Y.-S. and A. V. Thakor (1987): "Collateral and Competitive Equilibria with
 Moral Hazard and Private Information," The Journal of Finance, 42, 345­363.
Chicoine, L. (2019): "Schooling with learning: The effect of free primary education and
 mother tongue instruction reforms in Ethiopia," Economics of Education Review, 69,
 94­107.
------ (2020): Free Primary Education, Fertility, And Women's Access To The Labor
  Market : Evidence From Ethiopia, The World Bank.
Coville, A., S. Galiani, P. Gertler, and S. Yoshida (2021): "Financing Water
 and Sanitation in Nairobi's Slums," World Bank Working Paper.
Cull, R., A. Demirgu  ¨c¸ -Kunt, and J. Morduch (2009): "Microfinance Meets the
 Market," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23, 167­92.
------ (2018): "The Microfinance Business Model: Enduring Subsidy and Modest Profit,"
  The World Bank Economic Review, 32, 221­244.
Dearden, L. (2019): "Evaluating and designing student loan systems: An overview of
 empirical approaches," Economics of Education Review, 71, 49­64.
Delesalle, E. (2019): "The Effect of the Universal Primary Education Program on
 Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Tanzania," NBER Working Papers 25789,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
DeMarzo, P. M. (2019): "Presidential Address: Collateral and Commitment," The
 Journal of Finance, 74, 1587­1619.
Devoto, F., E. Duflo, P. Dupas, W. Pariente  ´, and V. Pons (2012): "Happiness
 on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco," American Economic Journal:

                                          36
  Economic Policy, 4, 68­99.
Djankov, S., C. McLiesh, and A. Shleifer (2007): "Private Credit in 129 Coun-
 tries," Journal of Financial Economics, 12, 77­99.
Donaldson, J., D. Gromb, and G. Piacentino (2019): "Conflicting Priorities: A
 Theory of Covenants and Collateral," 2019 Meeting Papers 157, Society for Economic
 Dynamics.
Duflo, E., P. Dupas, and M. Kremer (2019): "The Impact of Free Secondary Edu-
 cation: Experimental Evidence from Ghana," Working paper, Massachusetts Institute
 of Technology.
Federal Reserve of the Bank of New York (2020): "Quarterly Report on House-
 hold Debt and Credit," .
Gangopadhyay, S., M. Ghatak, and R. Lensink (2005): "Joint Liability Lending
 and the Peer Selection Effect*," The Economic Journal, 115, 1005­1015.
Gertler, P., B. Green, and C. Wolfram (2021): "Screening Borrowers with Cash
 Deposits," Working Paper.
Ghatak, M. (1999): "Group lending, local information and peer selection." Journal of
 Development Economics, 60, 27­50.
------ (2000): "Screening by the Company You Keep: Joint Liability Lending and the
  Peer Selection Effect," The Economic Journal, 110, 601­631.
Ghatak, M. and T. W. Guinnane (1999): "The economics of lending with joint
 liability: theory and practice1This version: May 1999.1," Journal of Development Eco-
 nomics, 60, 195­228.
Gine, X. and D. Karlan (2014): "Group versus individual liability: Short and long
 term evidence from Philippine microcredit lending groups," Journal of Development
 Economics, 107, 65­83.
   ´, X., P. Jakiela, D. Karlan, and J. Morduch (2010): "Microfinance Games,"
Gine
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2, 60­95.
Gurgand, M., A. Lorenceau, and T. Me        ´lonio (2011): "Student loans: Liquidity
 constraint and higher education in South Africa," PSE Working Papers.
Hart, O. and J. Moore (1994): "A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of
 Human Capital," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 841­879.
------ (1998): "Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of Debt," The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 113, 1­41.
Intermedia (2016): "Wave 3 Report FII Tracker Survey," .
Jack, W., M. Kremer, J. de Laat, and T. Suri (2019): "Borrowing Requirements,
  Credit Access, and Adverse Selection: Evidence from Kenya," Tech. rep., MIT.
Jimenez, G., V. Salas, and J. Saurina (2006): "Determinants of collateral," Journal
  of Financial Economics, 81, 255­281.
Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2009): "Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information
 Asymmetries With a Consumer Credit Field Experiment," Econometrica, 77, 1993­

                                         37
  2008.
Kiyotaki, N. and J. Moore (1997): "Credit Cycles," Journal of Political Economy,
 105, 211­248.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998):
 "Law and Finance," Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113­1155.
Laffont, J.-J. and P. Rey (2003): "Moral Hazard, Collusion and Group Lending," .
Laibson, D. (1994): "Self-control and saving," Massachusets Institute of Technology
 mimeo.
------ (1997): "Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting," The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 112, 443­478.
Li, S., T. M. Whited, and Y. Wu (2016): "Collateral, Taxes, and Leverage," The
  Review of Financial Studies, 29, 1453­1500.
Liberti, J. M. and A. R. Mian (2010): "Collateral Spread and Financial Develop-
  ment," The Journal of Finance, 65, 147­177.
Masuda, K. and C. Yamauchi (2018): "The Effects of Universal Secondary Education
 Program Accompanying Public-Private Partnership on Students' Access, Sorting and
 Achievement: Evidence from Uganda," CEI Working Paper Series 2018-4, Center for
 Economic Institutions, Institute of Economic Research, Hitotsubashi University.
Meager, R. (2019): "Understanding the Average Impact of Microcredit Expansions:
 A Bayesian Hierarchical Analysis of Seven Randomized Experiments," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 57­91.
Medina, P. C. (2020): "Side Effects of Nudging: Evidence from a Randomized Inter-
 vention in the Credit Card Market," The Review of Financial Studies.
Moshoeshoe, R., C. Ardington, and P. Piraino (2019): "The Effect of the Free
 Primary Education Policy on School Enrolment and Relative Grade Attainment in
 Lesotho," Journal of African Economies, 28, 511­532.
Moussa, W. and C. Omoeva (2020): "The Long-Term Effects of Universal Primary
 Education: Evidence from Ethiopia, Malawi, and Uganda," Comparative Education
 Review, 64, 179­206.
Myerson, R. (1981): "Optimal Auction Design," Mathematics of Operations Research,
 6, 58­73.
Qian, J. and P. E. Strahan (2007): "How Laws and Institutions Shape Financial
 Contracts: The Case of Bank Loans," The Journal of Finance, 62, 2803­2834.
Rajan, R. and A. Winton (1995): "Covenants and Collateral as Incentives to Moni-
 tor," The Journal of Finance, 50, 1113­1146.
Rampini, A. and S. Viswanathan (2010): "Collateral, Risk Management, and the
 Distribution of Debt Capacity," The Journal of Finance, 65, 2293­2322.
------ (2013): "Collateral and capital structure," Journal of Financial Economics, 109,
  466­492.
Solis, A. (2017): "Credit Access and College Enrollment," Journal of Political Economy,

                                          38
  125, 562­622.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1990): "Peer Monitoring and Credit Markets," The World Bank Eco-
  nomic Review, 4, 351­366.
Stiglitz, J. E. and A. Weiss (1981): "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
  Information," The American Economic Review, 71, 393­410.
Tirole, J. (2006): The Theory Of Corporate Finance, Princeton University Press.
Valente, C. (2019): "Primary education expansion and quality of schooling," Economics
 of Education Review, 73, 101913.
van den Berg, C. and A. Danilenko (2014): "Performance of Water Utilities in
  Africa," Tech. rep., World Bank, Washington, DC.
Williams, T., P. Abbott, and A. Mupenzi (2015): "Education at our school is
   not free: The hidden costs of fee-free schooling in Rwanda," Compare: A Journal of
   International and Comparative Education, 45, 931­952.
¸can, T. B., D. Rosenblum, and K. Tinker (2015): "School Fees and Access to
Is
   Primary Education: Assessing Four Decades of Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa," Journal
   of African Economies, 24, 559­592.




                                         39
9      Figures and Tables

                                   Figure 3: Consort Statement

                                               27,081 SMS
                                            sent to completed
                                             SHS customers




        Control group: 619              3,300 responded to SMS




                    Call center reached                          Call center reached
                          855/1002                                    1319/1616
                           (85%)                                        (82%)
                   Offered unsecured loan                        Offered secured loan



                          Took loan                      Took loan                 Took loan
                           438/855                        376/821                   217/498
                            (51%)                          (46%)                     (44%)
                          Unsecured                  Surprise Unsecured             Secured


    Took loan refers to accepting the loan, completing the necessary paperwork, and paying the deposit.




                                                   40
                                                             Figure 4: Loan Repayment and Completion




                                                                                                     Difference in fraction of principal repaid
                                   0.72                                                                                                           0.13
    Fraction of principal repaid




                                                                                                                                                  0.11
                                   0.60
                                                                                                                                                  0.09

                                   0.48                                                                                                           0.07

                                                                                                                                                  0.05
                                   0.36
                                                                           Secured                                                                0.03                                      Total Effect
                                                                           Surprise Unsecured                                                                                               Moral Hazard
                                                                           Unsecured                                                                                                        Selection
                                   0.24                                                                                                           0.01
                                          50           100           150                 200                                                              50           100           150            200

                                                Days elapsed since loan creation                                                                                Days elapsed since loan creation



                                                (a) Loan repayment                                                                                       (b) Differences in repayment
                                                                                                     Difference in fraction completed


                                   0.65                                                                                                            0.17
    Fraction completed




                                                                                                                                                   0.13
                                   0.54

                                                                                                                                                   0.09
                                   0.43
                                                                                                                                                   0.05

                                   0.32
                                                                                                                                                   0.01
                                                                           Secured                                                                                                          Total Effect
                                                                           Surprise Unsecured                                                                                               Moral Hazard
                                                                           Unsecured                                                                                                        Selection
                                   0.21                                                                                                           -0.03
                                          100                 150                        200                                                              100                  150                  200

                                                Days elapsed since loan creation                                                                                Days elapsed since loan creation



                                                (c) Loan completion                                                                                      (d) Differences in completion

Note: Panel (a) plots average fraction of principal repaid by days elapsed since loan origination for each
treatment group. Panel (b) plots the difference in average fraction of principal repaid by days elapsed
for each treatment group. Panel (c) plots average fraction of customers completed by days elapsed for
each treatment group. The difference in average fraction of customers completed by days elapsed for
each treatment group is in Panel D. In Panel (b) (Panel (d)), "Total Effect" displays the difference in
average fraction of principal repaid (customers completed) between the Secured and Unsecured groups,
"Moral Hazard" displays the difference in average fraction of principal repaid (customers completed)
between the Secured and Surprise Unsecured groups, and "Selection" displays the difference in average
fraction of principal repaid (customers completed) between the Surprise Unsecured and Unsecured groups.
(Differences in) both the fraction of principal repaid and fraction of customers completed are displayed
over the sample of 1,031 loans, of which 217 are Secured loans, 376 are Surprise Unsecured loans, and
438 are Unsecured loans.




                                                                                                41
Table 1: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard on Loan Repayment and
Loan Completion (LATE)

                 Loan  Mean                             Adverse Moral p-value
                                         Lockout
                 day Unsecured                          Selection Hazard diff
                                     Panel A: Loan Repayment
                  100         0.46        0.13            0.04     0.09        0.29
                                          (0.04)         (0.03)    (0.04)
                  150         0.57        0.13            0.05     0.09        0.46
                                          (0.04)         (0.03)    (0.04)
                  200         0.62        0.11            0.04     0.07        0.65
                                          (0.04)         (0.03)    (0.04)
                                     Panel B: Loan Completion
                  110         0.31        0.10            0.01     0.09        0.21
                                          (0.05)         (0.04)    (0.05)
                  150         0.41        0.17            0.05     0.12        0.31
                                          (0.05)         (0.04)    (0.05)
                  200         0.47        0.19            0.05    0.13         0.19
                                          (0.05)         (0.04)   (0.05)

                   n                       655            814       593

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of
the loan principal repaid (Panel A). Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been
repaid (Panel B). The above results display the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), which measures
the average treatment effect on loan repayment (completion) for compliers, using the share of days in
compliance as the endogenous variable (see the Appendix for Intent to Treat (ITT) results). The analysis
is run on samples at either the 100th, 110th, 150th, or 200th day from origination. "Lockout" captures
the difference in the repayment (completion) rate between the Unsecured and Secured samples, "Adverse
Selection" captures the difference in the repayment (completion) rate between the Unsecured and Surprise
Unsecured samples, and "Moral Hazard" captures the difference in the repayment (completion) rate
between the Surprise Unsecured and Secured samples. "p-value diff" records the p-value from testing the
equality of the differences between the Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard LATE models.  p < .10, 
p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   42
                            Table 2: Monthly IRRs of Loan Portfolios

         Treatment Group                Account percent locked                     All         n
                                 1st tercile 2nd tercile 3rd tercile
         Secured                   0.2%            -2.5%          -8.4%          -3.7%        217
                                [0.00, 0.06]    [0.06, 0.19]   [0.19, 0.57]   [0.00, 0.57]
         Unsecured                  -3.7            -6.3           -10.2          -6.9        438
                                [0.00, 0.05]    [0.05, 0.19]   [0.19, 0.64]   [0.00, 0.64]

         Prior School Fee           6.6             6.0            3.2            5.1        1377
         Loans (Secured)        [0.00, 0.04]    [0.04, 0.13]   [0.13, 0.30]   [0.00, 0.30]


Note: Loans in each treatment group are sorted by proportion of days locked at SMS and divided into
equal-sized terciles. Loans in each tercile are formed into a portfolio. The internal rate of return (IRR) is
the discount rate that makes the net present value of cash flows on the portfolio equal to zero. The IRRs
of portfolios formed using all loans in each treatment group are also reported. The range of the fraction
of days locked is reported in square brackets.



                      Table 3: Fraction of School Fee Loan Days Locked

                                                           Day
                                    Percentile
                                                   100     150     200
                                       25th        0.11    0.08    0.06
                                       50th        0.33    0.33    0.25
                                       75th        0.66    0.73    0.78

Note: The above table calculates the fraction of loan days locked at 100, 150, and 200 days from school-fee
loan origination, by percentile. The figures are calculated for the sample of 217 Secured school-fee loans
involved in the experiment.




                                                     43
Table 4: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection, and Moral Hazard, Risk (Interactions
Model) (LATE)

                                                                     Adverse       Moral
                                                         Lockout
                                                                     Selection     Hazard
             On Loan Repayment at 150 days
                                  Treatment               0.13         0.10         0.02
                                                          (0.06)       (0.05)      (0.05)
             Treatment × Median risk or above              0.01        -0.11       0.13
                                                          (0.08)       (0.06)      (0.08)
                             Median risk or above        -0.15        -0.15       -0.27
                                                          (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)
                                           Constant      0.63         0.64        0.73
                                                          (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)
             On Loan Completion at 200 days
                                   Treatment              0.15          0.09        0.06
                                                          (0.07)       (0.06)      (0.06)
             Treatment × Median risk or above              0.07         -0.07       0.15
                                                          (0.09)       (0.08)      (0.09)
                             Median risk or above        -0.20        -0.20       -0.28
                                                          (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.05)
                                           Constant      0.56         0.57        0.65
                                                          (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)
             n                                              655         814          593

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of the
loan principal repaid. Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been repaid. The above
results display the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), which measures the average treatment effect
on either loan repayment or loan completion for compliers, using the share of days in compliance as the
endogenous variable. The analysis is run on the sample at the 150th day (for loan repayment) or 200th day
(for loan completion) from origination. Under "Lockout" where the subsample is those who were assigned
Secured or Unsecured, "Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Secured. Under "Adverse Selection"
where the subsample is those who were assigned Unsecured or Surprise Unsecured, "Treatment" captures
the treatment effect of Surprise Unsecured. Under "Moral Hazard" where the subsample is those who
were in assigned Surprise Unsecured and Secured, "Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Secured.
"Median risk or above" is an indicator for whether the customer had their solar home system locked for
11 percent or more of its history by early May 2019, right before the start of the experiment.  p < .10,

   p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   44
            Figure 5: Effect of Lockout on Loan Take-up by Willingness to Pay




Note: This figure covers the sample of 950 individuals, of which 344 are treated with Secured loans and
606 are treated with Unsecured loans. Individuals treated with Surprise Unsecured loans are excluded
from this figure. Individuals with willingness to pay to unlock next day of 0 or 1,000 UGX are in the
first group, of 2,000 or 3,000 UGX in the second group, and of 4,000 or 5,000 in the third group. The
differences in take-up between individuals treated with Secured and Unsecured loans are plotted and 95%
confidence intervals are along with the bars. Note that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX
in 2019 (Source: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.FCRF?locations=UG).




                                                  45
                   Table 5: Education Outcomes, Household-level (LATE)

                                                                              Log school
                                           Enrollment      Days absent
                                                                             expenditures
             Loan                            0.0556           0.0319              0.297
                                             (0.0299)         (0.345)             (0.127)

             Outcome control mean              0.88             1.28              85.85
             n                                 1683             1625              1625

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Results relate to Term 2 outcomes. The above results display
the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), which measures the average treatment effect for compliers,
using actual receipt of a school-fee loan as the endogenous variable (see the Appendix for Intent to Treat
(ITT) results). "Enrollment" describes the share of school-aged children (SAC; individuals aged 5-20)
enrolled in Term 2, and is conditional on having at least one SAC within the household at endline. "Days
absent" describes the average days of school missed per month, per enrolled SAC, and is conditional
on having at least one SAC enrolled at endline in Term 2. "School expenditures" (school fees, supplies,
transport, and school meals) describes the average school expenditure per enrolled SAC and is conditional
on having at least one SAC enrolled at endline in Term 2. School expenditures are in USD (1 USD is
equal to approximately 3704 UGX in 2019). School expenditures are winsorized at the 99th percentile.
The outcome control mean for school expenditures is not log transformed.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p <
.01



              Table 6: Education Outcomes for School Aged Children (LATE)

                                                                          Log school
                                                  Enrollment
                                                                         expenditures
                                                Male       Female        Male Female
               Loan                           0.0593       -0.0403      0.253      0.381
                                              (0.0343)    (0.0325)      (0.145)    (0.176)

               P value from Chow test                       0.03                     0.48
               Outcome control mean             0.89        0.92        79.33       83.07
               n                                2756        2903        2508        2606

Note: Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered at the household level. Results relate to Term
2 outcomes. The above results display the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), which measures
the average treatment effect for compliers, using actual receipt of a school fee loan as the endogenous
variable (see the Appendix for Intent to Treat (ITT) results). School expenditures (school fees, supplies,
transport, and school meals) are conditional on enrollment at endline in Term 2. School expenditures
are in USD (1 USD is equal to approximately 3704 UGX in 2019). School expenditures are winsorized
at the 99th percentile. The p value from the Chow test compares the treatment effect for males to that
of females. The outcome control mean for school expenditures is not log transformed.  p < .10,  p <
.05,  p < .01



                                                   46
Table 7: Effect on Asset Purchases, Sales, and Money Borrowed in the Last 6 Months
(LATE)

                                                   Asset           Asset      Money               Net
                                                 purchases          sales    borrowed         difference
                                                  (IHST)          (IHST)      (IHST)           (IHST)
          Loan                                      0.113          -0.216         0.061            0.060
                                                   (0.380)        (0.301)        (0.405)          (0.407)
          Outcome control mean (USD, level)          238            96            234              -234
          n                                         1836           1836           1836             1836

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE) to derive semi-elasticities. The LATE measures the average treatment effect for compliers,
using actual receipt of a school fee loan type (or any school fee loan) as the endogenous variable (see
the Appendix for Intent to Treat (ITT) results). "Net difference" records the difference between asset
purchases and asset sales, minus money borrowed. Asset purchases, asset sales, and money borrowed
are winsorized at the 99th percentile. Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note
that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). Winsorizing at the 99th percentile takes
place before IHST transformation. For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of
the school fee loan was added back into the total amount reported to have been borrowed. Loan refers to
the semi-elasticity calculated following the exact method from Bellemare and Wichman (2019), following
arguments from Halvorsen and Palmquist (1980), Kennedy (1981) and Giles (1982).  p < .10,  p <
.05,  p < .01

                     Table 8: Effect on Household Balance Sheet (LATE)

                                                         Asset        Money              Net
                                                         value       borrowed        difference
                                                        (IHST)        (IHST)          (IHST)
                 Loan                                    -0.160        0.114              -0.014
                                                        (0.172)       (0.417)            (0.756)
                 Outcome control mean (USD, level)         1810            553             1258
                 n                                         1830           1830             1830

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE) to derive semi-elasticities. The LATE measures the average treatment effect for compliers, using
actual receipt of a school fee loan type (or any school fee loan) as the endogenous variable (see the
Appendix for Intent to Treat (ITT) results). "Asset value" records the sum of the household's value of
assets at baseline, together with net difference between asset purchases and asset sales over the last 6
months, recorded at endline. "Money borrowed" is the sum of the amount borrowed over the 12 months
prior to the baseline survey (recorded at baseline) and the amount over the 6 months prior to the endline
survey (recorded at endline). The components for "asset value" and "money borrowed" are winsorized
at the 99th percentile prior to IHST transformations. "Net difference" records the difference between
"asset value" and "money borrowed." Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note
that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a
creditor, the amount of the school fee loan was added back into the total amount reported to have been
borrowed. Loan refers to the semi-elasticity calculated following the exact method from Bellemare and
Wichman (2019), following arguments from Halvorsen and Palmquist (1980), Kennedy (1981) and Giles
(1982). The number of observations differs from that in Table 7 because the outcomes in this table relies
on having reported values at baseline.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01

                                                   47
A      Online Appendix
 Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics of Enrollee Characteristics from Administrative Data

                                                          (1)        (2)        (3)
                                                        Uganda      SMS      Took up
                   Characteristic
                                                        LSMS       sent to     loan
                   Proportion of days locked at SMS         -        0.13    0.16
                                                                    (0.15)    (0.15)
                   Age (years)                             45       46         44
                                                          (22)       (12)      (11)
                   Female (proportion)                    0.34     0.23      0.14
                                                         (0.68)     (0.42)    (0.35)
                   Married (proportion)                   0.70     0.90      0.92
                                                         (0.67)     (0.30)    (0.26)
                   Number of children                      3.0      4.3       3.9
                                                          (3.3)      (2.9)     (2.5)
                   Agriculture or Non-employed            0.55     0.37      0.24
                                                         (0.73)     (0.48)    (0.43)
                   Non-professional                       0.27     0.39        0.38
                                                         (0.65)     (0.49)    (0.49)
                   Other                                  0.05     0.08        0.08
                                                         (0.32)     (0.27)    (0.28)
                   Professional                           0.13     0.17      0.30
                                                         (0.55)     (0.38)    (0.46)
                   Central                                0.39     0.44      0.37
                                                         (0.70)     (0.50)    (0.48)
                   Eastern                                0.28       0.28    0.35
                                                         (0.68)     (0.45)    (0.48)
                   Western                                0.33     0.28        0.28
                                                         (0.68)     (0.45)    (0.45)
                   n                                      2281     27081      1072


Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. The World Bank Uganda LSMS information in (1) comes
from the 2018/2019 wave and uses probability weights. (2) and (3) come from Fenix administrative data.
LSMS demographics relate to the household head, while Fenix demographics relate to the customer
signing with Fenix. For Occupation using the Fenix data, "Agriculture or Non-employed" includes Cattle
Trader, Farmer, Fisherman, and Not Employed; "Professional" includes Accountant, Banker, Broker,
Electrician, Engineer, Government / Civil Servant, Health Worker, Journalist, Mechanic / Technician,
NGO Worker, Office Work, Police, Security Guard, Teacher, Tour Guide, UPDF, and Uganda Prisons;
"Non-professional" includes Boda Boda, Butcher, Carpenter, Construction, Driver, Herbalist, MM Agent,
Market Trader, Money Changer, Religious Leader, Shop Keeper, Small Business Owner, Tailor, and Taxi
Operator. LSMS sample occupations followed a similar categorization. (3) is a subset of (2). The results
from tests of differences comparing (1) to (2) and (2) to (3) are displayed in (2) and (3), respectively.
Menu of Choice treatment customers are dropped from (2) and (3), and comprised less than 2% of those
samples.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   48
                    Table A.2: Characteristics of those who take-up loans

                                                               Secured     Unsecured      N
          Percent of days locked at SMS                          15.8         14.9       505
                                                                (15.5)       (14.3)
          Household head characteristics
            Age (years)                                          42.7         44.0       505
                                                                 (9.9)       (11.1)
            Female (proportion)                                  0.10         0.11       505
                                                                (0.31)       (0.32)
          Household head occupation (proportion)
            Family business or farm                              0.51        0.65        505
                                                                (0.50)       (0.48)
            Self-employed                                        0.61          0.63      505
                                                                (0.49)       (0.48)
            Outside the home                                     0.36          0.33      505
                                                                (0.48)       (0.47)
          Number of school aged children                          3.0          3.2       505
                                                                 (2.1)        (2.0)
          Annual household income per adult (USD)                 336          298       505
                                                                (333)         (248)
          Value of assets per adult (USD)                         354          389       505
                                                                (489)         (481)
          WTP for SHS next day (USD)                             0.81          0.77      505
                                                                (0.40)       (0.40)
          Hours to nearest ReadyPay Service Center                0.9          1.0       505
                                                                 (0.8)        (0.8)

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. The above table presents group averages for various charac-
teristics, and does not include individuals in the Surprise Unsecured treatment group. "Percent of days
locked at SMS" describes the percentage of days that the customer was locked on their solar home systems
(SHS) at the time that the initial SMS was sent to customers inviting them to take up a school fee loan.
School aged children are children between the ages of 5 and 20, inclusive. USD values are winsorized at
the 99th percentile. "WTP for SHS next day" describes customers' reported willingness to pay to unlock
their SHS for the next day. "Hours to nearest ReadyPay Service Center" describes the amount of time
customers reported taking to go to the nearest Fenix ReadyPay Service Center. Values were converted
to USD (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). Tests of differences in means
are carried out between Unsecured and Secured.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                  49
                               Table A.3: Baseline Characteristics

                                                           Surprise
    Characteristic                              Secured               Unsecured    Control     n
                                                          Unsecured
    Risk
           Percent of days locked at SMS (%)     14.7       15.2         16.0        14.0    2130
                                                (15.3)     (15.5)       (15.2)      (14.5)
    Household head
                                 Age (years)     43.0       43.8         43.3        43.5    2122
                                                (11.0)     (11.1)       (10.6)      (11.1)
                        Female (proportion)      0.13       0.12         0.11        0.11    2125
                                                (0.34)     (0.32)       (0.32)      (0.31)
                        Married (proportion)     0.89       0.88         0.85        0.86    2125
                                                (0.32)     (0.32)       (0.35)      (0.34)
    Household head occupation (proportion)
                  Family business or farm        0.59       0.56         0.53        0.56    2125
                                                (0.49)     (0.50)       (0.50)      (0.50)
                               Self-employed     0.60       0.63         0.60        0.59    2123
                                                (0.49)     (0.48)       (0.49)      (0.49)
                           Outside the home      0.35       0.36         0.37        0.34    2125
                                                (0.48)     (0.48)       (0.48)      (0.47)
    Demographics
           Number of people in household          6.6        6.6          6.6        6.6     2130
                                                 (2.7)      (3.0)        (2.7)      (2.7)
     Number of children aged 5-20 enrolled        2.7        2.7          2.7        2.7     2125
                                 in school       (1.9)      (2.0)        (1.9)      (2.0)
    Financial information
     Amount spent on lighting, year (USD)         28         35           42         43      2126
                                                 (73)       (73)         (96)       (99)
        Total household income, year (USD)       1395       1473         1431       1573     2094
                                                (1271)     (1340)       (1348)     (1484)
                       Value of assets (USD)     1755       1599         1705       1767     2127
                                                (2391)     (2062)       (2425)     (2337)
    Borrowing
                Borrowed in last 12 months       0.60       0.60         0.62        0.63    2125
                                 (proportion)   (0.49)     (0.49)       (0.49)      (0.48)
         Money borrowed in last 12 months        323        310          357         334     2122
                                      (USD)     (739)      (675)        (726)       (666)
     Ever refused for loan in last 12 months     0.13       0.14         0.15        0.20    2124
                                 (proportion)   (0.34)     (0.35)       (0.35)      (0.40)
        Took a microfinance loan in last 12      0.07       0.06         0.08        0.07    2125
                        months (proportion)     (0.26)     (0.25)       (0.27)      (0.26)


Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. USD values are winsorized at the 99th percentile. Values were
converted to USD (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019).




                                                  50
                                    Table A.4: Baseline Characteristics, p-values from pairwise comparisons

                                                                    Secured -                               Surprise      Surprise
                                                                                  Secured -    Secured -                               Unsecured -
         Characteristic                                              Surprise                              Unsecured -   Unsecured -
                                                                                  Unsecured     Control                                 Control
                                                                    Unsecured                              Unsecured      Control
         Risk
                               Percent of days locked at SMS (%)       0.648        0.177        0.489        0.312         0.222         0.032

         Household head
                                                      Age (years)      0.222        0.595        0.466        0.395         0.687         0.752
                                              Female (proportion)      0.484        0.330        0.373        0.764         0.764         0.962
                                             Married (proportion)      0.822        0.150        0.338        0.156         0.395         0.713
         Household head occupation (proportion)
                                          Family business or farm      0.410        0.067        0.516        0.248         0.922         0.274
                                                    Self-employed      0.343        0.983        0.836        0.279         0.240         0.798
                                                Outside the home       0.638        0.400        0.904        0.672         0.548         0.331
         Demographics
                                  Number of people in household        0.919        0.882        0.843        0.966         0.915         0.939
51




                 Number of children aged 5-20 enrolled in school       0.691        0.925        0.802        0.563         0.908         0.704
         Financial information
                           Amount spent on lighting, year (USD)        0.137        0.013        0.014        0.139         0.117         0.810
                             Total household income, year (USD)        0.354        0.667        0.074        0.568         0.272         0.113
                                            Value of assets (USD)      0.264        0.742        0.942        0.388         0.226         0.682
         Borrowing
                        Borrowed in last 12 months (proportion)        0.858        0.647        0.448        0.460         0.307         0.689
                       Money borrowed in last 12 months (USD)          0.767        0.466        0.834        0.222         0.580         0.607
             Ever refused for loan in last 12 months (proportion)      0.547        0.434        0.009        0.839         0.019         0.027
         Took a microfinance loan in last 12 months (proportion)       0.687        0.514        0.836        0.220         0.524         0.675


     Note: p-values from t-tests between two different treatment groups are included in the above table.
                   Table A.5: Share of Days in Compliance, by Treatment

                           Loan                  Surprise
                                    Secured               Unsecured
                           day                  Unsecured
                             50       0.93         0.90           0.92
                                     (0.25)       (0.23)         (0.22)
                            100       0.93         0.93           0.94
                                     (0.25)       (0.20)         (0.20)
                            150       0.93         0.94           0.94
                                     (0.25)       (0.20)         (0.20)
                            200       0.93         0.94           0.94
                                     (0.25)       (0.20)         (0.20)

                              n       217           376            438

Note: Standard deviations in parentheses. The analysis is run on treatment samples of the share of days
in compliance at 50, 100, 150, and 200 days from origination.




                                                  52
Table A.6: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard on Loan Repayment
and Loan Completion (ITT)

                 Loan  Mean                             Adverse Moral p-value
                                         Lockout
                 day Unsecured                          Selection Hazard diff
                                     Panel A: Loan Repayment
                  100         0.46        0.12            0.04     0.08        0.16
                                          (0.03)         (0.03)    (0.03)
                  150         0.57        0.12            0.04     0.07        0.33
                                          (0.03)         (0.03)    (0.04)
                  200         0.62        0.10            0.04     0.06        0.55
                                          (0.03)         (0.03)    (0.03)
                                     Panel B: Loan Completion
                  110         0.31        0.09            0.01     0.08        0.11
                                          (0.04)         (0.03)    (0.04)
                  150         0.41        0.15            0.05     0.10        0.18
                                          (0.04)         (0.03)    (0.04)
                  200         0.47        0.16            0.05    0.12         0.08
                                          (0.04)         (0.04)   (0.04)

                   n                       655            814       593

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of the
loan principal repaid (Panel A). Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been repaid
(Panel B). The above results display the Intent to Treat (ITT) analysis, which measures the average
effect of assignment on loan repayment (completion). The analysis is run on samples at either the 100th,
110th, 150th, or 200th day from origination. "Lockout" captures the difference in the repayment (com-
pletion) rate between the Unsecured and Secured samples, "Adverse Selection" captures the difference
in the repayment (completion) rate between the Unsecured and Surprise Unsecured samples, and "Moral
Hazard" captures the difference in the repayment (completion) rate between the Surprise Unsecured and
Secured samples. "p-value diff" records the p-value from testing the equality of the differences between
the Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard ITT models.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   53
Table A.7: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection, and Moral Hazard on Loan Repayment
and Loan Completion, Early Adopters

   Loan      Mean            Lockout           Adverse Selection       Moral Hazard        p-value
   day     Unsecured       ITT    LATE          ITT     LATE           ITT    LATE           diff
                                 Panel A: Loan Repayment
                               
    100        0.47       0.15   0.18 0.01          0.01              0.14      0.18         0.01
                          (0.05) (0.07) (0.05)     (0.06)             (0.05)    (0.07)
    150        0.56       0.18      0.22        0.05       0.06        0.13      0.16        0.16
                          (0.06)    (0.07)     (0.05)     (0.06)       (0.06)    (0.07)
    200        0.62       0.16      0.19        0.06       0.07        0.10      0.13        0.40
                          (0.06)    (0.07)     (0.05)     (0.06)       (0.05)    (0.07)
                                   Panel B: Loan Completion
    110        0.33       0.14      0.18 -0.01       -0.01             0.15      0.19        0.02
                          (0.07)    (0.08) (0.05)   (0.07)             (0.07)    (0.08)
    150        0.42       0.18      0.22        0.05       0.06        0.13      0.16        0.22
                          (0.07)    (0.08)     (0.06)     (0.07)       (0.07)    (0.09)
    200        0.49       0.24      0.29        0.05       0.06       0.19      0.23         0.02
                          (0.07)    (0.08)     (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.07)    (0.08)

     n                      247       247       308         308         223       223

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The samples are further restricted to those individuals who had
received the baseline survey after placing the loan deposit or who had not received a baseline survey
(Early Adopters). Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of the loan principal
repaid (Panel A). Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been repaid (Panel B). The
Intention to Treat (ITT) measures the average effect of assignment on loan repayment, while the Local
Average Treatment Effect (LATE) measures the average treatment effect on loan repayment for compliers,
using the share of days in compliance as the endogenous variable. The analysis is run on samples at
either the 100th, 110th, 150th, or 200th day from origination. "Lockout" captures the difference in the
repayment (completion) rate between the Unsecured and Secured samples, "Adverse Selection" captures
the difference in the repayment (completion) rate between the Unsecured and Surprise Unsecured samples,
and "Moral Hazard" captures the difference in the repayment (completion) rate between the Surprise
Unsecured and Secured samples. "p-value diff" records the p-value from testing the equality of the
differences between the Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard ITT models.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p <
.01




                                                  54
               Table A.8: Monthly IRRs of Loan Portfolios, Compliers Only

         Treatment Group               Account percent locked                     All         n
                                1st tercile 2nd tercile 3rd tercile
         Secured                  -0.5%           -3.0%           -7.4%          -3.7%       202
                               [0.00, 0.05]    [0.06, 0.18]    [0.18, 0.57]   [0.00, 0.57]
         Unsecured                 -5.3            -7.1            -11.8          -8.2       358
                               [0.00, 0.05]    [0.05, 0.20]    [0.20, 0.64]   [0.00, 0.64]

         Prior School Fee          6.6             6.0             3.2            5.1        1377
         Loans (Secured)       [0.00, 0.04]    [0.04, 0.13]    [0.13, 0.30]   [0.00, 0.30]


Note: In this analysis, we exclude customers with imperfect compliance (i.e., customers who were sup-
posed to be locked were unlocked for some days and vice versa). Loans in each treatment group are
sorted by proportion of days locked at SMS and divided into equal-sized terciles. Loans in each tercile
are formed into a portfolio. The internal rate of return (IRR) is the discount rate that makes the net
present value of cash flows on the portfolio equal to zero. The IRRs of portfolios formed using all loans
in each treatment group are also reported. The range of the fraction of days locked is reported in square
brackets.

                   Table A.9: Education Outcomes, Household-level (ITT)

                                                                               Log school
                                           Enrollment         Days absent
                                                                              expenditures
             Loan                             0.0251            0.0144            0.134
                                              (0.0135)          (0.156)          (0.0567)

             Outcome control mean              0.88              1.28              85.85
             n                                 1683              1625              1625

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Results relate to Term 2 outcomes. The above results display the
Intent to Treat (ITT) analysis, which measures the average effect of assignment to a loan. "Enrollment"
describes the share of school-aged children (SAC; individuals aged 5-20) enrolled in Term 2, and is
conditional on having at least one SAC within the household at endline. "Days absent" describes the
average days of school missed per month, per enrolled SAC, and is conditional on having at least one SAC
enrolled at endline in Term 2. "School expenditures" (school fees, supplies, transport, and school meals)
describes the average school expenditure per enrolled SAC and is conditional on having at least one SAC
enrolled at endline in Term 2. School expenditures are in USD (1 USD is equal to approximately 3704
UGX in 2019). School expenditures are winsorized at the 99th percentile. The outcome control mean for
school expenditures is not log transformed.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   55
             Table A.10: Education Outcomes for School Aged Children (ITT)

                                                                         Log school
                                                Enrollment
                                                                        expenditures
                                              Male       Female        Male     Female
             Loan                           0.0276       -0.0182      0.120       0.176
                                            (0.0158)    (0.0146)     (0.0688)    (0.0804)

             P value from Chow test                        0.03                     0.51
             Outcome control mean             0.89         0.92        79.33       83.07
             n                                2756         2903        2508        2606

Note: Standard errors in parentheses and are clustered at the household level. Results relate to Term 2
outcomes. School expenditures are conditional on enrollment at endline in Term 2. The above results
display the Intent to Treat (ITT) analysis, which measures the average effect of assignment to a loan.
School expenditures (school fees, supplies, transport, and school meals) are conditional on enrollment at
endline in Term 2. School expenditures are in USD (1 USD is equal to approximately 3704 UGX in 2019).
School expenditures are winsorized at the 99th percentile. The p value from the Chow test compares the
treatment effect for males to that of females. The outcome control mean for school expenditures is not
log transformed.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   56
                           Table A.11: Shocks over the past 6 months

                                         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
                                     Proportion     Proportion    How worried    How worried
                                       shocks         shocks        are you        are you
                                     experienced    experienced   about this?    about this?
                                            Shock Category A: Problem With Money
           Assigned Secured loan       0.0151                       0.0369
                                      (0.0255)                     (0.0233)
                 Assigned Surprise    -0.00584                      0.0111
                   Unsecured loan     (0.0227)                     (0.0210)
               Assigned Unsecured      0.0216                      0.00819
                             loan     (0.0226)                     (0.0206)
                Assigned any loan                    0.00973                        0.0157
                                                     (0.0199)                      (0.0183)
                         Constant     0.415          0.415         0.729           0.729
                                      (0.0180)       (0.0180)      (0.0165)        (0.0165)
           n                            1882             1882        1400             1400
                                         Shock Category B: Money Matters For Coping
           Assigned Secured loan      -0.00302                     0.00955
                                      (0.0169)                     (0.0186)
                 Assigned Surprise    -0.00625                     -0.00607
                   Unsecured loan     (0.0150)                     (0.0168)
               Assigned Unsecured      0.0157                      0.00901
                             loan     (0.0149)                     (0.0166)
                Assigned any loan                    0.00314                       0.00352
                                                     (0.0132)                      (0.0146)
                         Constant     0.342          0.342         0.832           0.832
                                      (0.0119)       (0.0119)      (0.0132)        (0.0132)
           n                            1882             1882        1648             1648
                                               Shock Category C: Money Doesn't Help
           Assigned Secured loan      -0.00675                      0.0646
                                      (0.0121)                     (0.0466)
                 Assigned Surprise     -0.0111                      0.0577
                   Unsecured loan     (0.0107)                     (0.0410)
               Assigned Unsecured      -0.0148                      0.0312
                             loan     (0.0107)                     (0.0406)
                Assigned any loan                     -0.0116                       0.0486
                                                     (0.00942)                     (0.0353)
                         Constant     0.0886         0.0886        0.695           0.695
                                      (0.00851)      (0.00851)     (0.0315)        (0.0314)
           n                            1882             1882         455             455


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Shock Category A gathers together the following experiences over
the last 6 months: not having enough money for basic needs such as food and clothing; not having enough
money for other living home expenses; being unable to educate all of your children; not having enough
money for medicines and medical treatment; debts owed to others. Shock Category B gathers together
the following experiences over the last 6 months: health problems or illness; an accident or disaster;
difficulty finding work; death of a family member; job loss; weather affecting your crops. Shock Category


                                                    57
C gathers together the following experiences over the last 6 months: problems at home with relatives;
problems with people in other tribes; idleness of your children or spouse; alcohol consumption of your
children or spouse. Columns (1) and (2) use the proportion of shocks within a category that one is said to
have experienced over the last 6 months as the dependent variable. Columns (3) and (4) use the average
value of the likert-scale values transformed to 0-1 scales, out of the shocks experienced within a category,
as the dependent variable. The reference group is the Control group that was not assigned any school
fee loan.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                    58
     Table A.12: Effect on Asset Purchases, Sales, and Money Borrowed in the Last 6 Months, Regressions, IHST Transformation
     (LATE)

                                                      Asset       Asset       Asset      Asset     Money       Money          Net          Net
                                                    purchases   purchases      sales      sales   borrowed    borrowed    difference   difference
                                                     (IHST)      (IHST)      (IHST)     (IHST)     (IHST)      (IHST)      (IHST)       (IHST)
               Assigned Secured loan                 0.0173                  -0.0522               -0.0481                 0.0568
                                                     (0.390)                 (0.426)               (0.436)                 (0.438)
               Assigned Surprise Unsecured loan       -0.104                  -0.495               0.0616                  -0.0648
                                                     (0.332)                 (0.363)               (0.372)                 (0.373)
               Assigned Unsecured loan                0.300                  -0.00113              0.0879                  -0.0880
                                                     (0.308)                  (0.336)              (0.344)                 (0.346)
               Assigned any loan                                   0.107                 -0.234                0.0587                   -0.0580
                                                                  (0.342)               (0.372)                (0.381)                  (0.383)
59




               Outcome control mean (level)            238          238         96        96         234         234         -234        -234
               n                                      1836         1836        1836      1836       1836        1836         1836        1836


     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE). The LATE measures the average treatment
     effect for compliers, using actual receipt of a school fee loan type (or any school fee loan) as the endogenous variable. "Net difference" records the
     difference between asset purchases and asset sales, minus money borrowed. Asset purchases, asset sales, and money borrowed are winsorized at the
     99th percentile. Winsorizing takes place before IHST transformation. Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note that 1 USD
     was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee loan was added
     back into the total amount reported to have been borrowed. The above analysis uses the Intent to Treat (ITT).  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01
     Table A.13: Effect on Asset Purchases, Sales, and Money Borrowed in the Last 6 Months, Regressions, IHST Transformation
     (ITT)

                                                     Asset       Asset        Asset      Asset     Money       Money          Net          Net
                                                   purchases   purchases       sales      sales   borrowed    borrowed    difference   difference
                                                    (IHST)      (IHST)       (IHST)     (IHST)     (IHST)      (IHST)      (IHST)       (IHST)
              Assigned Secured loan                 0.00850                  -0.0256               -0.0236                 0.0279
                                                    (0.192)                  (0.209)               (0.214)                 (0.215)
              Assigned Surprise Unsecured loan      -0.0533                   -0.254               0.0317                  -0.0333
                                                    (0.171)                  (0.186)               (0.191)                 (0.192)
              Assigned Unsecured loan                0.166                  -0.000621              0.0484                  -0.0485
                                                    (0.170)                  (0.185)               (0.190)                 (0.191)
              Assigned any loan                                  0.0468                  -0.103                0.0258                   -0.0254
                                                                 (0.150)                (0.163)                (0.167)                  (0.168)
60




              Outcome control mean (level)            238          238          96        96         234         234        -234         -234
              P value from K-W H test                0.585                    0.521                 0.937                   0.914
              P value from M-W U test                             0.998                  0.509                  0.900                    0.907
              n                                       1836        1836        1836       1836       1836        1836        1836         1836


     Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Intent to Treat (ITT) from loan assignment. "Net difference" records the difference
     between asset purchases and asset sales, minus money borrowed. Asset purchases, asset sales, and money borrowed are winsorized at the 99th
     percentile. Winsorizing takes place before IHST transformation. Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note that 1 USD was
     equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee loan was added back
     into the total amount reported to have been borrowed.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01
Table A.14: Effect on Household Balance Sheet, Regressions, IHST Transformation
(LATE)

                                        Asset     Asset     Money       Money           Net          Net
                                        value     value    borrowed    borrowed     difference   difference
                                       (IHST)    (IHST)     (IHST)      (IHST)       (IHST)       (IHST)
 Assigned Secured loan                 0.0124               -0.00858                  0.274
                                       (0.232)               (0.426)                 (0.873)
 Assigned Surprise Unsecured loan       -0.223               -0.103                  0.0140
                                       (0.198)              (0.364)                  (0.747)
 Assigned Unsecured loan                -0.151               0.318                    -0.185
                                       (0.184)              (0.339)                  (0.694)
 Assigned any loan                                -0.171                  0.108                   -0.0150
                                                 (0.204)                 (0.374)                  (0.767)

 Outcome control mean (level)           1810      1810        553          553        1258         1258
 n                                      1830      1830       1830         1830        1830         1830


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE). The LATE measures the average treatment effect for compliers, using actual receipt of a school
fee loan type (or any school fee loan) as the endogenous variable (see the Appendix for Intent to Treat
(ITT) results). "Asset value" records the sum of the household's value of assets at baseline, together with
net difference between asset purchases and asset sales over the last 6 months, recorded at endline. "Money
borrowed" is the sum of the amount borrowed over the 12 months prior to the baseline survey (recorded
at baseline) and the amount over the 6 months prior to the endline survey (recorded at endline). The
components for "asset value" and "money borrowed" are winsorized at the 99th percentile prior to IHST
transformations. "Net difference" records the difference between "asset value" and "money borrowed."
Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately
3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee
loan was added back into the total amount reported to have been borrowed. The number of observations
differs from that in Table A.12 because the outcomes in this table relies on having reported values at
baseline.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                    61
Table A.15: Effect on Household Balance Sheet, Regressions, IHST Transformation (ITT)

                                       Asset      Asset      Money       Money          Net          Net
                                       value      value     borrowed    borrowed    difference   difference
                                      (IHST)     (IHST)      (IHST)      (IHST)      (IHST)       (IHST)
 Assigned Secured loan                0.00611               -0.00421                  0.135
                                      (0.114)                (0.209)                 (0.429)
 Assigned Surprise Unsecured loan      -0.114                -0.0529                 0.00716
                                      (0.102)                (0.187)                 (0.383)
 Assigned Unsecured loan              -0.0826                 0.174                   -0.102
                                      (0.101)                (0.186)                 (0.381)
 Assigned any loan                                -0.0746                0.0472                  -0.00655
                                                 (0.0892)                (0.164)                  (0.335)

 Outcome control mean (level)          1810       1810         553         553        1258         1258
 P value from K-W H test               0.521                  0.547                   0.728
 P value from M-W U test                          0.221                   0.953                    0.458
 n                                      1830      1830        1830        1830         1830        1830


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Intent to Treat (ITT) from loan
assignment. "Asset value" records the sum of the household's value of assets at baseline, together with
net difference between asset purchases and asset sales over the last 6 months, recorded at endline. "Money
borrowed" is the sum of the amount borrowed over the 12 months prior to the baseline survey (recorded
at baseline) and the amount over the 6 months prior to the endline survey (recorded at endline). The
components for "asset value" and "money borrowed" are winsorized at the 99th percentile prior to IHST
transformations. "Net difference" records the difference between "asset value" and "money borrowed."
Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately
3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee
loan was added back into the total amount reported to have been borrowed. The number of observations
differs from that in Table A.13 because the outcomes in this table relies on having reported values at
baseline.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   62
       Table A.16: Effect on Household Balance Sheet, Regressions, Levels (LATE)

                                        Asset   Asset    Money       Money           Net          Net
                                        value   value   borrowed    borrowed     difference   difference
  Assigned Secured loan                  119               26                       93
                                        (375)             (149)                    (376)
  Assigned Surprise Unsecured loan       -221              -10                      -211
                                        (321)             (128)                    (322)
  Assigned Unsecured loan                 -7               61                       -68
                                        (299)             (119)                    (300)
  Assigned any loan                              -72                    32                       -104
                                                (330)                 (131)                     (331)

  Outcome control mean (level)          1810    1810        553         553        1258         1258
  n                                     1830    1830       1830        1830        1830         1830


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Local Average Treatment Effect
(LATE). The LATE measures the average treatment effect for compliers, using actual receipt of a school
fee loan type (or any school fee loan) as the endogenous variable (see the Appendix for Intent to Treat
(ITT) results). "Asset value" records the sum of the household's value of assets at baseline, together
with net difference between asset purchases and asset sales over the last 6 months, recorded at endline.
"Money borrowed" is the sum of the amount borrowed over the 12 months prior to the baseline survey
(recorded at baseline) and the amount over the 6 months prior to the endline survey (recorded at endline).
The components for "asset value" and "money borrowed" are winsorized at the 99th percentile. "Net
difference" records the difference between "asset value" and "money borrowed." Values were converted to
USD (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported
Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee loan was added back into the total amount reported to
have been borrowed. The number of observations differs from that in Table A.12 because the outcomes
in this table relies on having reported values at baseline.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   63
        Table A.17: Effect on Household Balance Sheet, Regressions, Levels (ITT)

                                       Asset   Asset     Money       Money          Net          Net
                                       value   value    borrowed    borrowed    difference   difference
  Assigned Secured loan                 58                 13                      46
                                       (185)              (73)                    (185)
  Assigned Surprise Unsecured loan      -113               -5                      -108
                                       (165)              (65)                    (165)
  Assigned Unsecured loan                -4                33                      -37
                                       (164)              (65)                    (164)
  Assigned any loan                              -31                   14                       -45
                                                (144)                 (57)                     (145)

  Outcome control mean (level)         1810     1810       553         553        1258         1258
  P value from K-W H test              0.532              0.529                   0.728
  P value from M-W U test                       0.221                 0.945                    0.458
  n                                     1830    1830      1830        1830        1830         1830


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Intent to Treat (ITT) from loan as-
signment. "Asset value" records the sum of the household's value of assets at baseline, together with net
difference between asset purchases and asset sales over the last 6 months, recorded at endline. "Money
borrowed" is the sum of the amount borrowed over the 12 months prior to the baseline survey (recorded
at baseline) and the amount over the 6 months prior to the endline survey (recorded at endline). The
components for "asset value" and "money borrowed" are winsorized at the 99th percentile. "Net dif-
ference" records the difference between "asset value" and "money borrowed." Values were converted to
USD (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported
Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee loan was added back into the total amount reported to
have been borrowed. The number of observations differs from that in Table A.13 because the outcomes
in this table relies on having reported values at baseline.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   64
Table A.18: Effect on Asset Purchases, Sales, and Money Borrowed in the Last 6 Months
(ITT)

                                                    Asset      Asset      Money          Net
                                                  purchases     sales    borrowed    difference
                                                   (IHST)     (IHST)      (IHST)      (IHST)
           Loan                                     0.048       -0.102     0.026       0.026
                                                   (0.157)     (0.153)    (0.172)     (0.173)
           Outcome control mean (USD, level)         238         96        234         -234
           n                                        1836        1836       1836        1836


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Intent to Treat (ITT) estimates to
derive semi-elasticities. "Net difference" records the difference between asset purchases and asset sales,
minus money borrowed. Asset purchases, asset sales, and money borrowed are winsorized at the 99th
percentile. Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note that 1 USD was equal
to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019). Winsorizing at the 99th percentile takes place before IHST
transformation. For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee loan
was added back into the total amount reported to have been borrowed. Loan refers to the semi-elasticity
calculated following the exact method from Bellemare and Wichman (2019), following arguments from
Halvorsen and Palmquist (1980), Kennedy (1981) and Giles (1982).  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   65
                    Table A.19: Effect on Household Balance Sheet (ITT)

                                                         Asset     Money           Net
                                                         value    borrowed     difference
                                                        (IHST)     (IHST)       (IHST)
                 Loan                                    -0.072     0.047        -0.007
                                                        (0.083)    (0.171)      (0.333)
                 Outcome control mean (USD, level)        1810        553        1258
                 n                                        1830       1830        1830


Note: Standard errors in parentheses. The above analysis uses the Intent to Treat (ITT) from loan
assignment. "Asset value" records the sum of the household's value of assets at baseline, together with
net difference between asset purchases and asset sales over the last 6 months, recorded at endline. "Money
borrowed" is the sum of the amount borrowed over the 12 months prior to the baseline survey (recorded
at baseline) and the amount over the 6 months prior to the endline survey (recorded at endline). The
components for "asset value" and "money borrowed" are winsorized at the 99th percentile prior to IHST
transformations. "Net difference" records the difference between "asset value" and "money borrowed."
Values were converted to USD prior to IHST transformation (note that 1 USD was equal to approximately
3,704 UGX in 2019). For 31 individuals who reported Fenix as a creditor, the amount of the school fee loan
was added back into the total amount reported to have been borrowed. Loan refers to the semi-elasticity
calculated following the exact method from Bellemare and Wichman (2019), following arguments from
Halvorsen and Palmquist (1980), Kennedy (1981) and Giles (1982). The number of observations differs
from that in Table A.18 because the outcomes in this table relies on having reported values at baseline.

  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                   66
Table A.20: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection, and Moral Hazard, Risk (Interactions
Model) (ITT)

                                                                      Adverse       Moral
                                                          Lockout
                                                                      Selection     Hazard
             On Loan Repayment at 150 days
                                  Treatment                0.11         0.09          0.02
                                                           (0.05)       (0.04)       (0.05)
             Treatment × Median risk or above               0.01        -0.10         0.11
                                                           (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.07)
                              Median risk or above        -0.16        -0.16        -0.26
                                                           (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)
                                            Constant      0.64         0.64         0.74
                                                           (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.03)
             On Loan Completion at 200 days
                                   Treatment               0.13          0.08         0.06
                                                           (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.06)
             Treatment × Median risk or above               0.07         -0.06        0.13
                                                           (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.08)
                              Median risk or above        -0.21        -0.21        -0.27
                                                           (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)
                                            Constant      0.58         0.58         0.65
                                                           (0.03)       (0.03)       (0.04)
             n                                               655          814         593

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of the
loan principal repaid. Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been repaid. The above
results display the Intent to Treat (ITT) analysis, which measures the average effect of assignment on loan
repayment or loan completion. The analysis is run on the sample at the 150th day (for loan repayment)
or 200th day (for loan completion) from origination. Under "Lockout" where the subsample is those
who were assigned Secured or Unsecured, "Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Secured. Under
"Adverse Selection" where the subsample is those who were assigned Unsecured or Surprise Unsecured,
"Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Surprise Unsecured. Under "Moral Hazard" where the
subsample is those who were in assigned Surprise Unsecured and Secured, "Treatment" captures the
treatment effect of Secured. "Median risk or above" is an indicator for whether the customer had their
solar home system locked for 11 percent or more of its history by early May 2019, right before the start
of the experiment. "×" represents an interaction.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                    67
Table A.21: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection, and Moral Hazard, WTP (Interactions
Model) (LATE)

                                                                     Adverse Moral
                                                         Lockout
                                                                     Selection Hazard
            On Loan Repayment at 150 days
                                   Treatment                0.09       0.02        0.07
                                                          (0.07)      (0.06)      (0.07)
            Treatment × Median WTP or above                 0.10       0.07        0.03
                                                          (0.09)      (0.07)      (0.09)
                            Median WTP or above            -0.00       0.00        0.07
                                                          (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
                                            Constant      0.58        0.58        0.60
                                                          (0.04)      (0.04)      (0.04)
            On Loan Completion at 200 days
                                    Treatment              0.14         0.00       0.14
                                                          (0.08)      (0.07)      (0.08)
            Treatment × Median WTP or above                 0.09        0.08       0.01
                                                          (0.11)      (0.09)      (0.11)
                            Median WTP or above            -0.01       -0.00       0.07
                                                          (0.06)      (0.06)      (0.06)
                                            Constant      0.49        0.50        0.50
                                                          (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
            n                                               505         638         469

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of
the loan principal repaid. Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been repaid. The
above results display the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE), which measures the average treatment
effect on either loan repayment or loan completion for compliers, using the share of days in compliance
as the endogenous variable (see the Appendix for Intent to Treat (ITT) results). The analysis is run on
the sample at the 150th day (for loan repayment) or 200th day (for loan completion) from origination.
Under "Lockout" where the subsample is those who were assigned Secured or Unsecured, "Treatment"
captures the treatment effect of Secured. Under "Adverse Selection" where the subsample is those who
were assigned Unsecured or Surprise Unsecured, "Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Surprise
Unsecured. Under "Moral Hazard" where the subsample is those who were in assigned Surprise Unsecured
and Secured, "Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Secured. "Median WTP or above" is an
indicator for whether the customer responded as willing to pay at least 3,000 Ugandan Shillings to
unlock their hypothetically-locked solar home system the next day. "×" represents an interaction.  p <
.10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                  68
Table A.22: Tests of Lockout, Adverse Selection, and Moral Hazard, WTP (Interactions
Model) (ITT)

                                                                        Adverse Moral
                                                           Lockout
                                                                        Selection Hazard
            On Loan Repayment at 150 days
                                   Treatment                 0.08         0.02         0.06
                                                            (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.06)
            Treatment × Median WTP or above                  0.09         0.06         0.03
                                                            (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.08)
                             Median WTP or above             0.01         0.01         0.07
                                                            (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.05)
                                             Constant       0.58         0.58         0.60
                                                            (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)
            On Loan Completion at 200 days
                                    Treatment                0.13         0.00         0.12
                                                            (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.07)
            Treatment × Median WTP or above                  0.08         0.07         0.01
                                                            (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.09)
                             Median WTP or above             0.00         0.00         0.07
                                                            (0.06)       (0.06)       (0.06)
                                             Constant       0.50         0.50         0.50
                                                            (0.04)       (0.04)       (0.04)
            n                                                 505          638          469

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Loan repayment is measured by the cumulative proportion of the
loan principal repaid. Loan completion describes whether the loan principal has been repaid. The above
results display the Intent to Treat (ITT) analysis, which measures the average effect of assignment on loan
repayment or loan completion. The analysis is run on the sample at the 150th day (for loan repayment)
or 200th day (for loan completion) from origination. Under "Lockout" where the subsample is those
who were assigned Secured or Unsecured, "Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Secured. Under
"Adverse Selection" where the subsample is those who were assigned Unsecured or Surprise Unsecured,
"Treatment" captures the treatment effect of Surprise Unsecured. Under "Moral Hazard" where the
subsample is those who were in assigned Surprise Unsecured and Secured, "Treatment" captures the
treatment effect of Secured. "Median WTP or above" is an indicator for whether the customer responded
as willing to pay at least 3,000 Ugandan Shillings to unlock their hypothetically-locked solar home system
the next day. "×" represents an interaction.  p < .10,  p < .05,  p < .01




                                                    69
   Figure A.1: Loan Repayment (Completion) by Percent of Days Locked on Day 150




                                         (a) Loan repayment




                                        (b) Loan completion

Note: 95% confidence intervals (displayed with dotted lines) are obtained via bootstrapping. Percent of
days locked at SMS is trimmed at 1% and 99%. Repayment (completion) rate on day 150 is residualized
to remove the effects of treatments and recentralized to the mean of the Secured group.




                                                  70
                       Figure A.2: Loan take-up by willingness to pay




Note: This figure covers the sample of 950 individuals, of which 344 are treated with Secured loans and
606 are treated with Unsecured loans. Individuals treated with Surprise Unsecured loans are excluded
from this figure. Individuals with willingness to pay to unlock next day being 0 or 1,000 UGX are
in the first group, being 2,000 or 3,000 UGX in the second group, and being 4,000 or 5,000 in the
third group. The average loan take-up by willingness to pay is plotted and 95% confidence intervals
are along with the bars. Note that 1 USD was equal to approximately 3,704 UGX in 2019 (Source:
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/PA.NUS.FCRF?locations=UG).




                                                  71
B        Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. Household i strategically defaults with probability (1 - qi )F (p/), where F (·) is
a cdf and therefore increasing in its argument. Fixing p, as  increases the argument, p/, decreases and
therefore so too does (1 - qi )F (p/).
                                                                                   v
                                                                                   ¯
Proof of Proposition 2. By hypothesis, S1 (p) = (1 - )E(~   vi ) < S0 (p) = v max{v - p, (1 - )v }dF (v ).
Hence, there must exist v such that the household does not strategically default (i.e., v   ¯ > p/) and
therefore Si (p) is strictly decreasing in qi . Further, observe that Si (p) is continuous in qi . By the
intermediate value theorem, there must exist a qj  (0, 1) such that Sj (q ) = d  w. From (2), all i such
that qi  qj will purchase and all i such that qi > qj will not. Hence, qj = q . To see that q is decreasing
in , differentiate both sides of Sj (p) = d with respect to  to get that

                                                    dSj (p)
                                                0=
                                                      d
                                                    Sj      Sj qj
                                                  =      +
                                                            qj 
         qj        Sj Sj                 Sj
Hence,        =-    / qj   < 0, since          -qj E(~
                                                     vi ) < 0.

Proof of Lemma 1. We will first show that di = w is optimal. First, clearly di < min{w, Si (pi )} is subop-
timal since the monopolist can simply increase di and earn more profit. Therefore, di = min{w, Si (pi )}.
Next suppose that the monopolist sells to household i and di < w, which therefore implies di = Si (pi )
and therefore pi solves arg max Si (pi ) + Ri (pi ) - c. Since repossession is inefficient (Assumption 2), total
surplus is maximized by setting v (p) = v or pi = v , but then di + Ri (pi ) < w + Ri (v )  w + v < c (by
Assumption 3). Thus, the monopolist would prefer not to sell to household i, a contradiction. Hence,
di = w .

Proof of Proposition 3. As shown in Lemma 1, when w  Si (p ) then the monopoly price is p = v  .
Conditional on purchasing the good, the probability that household i strategically defaults is therefore
(1 - qi )F (v  ). Thus, to prove the result, it suffices to show that v  is increasing in  and decreasing in .
The left-hand side of (5) is independent of the two parameters and increasing in v (by Assumption 4).
The right-hand side of (5) is increasing in  and decreasing in . Thus, the point at which the left and
right-hand side intersect (i.e., v  ) must increase with  and decrease with .

Proof of Proposition 4. This result follows from computing when monopoly profits are positive given the
optimal prices in Lemma 1. For (i), when w < Si (p ), the firm's total profit from selling to household i
under the optimal contract is w + Ri (p ) - c. Similarly, for (ii), when w > Si (p ), the firms total profit
                                        -1
from selling to household i is w + Ri (Si  (w)) - c.

Proof of Proposition 5. It is straightforward to argue that the constraint in (6) binds with equality. If
not, then the firm could lower d and increase Ui . We can therefore rewrite the program (6) as

                                        (di , pi )  arg max Ui (d, p) + i (d, p)
                                                       d,p
                                                                                                           (10)
                                               s.t.   i (d, p) = 0

Since d does not enter the objective of (10) and total surplus is decreasing in p, the solution to the above
involves the smallest p such that the firm makes zero profit (and then setting dc i = w ), which is precisely
as stated in (ii). Statement (i) then follows from computing when the firm profits are non-negative given
the prices in (ii).




                                                          72
