                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




FEARLESS WOMAN: FINANCIAL LITERACY AND STOCK MARKET PARTICIPATION

                                     Tabea Bucher-Koenen
                                        Rob J. Alessie
                                      Annamaria Lusardi
                                      Maarten van Rooij

                                      Working Paper 28723
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28723


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021

The authors wish to thank Martin Brown, Joao Cocco, Helmut Farbmacher, Adriaan Kalwij,
Marc Kramer, Pierre-Carl Michaud, Federica Teppa, Nathanael Vellekoop, and Joachim Winter
for helpful feedback and Audrey Brown for editorial assistance. They are also grateful to seminar
participants in Amsterdam, Frankfurt, Jena, Giessen, Groningen, Mannheim, Maastricht,
Montreal, Munich, Utrecht, and Sterling, and the participants at the Annual Meeting of the
Neuroeconomic Society in Bonn, the EIB meetings in Paris, the Annual Conference of the
European Economic Association in Toulouse, the Cintia conference in Turin, the Netspar Pension
Workshop in Amsterdam, the Netspar Conference on Advances in Household Finance in
Modena, the Annual Meeting of the International Association of Applied Econometrics in Milan,
the Women in Finance Conference at Columbia University in New York, the Household Finance
Workshop in Sheffield, the SAFE Household Finance Workshop in Frankfurt, and the DIW
Workshop on Gender and Financial Literacy in Berlin for useful comments. Financial support
from the European Investment Bank Institute is gratefully acknowledged. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions presented in this article are entirely those of the authors and
should not be attributed in any manner to the European Investment Bank or its Institute, the De
Nederlandsche Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Rob J. Alessie, Annamaria Lusardi, and Maarten van Rooij.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fearless Woman: Financial Literacy and Stock Market Participation
Tabea Bucher-Koenen, Rob J. Alessie, Annamaria Lusardi, and Maarten van Rooij
NBER Working Paper No. 28723
April 2021
JEL No. C81,D14,D91,G53

                                         ABSTRACT

Women are less financially literate than men. It is unclear whether this gap reflects a lack of
knowledge or, rather, a lack of confidence. Our survey experiment shows that women tend to
disproportionately respond "do not know" to questions measuring financial knowledge, but when
this response option is unavailable, they often choose the correct answer. We estimate a latent
class model and predict the probability that respondents truly know the correct answers. We find
that about one-third of the financial literacy gender gap can be explained by women's lower
confidence levels. Both financial knowledge and confidence explain stock market participation.


Tabea Bucher-Koenen                            Annamaria Lusardi
ZEW ­ Leibniz Centre for                       The George Washington University
European Economic Research                     School of Business
L 7, 1                                         2201 G Street, NW
68161 Mannheim                                 Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Germany                                        Washington, DC 20052
Tabea.Bucher-Koenen@zew.de                     and NBER
                                               alusardi@gwu.edu
Rob J. Alessie
University of Groningen                        Maarten van Rooij
Department of Economics, Econometrics          Dutch Central Bank
and Finance                                    P. O. Box 98
P.O. Box 800                                   1000 AB Amsterdam
9700 AV Groningen                              The Netherlands
r.j.m.alessie@rug.nl                           M.C.J.van.Rooij@DNB.NL
1. Introduction

Three facts motivate the work in this paper. First, there is a pronounced gender difference in
financial inclusion. Worldwide, only 47% of women versus 55% of men have access to an
account at a formal financial institution. Women are also significantly less likely to have access
to formal credit, both in high-income and developing economies (see World Bank 2013). Even
before the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, women were found to be more financially fragile than
men and to lack buffer stocks of savings (Hasler and Lusardi 2019). Moreover, women own
fewer assets and are less likely to have pensions and to invest in risky, high-yield assets (see,
e.g., Almenberg and Dreber 2015, and Lusardi and Mitchell 2008). The cost of these differences
is staggering. Regarding non-participation in the stock market, for instance, price-adjusted
historical returns show that savings invested in risk-free assets versus stocks result in large
differences in wealth holdings over a long period of time. 1

Second, there is a universal gender gap in financial literacy. Notably, in the majority of
countries, women tend to disproportionately indicate they "do not know" the answer to financial
literacy questions. This is true across cultures and measures of financial knowledge as well as
across socio-demographic characteristics. It is also true in other financial knowledge domains
such as debt literacy and pension literacy (see, e.g., Bucher-Koenen et al. 2017, Klapper and
Lusardi 2020, OECD 2013). At the same time, financial literacy has been shown to be a crucial
determinant of financial decision making, including stock market participation, portfolio choice,
retirement planning, wealth accumulation, and debt management (see Lusardi and Mitchell
2014 for a review).

The third fact, which motivates the title of this paper, is related to Fearless Girl--a bronze
statue of a girl that was placed in front of the Charging Bull on Wall Street in New York City
on March 7, 2017 (one day before International Women's Day). The intent was to raise
awareness and encourage women's leadership. Its symbolic placement sparked a debate about
women's roles, particularly in financial professions, and pointed to the importance of
confidence, especially in the fields of finance and investing. A fearless girl will become a
fearless woman.




1
 Bovenberg et al. (2007) show that, compared to an optimal strategy, not participating in the stock
market for retirement and other savings yields a welfare loss of 12 percent.
                                                2
We take these observations to the data and consider whether and the extent to which confidence
contributes to the persistent gender gap in financial literacy and financial behavior. Inspired in
part by the interest generated by Fearless Girl, we examine the role of confidence in explaining
the gender gap in stock market participation. The central questions we address can be
summarized as follows: Are women financially literate yet lacking confidence in their
knowledge? and Is it lack of confidence or lack of financial knowledge that is responsible for
the gender difference in stock market participation? These questions are of paramount
importance, particularly now that women play a greater role in saving and investing, including
making decisions regarding retirement savings and stock market participation.

To investigate these questions, we use data from the De Nederlandsche Bank (DNB) Household
Survey (DHS), which is a panel study of the Dutch central bank and is representative of the
Dutch-speaking population in the Netherlands. We designed two survey modules, which were
fielded to panel participants, using the Big Three financial literacy questions, which measure
knowledge about basic but fundamental financial concepts: interest compounding, inflation,
and risk diversification. 2 These questions were asked in each module, and we altered the survey
design as follows: In the first module we used the standard setup, which includes a "do not
know" option among the possible answers to the financial literacy questions. In the second
module, asked about six weeks after the first, we took away the "do not know" option, thus
forcing respondents to choose an answer from a set of options. Additionally, we asked
respondents how confident they were in their answer. Based on these data, we develop and
estimate a latent class model (LCM) to predict "true" financial literacy. The objective of the
LCM is to create a measure of financial knowledge that is not confounded by differences in
answering behavior related to confidence. The model helps us assess how much of the financial
literacy gender gap is due to differences in knowledge versus confidence. For each concept
(interest compounding, inflation, and risk diversification), our model predicts the probability
that the respondent knows the answer, conditional on the structure of responses to the financial
literacy questions in the two modules, information on confidence, and background variables.
Thus, in contrast to the financial literacy measures often used in the literature, in which the
number of correct answers is simply added up, we develop a more rigorous measure that takes
into consideration the entire structure of the answers to the financial literacy questions. Using


2
 These questions were developed by Annamaria Lusardi and Olivia Mitchell and are the questions most
commonly used to measure financial literacy in surveys around the world (see Lusardi and Mitchell
2011a, 2011b, and 2014).
                                                3
this new measure, we assess the impact of financial literacy on stock market participation, an
important outcome which is quite consequential for wealth accumulation and financial
wellbeing.

The contributions of this paper are as follows: First, we provide a novel perspective on financial
literacy measurement and show how we can better use the Big Three financial literacy questions
in empirical research. Good measurement forms the basis of rigorous research and is essential
to making progress in a field. The literature on financial literacy has grown rapidly in the past
decade, and most empirical work includes measures of financial literacy. 3 The Big Three
financial literacy questions have been added to national surveys around the world and have
become a standard measure of financial literacy, but few studies have examined the quality of
their measurement and the best way to use the information they provide. Second, we extend the
growing literature on gender differences in financial decision making. This is relevant given
that women are increasingly important participants in financial markets. Third, we provide a
methodological contribution to the literature on financial literacy.

Our results show a pronounced gender gap in financial literacy, confirming previous findings:
women are less likely to answer the financial literacy questions correctly and more likely to
choose the "do not know" option. However, taking away the "do not know" response option
substantially reduces the gender gap. Applying our novel estimation strategy, we can
decompose the gender gap into a gap in "true" knowledge and a gap in confidence. We find
less of a gender gap in our measure of true financial literacy than in the measure that has been
standard in the research to date. Specifically, we find that about two-thirds of the financial
literacy gender gap is explained by lower financial knowledge and the remaining one-third is
due to lower confidence. In other words, women have lower financial literacy than men, but
they know more than they think they know. Moreover, we find that both factors--knowledge
and confidence--are important for understanding gender differences in stock market
participation, so it is important to have information on both.

We also show that the way in which financial literacy is measured matters for our observed
financial outcome, i.e., stock market participation. We recognize that many researchers do not
have access to the type of data we were able to collect. However, we also show that including
the number of "do not know" responses to financial literacy questions in addition to the number


3
    Financial literacy now has its own JEL classification code: G53.
                                                     4
of correct answers in empirical regressions that assess the impact of financial literacy on
behavior can partially account for differences in confidence.

Finally, our findings can provide insights for educational programs designed to improve
financial decision making. First, according to our estimates, the majority of the financial literacy
gender gap is a knowledge gap. Thus, boosting women's financial knowledge is important to
the promotion of financial market participation. Second, we do find a gender gap in confidence,
and this matters for financial decisions, as symbolized by the Fearless Girl statue. Thus, our
results indicate that financial education programs specifically tailored to women that boost both
knowledge and confidence might be more effective than one-size-fits-all programs.

The paper is organized as follows: In the next section we provide a literature review. In Section
3, we describe the data and report descriptive results on financial literacy using information
from two modules of the DHS data. In Section 4, we describe our econometric strategy for
measuring financial literacy when there are heterogeneous differences in confidence across
gender. We explore the relationship between measures of financial literacy and financial
behavior in Section 5 and the role of confidence in Section 6. In section 7, we discuss
instrumental variables estimates and how we can make use of the "do not know" answers. We
provide conclusions in Section 8.

2. Literature overview

We provide below a review of the literature that is related to our work and that includes gender
differences not only in financial knowledge but also in financial behavior and measurement
issues as well.

2.1 Gender differences in income and financial outcomes

Gender differences have been widely studied in economics. Most of the research on gender
equality focuses on gender differences in income (see e.g. Blau and Kahn 2017 and Goldin et
al. 2017) and labor force participation (see, e.g., Goldin and Mitchell 2017). While the gender
wage gap has been declining over time, a substantial gap still exists in many countries. Among
the reasons cited to explain this gap are gender differences in education, wages, occupational
segregation, part-time work, and taxation (see, e.g., Goldin and Katz 2016, Goldin et al. 2017,
Eckstein et al. 2019); medical progress and fertility choices (Albanesi and Olivetti 2016); and
selection into family-friendly career paths (Adda et al. 2017). However, even after accounting
for many contributing factors, some of the gender gap remains unexplained.
                                                 5
The gender gap in income is directly related to gender gaps in other income-dependent domains.
Dynan et al. (2004), for example, show a strong relationship between lifetime income and
saving rates in the US. Moreover, in many countries pension income is linked to contributions
made during the working life; thus, gender gaps in income and labor force participation directly
affect pension income. With pension reforms shifting from defined benefit to defined
contribution plans and from state pensions to occupational contracts and private savings, the
link between labor market status and retirement income will become even more pronounced,
potentially widening the gender gap in retirement income.

Women, on average, are found to hold lower amounts of wealth (e.g., Lusardi and Mitchell
2008, Neelakantan and Chang 2010). They also invest more conservatively; i.e., they are less
likely to own stocks and more likely to invest in fixed-income securities (see Almenberg and
Dreber 2015; Sundén and Surette 1998). And, of relevance given the current crisis driven by
the COVID-19 pandemic, women are found to be more financially fragile; i.e., they are less
confident about their capacity to handle a financial shock (Hasler and Lusardi 2019).

Another strand of literature examines the relationship between gender and access to formal
financial services, mostly in developing countries. Access to formal financial services, such as
credit and savings vehicles, is crucial for entrepreneurship and firm growth (Aterido et al. 2013).
Klapper and Parker (2010) survey the gender gap in credit access and find that compared to
men, women are less likely to get access to formal financial institutions, are charged higher
interest rates, and raise less venture capital (Brush et al. 2004). Asiedu et al. (2013) study access
to financing in 90 developing countries and find that compared to male-owned firms, female-
owned firms are more financially constrained.

Moreover, there is increasing evidence of differential treatments by financial institutions.
Alesina et al. (2013) provide evidence that female entrepreneurs are charged higher interest
rates. Brock and de Haas (2019) show discriminatory behavior by loan officers against female
borrowers. Additionally, there is evidence that women get lower quality financial advice both
in field experiments (see, e.g., Bhattacharya et al. 2020) and in real-world data from advisor
protocols (Bucher-Koenen et al. 2020). Moreover, Niessen-Ruenzi and Ruenzi (2018) find
evidence of a gender bias in the mutual fund industry, with higher inflows going into male
managed funds.

2.2 Gender and financial literacy


                                                 6
One potential determinant of the gender difference in economic outcomes, including those
mentioned above, is the gender difference in financial literacy. We follow Lusardi and Mitchell
(2014) and define financial literacy as "people's ability to process economic information and
make informed decisions about financial planning, wealth accumulation, debt, and pensions"
(p. 6). Thus, in line with this strand of the literature, we look at financial literacy as the
knowledge needed to make an informed financial decision.

There is a wide literature documenting consistently lower financial literacy among women than
men (see Bucher-Koenen et al. 2017 for a survey). This gender difference is documented in
both developed and developing countries (Klapper and Lusardi 2020). It is particularly striking
that financial literacy levels seem to be low even among young women who are well educated
and have strong labor market attachment. For example, even women from an elite American
college show a considerable lack of financial knowledge (Mahdavi and Horton 2014).

Differences in financial literacy matter. Almenberg and Dreber (2015) show that differences in
financial literacy can explain some of the gender gap in stock market participation. Similarly,
Bannier and Neubert (2016) show that financial literacy and risk tolerance both matter for the
gender gap in investments and that the correlation between sophisticated investments and self-
assessed financial literacy is stronger for women than for men. Beckmann and Menkhoff (2008)
examine female fund managers and conclude that financial expertise reduces the gender
difference in financial behavior but differences do not completely disappear, even among
experts. 4

While the evidence of persistent gender differences in knowledge and behavior is compelling,
its origins are hard to explain. There is little evidence so far on what contributes to the gender
gaps mentioned above, particularly on what might explain the gender differences in financial
literacy. Fonseca et al. (2012) and Hsu (2016) suggest that within households, men specialize
more often in financial decision making than women, but gender differences are also found
among singles and teen-agers (see Lusardi and Mitchell 2014; Bucher-Koenen et al. 2017,
Driva et al. 2016). Giuliano (2017) provides a survey on the role that history plays in gender
norms and observed gender differences today. She argues that gender roles emerge as a
response to specific historic circumstances and are highly persistent even after circumstances
change. Strong transmission channels from parents to children cause long-term persistence of

4
 Allgood and Walstad (2015) as well as Bannier and Schwartz (2018) show that both actual and
perceived financial literacy are related to financial behaviors.
                                                7
gender roles in society. Thus, if women were not responsible for financial decision making
historically, it might take a long time for them to become decision makers today ­ even if
circumstances have changed.

Filipiak and Walle (2015) compare financial literacy of individuals who live in matrilineal with
those who live in patriarchal environments in India and find no gender differences in the
matrilineal cultural environment. They show that a sizable portion of the financial literacy
differences between women living in matrilineal and patriarchal societies remains unexplained
and suggest nurture as a potential reason for those differences.

2.3 Measurement of financial literacy

Few studies have focused on the measurement of financial literacy to explain gender differences
in knowledge and behavior. For example, there is evidence that women and girls are more likely
to skip questions in multiple choice settings (Baldiga 2014, Riener and Wagner 2017). Reasons
put forward for such behavior are related to avoidance of high-stakes and competitive settings
(Niederle and Vesterlund 2007 and 2010), risk aversion (Croson and Gneezy 2009), and
confidence in male specific tasks and willingness to contribute to tasks that are outside the
gender-specific domain (Baldiga Coffman 2014). These arguments can be relevant for the
measurement of financial literacy as well.

There is ample evidence that women are less confident than men in many situations, particularly
those that are considered male domains (see, e.g., Beyer 1990, Deaux and Farris 1977, Prince
1993). In the context of financial knowledge, Chen and Volpe (2002) find that female college
students are less confident and enthusiastic about financial topics. Webster and Ellis (1996)
provide evidence that even among financial experts, women show lower self-confidence in
financial analyses than men. Girls are also less confident with respect to their math abilities,
even if there is no difference in test performance (Weinhardt 2017). Since many of the financial
literacy test items involve math, this could contribute to the measured financial literacy gender
gap.

3. Data and descriptive evidence

We focus hereafter on three questions related to gender differences in financial literacy. The
first is whether the observed financial literacy gender gap is affected by the way in which
financial literacy is measured. Specifically, how does answering behavior change if the "do not
know" response option is taken away? The second question is whether selection of the "do not
                                               8
know" response can be traced to confidence. Are women less confident in their responses to
specific financial literacy questions compared to men? The third and most important question
is whether the way in which financial literacy is measured affects the assessment of its impact
on behavior. Specifically, how important is it to disentangle knowledge from confidence?

3.1 The data

We use data from the DHS, which is a panel study of the Dutch central bank that is collected
by CentERdata and is representative of the Dutch speaking population in the Netherlands. 5 The
central bank of the Netherlands is one of the few central banks that have been collecting
financial literacy data for many years now; similar data have increasingly been collected in
other countries around the world, including the United States. 6 We merge DHS data with data
from two survey modules we designed and that are collected from CentERpanel respondents.
The objective of the two modules is to understand what drives the gender gap in financial
literacy, particularly what drives the gender difference in the "do not know" responses. In the
first module, we ask the Big Three financial literacy questions in the traditional way; i.e.,
respondents have the option (as part of the multiple-choice answers) to select "do not know."
Six weeks later, in the second module, we ask these respondents the same financial literacy
questions, but this time without the "do not know" option. To the second module, we also add
a follow-up question that asks how confident respondents are about their answers. The resulting
new sets of data allow us to dissect the answers to the financial literacy questions and examine
the drivers of women's "do not know" responses.

As mentioned, we ask the Big Three financial literacy questions to the same respondents twice
(see appendix A.1 for the exact wording of the questions). Alessie et al. (2011) and Angrisani
et al. (2020) compare answers to the financial literacy questions over time and show a very high
stability of answers within respondents. However, unlike our study, these studies asked the
exact same questions twice. Our design is as follows: When we asked the financial literacy
questions in May 2012 (May module), respondents faced the standard list of response options,



5
  The CentERpanel is an online household panel run by CentERdata, a survey agency at Tilburg
University. Participants without internet access are provided with equipment that enables them to
participate. For more information, see www.centerdata.nl. The panel participants answer surveys
regularly. Once a year they respond to the DHS survey.
6
  The US Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System's Survey of Consumer Finances added the
Big Three financial literacy questions to its questionnaire in 2016; these questions have also been added
to the Bundesbank and the Bank of Italy surveys, among others.
                                                   9
which includes "do not know". 7 When respondents were asked the same questions for the
second time about six weeks later, at the end of June/beginning of July 2012 (July module), the
"do not know" options were not included (July module). Respondents were then required to
rate their level of confidence in their answer on a scale from 1 (not confident at all) to 7
(completely confident) after each question.

Our sample includes all panel members who are household heads and their partners.
Respondents are age 18 and older. For our main analysis, we restrict the sample to respondents
who participated in both the May and July modules (balanced panel). Because we allowed both
the household head and their partner to participate, we have two individual observations for a
number of households (and in the regression analysis we compute standard errors which are
clustered at the household level). We drop respondents who did not complete the financial
literacy modules (30 respondents; 1.35% of the initial raw sample). 8 Our final sample contains
1,532 respondents: 861 (56.2%) are men and 671 (43.8%) are women. Further socio-
demographic characteristics of the sample are provided in the summary statistics in appendix
table A.1.

Because we work with a balanced panel, we consider both attrition and learning, though neither
is likely to affect our findings.

To test for attrition between the modules, we look at the three financial literacy questions and
the number of correct answers in the May questionnaire and partition the sample into those who
participated in the May module only (N=221) and those who participated in both modules
(N=1,532). We do not find a systematic difference in the average financial literacy of those
groups. Thus, respondents did not systematically drop out after the May module because they
were uncomfortable answering the financial literacy questions. The same is true for attrition
based on gender. Men and women both dropped out after the May module with equal
probability (see appendix table A.2, panel A).

Because the same group of respondents was asked the same questions twice, there could be
concern about learning effects. We can test for learning by comparing the refresher sample


7
  Note that there is also the option "to refuse to answer," which is chosen by a very small fraction of
respondents and is therefore irrelevant.
8
  Twenty respondents had at least one missing answer in the first financial literacy survey and 10
respondents had at least one missing answer in the second financial literacy survey. Thus, despite taking
away the "do not know" option, the missing rate did not increase.
                                                   10
(N=445) with the group that participated in both modules (N=1,532). The respondents in the
refresher sample participated only in the July module and thus saw only the questions without
the "do not know" option. So if we find a higher probability of answering correctly among panel
participants than among those in the refresher sample, we can attribute the difference to panel
participants having seen the questions before. The results of this exercise are shown in table
A.2, panel B, in the appendix. There are no significant differences in the responses of those two
groups. We also split the sample by gender and do not find learning effects for men or women.
Thus, we are confident that learning effects are not confounding our results.

3.2 Comparing answers across modules

In table 1, we present the answers to the three financial literacy questions for both the May and
July modules separately for men and women. 9

                                       [Table 1 - about here]

In the May module, when we look at the question assessing understanding of compound interest
(the "interest question"), 10 which is the simplest question, we find that men are more likely to
answer correctly than women (91.9% vs. 84.4%, see table 1, panel A). The gender gap for this
question is 7.5 percentage points. Women are more often incorrect, but they also report a higher
number of "do not know" (DK for short) answers. While 6.7% of the women reply "do not
know" to this question, only 2.8% of the men pick the "do not know" option. In the July module,
we ask the same question, this time without the DK option. The number of correct answers
increases to 94.7% for men and 91.2% for women. The number of incorrect answers also
increases. However, overall the gender difference shrinks by half, to 3.5 percentage points. 11
When we look at the responses to this question in July for those who chose "do not know" in
May (see table 2), we find that the majority are able to provide the correct answer. Around 70%
of both men and women who responded "do not know" to this simple question in the May
module are, in fact, able to correctly answer the question in the July module. 12



9
  The statistics presented in this paper are not weighted. We also used sampling weights but found only
very small differences.
10
   This question is very simple; it measures basic knowledge of the workings of interest rates and the
capacity to do calculations in the context of interest rates.
11
   As mentioned earlier, the number of refusals is very small: less than 0.5% for each of the questions
(see Table 1). Therefore, we lump this category together with the "do not know" responses because in
both cases respondents display a reluctance to answer the question.
12
   Random answering is rejected at the 0.1% significance level.
                                                  11
                                         [Table 2 - about here]

The question measuring respondents' knowledge of the workings of inflation (the "inflation
question") appears to be somewhat more difficult for the respondents in our sample. The
number of correct answers is lower than for the previous question, and the gender gap is larger
at more than 9 percentage points (see table 1, panel B). Two-thirds of the gender gap is again
driven by the DKs, although the number of incorrect answers is somewhat higher among
women. When forced to answer, i.e., when the "do not know" option is taken away, the gender
gap diminishes from 9 to 6 percentage points. This is again because those who responded "do
not know" to this question in the May module are, in fact, often able to provide the correct
answer when forced to make a choice. 13 Nevertheless, within the DK group, men more often
provided a correct answer when forced to make a choice than women (67% for men versus 62%
for women; see table 2, panel B).

The third question assesses knowledge of the workings of risk diversification (the "risk
diversification" question). For this question, the proportion of DK answers is much higher for
both men and women, but especially for women. More than half of the women indicate that
they do not know the answer to this question (54.7%) compared to 30.1% of the men (see table
1, panel C). The gender gap for this question is as high as 27.5 percentage points. Strikingly,
when responding in the July module, in which a choice is forced, the gap shrinks to 9 percentage
points. The majority of both women and men who chose DK in the May module are able to
answer this question correctly in the July module. 14 Yet the proportion of correct answers is
higher for men than for women (72.6% versus 67.7%; see table 2, panel C).

Panel D of table 1 shows the number of correct answers. The probability of answering all three
questions correctly increases from 58.1% to 74.9% for men and from 29.4% to 60.1% for
women between the May and the July modules. The financial literacy gender gap shrinks by
about half from 29 to 15 percentage points.

To summarize, we confirm a gender gap in financial literacy. This is due in part to women more
often stating they do not know the answer--when given the option to do so--to the financial
literacy questions. When respondents are forced to answer, the gender gap decreases
substantially (but does not disappear). The "do not know" answers may signal lack of certainty


13
     Random answering is rejected at the 0.1% significance level.
14
     Random answering is rejected at the 0.1% significance level.
                                                    12
along with a high likelihood of being correct. Indeed, conditional on responding "do not know"
in the May module, both men and women are likely to give a correct answer in the July module
for each of the three questions. In the next section, we turn to an examination of the role of
confidence.

3.3 Confidence in knowledge

As mentioned earlier, in the July module, respondents were asked to rank their confidence in
their answers to the financial literacy questions on a scale from 1 (not confident) to 7
(completely confident). Average scores for all three questions for men and women are in table
3. Overall, we confirm that women are significantly less confident in their answers than men.
Among men, a large fraction are very confident in their answers (ratings of 6 or 7), but this is
not true for women, who report much lower levels of confidence. Comparing the ratings for the
three questions reveals that respondents are fairly confident in their answers to the interest and
inflation questions, which are simpler questions. Confidence ratings for the more difficult risk
question are lower.

                                         [Table 3 - about here]

We turn next to evaluate the confidence levels from the July module, conditional on the
respondent's answers to the same questions in the May module. What we find is that conditional
on giving a correct answer in the May module, women are significantly less confident than men
in their answers in the July module for all three questions. Thus, even when they pick the correct
answer, women are not confident in their knowledge. Conditional on answering DK in the May
module, women are less confident in their answers in the July module compared to men for the
risk diversification question. The effect is not statistically significant for the first two questions
(potentially due to the much lower number of DK responses), but it is statistically significant
for the risk diversification question. Further, respondents who selected a DK answer in the May
module are, on average, much less confident compared to those who choose an answer, whether
correct or incorrect, in the May module. 15




15
  We also ran regressions with "do not know" responses as the dependent variables and confidence
levels (as well as the socio-demographic variables of gender, age, income, education, and marital status)
as explanatory variables. We find a significant negative relationship between higher confidence levels
and "do not know" responses. The relationship is particularly strong for the risk diversification question.
Results are available upon request.
                                                    13
In summary, the financial literacy scores in the May module reflect both knowledge and
confidence. The measure resulting from the July module, in which respondents were forced to
pick an answer, is not confounded by confidence. At the same time, the July measure is likely
to contain measurement error and to be upward biased due to respondents simply guessing the
correct answer. Thus, taking away the DK option does not necessarily lead to a better measure
of financial literacy or provide a superior way to measure financial knowledge. In the next
section, we use information from both survey modules and develop a latent class model (LCM)
in order to estimate a measure of "true" financial literacy.

4. Modeling "true" financial literacy

To get a measure of "true" financial literacy, we estimate each respondent's probability of truly
knowing the answer to a specific financial literacy question depending on the structure of their
responses to the financial literacy and the confidence questions in the two survey modules. For
this purpose, we set up a latent class model. 16

The descriptive statistics reported above show that respondents, particularly women, are often
uncertain about their answers to the financial literacy questions. Respondents seem to pick the
"do not know" option when they are not confident in their knowledge, even if they may actually
know the correct answer. This leads to systematic bias with respect to gender in the
measurement of financial literacy. On the other hand, some respondents seem to pick an answer
randomly. Thus, answers may be correct simply because of random guessing. Therefore, just
counting the number of correct answers, as it is usually done in the literature (including our
own previous work), creates noisy financial literacy measures.

The central contribution of the LCM is to disentangle "true" knowledge, confidence, and
guessing in order to calculate a financial literacy index with minimal measurement error. For
this purpose, we derive a measure of "true" financial knowledge based upon the structure of the
two survey modules, using respondents' confidence in their answers to correct for guessing.
Based on this information, we predict the probability that a respondent truly knows the correct
answer, thus taking a value between 0 and 1 for each of the questions. Our new financial literacy
index is the sum of these probabilities for the individual financial literacy questions. As in the
standard measure, these probabilities have the value of one if a respondent knows the correct
answer for certain or zero if the respondent does not know the correct answer. However, for


16
     Also known as finite mixture model (Aitkin and Rubin 1985; Cameron and Trivedi 2005).
                                                   14
some respondents, these probabilities take values between zero and one; this is particularly the
case for respondents who responded with "do not know" in the May survey and would have
received a zero weight in the standard financial literacy index but do, in fact, know the answer
with some degree of confidence. Providing a good measure of financial literacy has implications
for assessing its impact on financial behavior, as we will show in the next section.

First, we define for each of our three financial literacy questions the following latent variable
for "true" knowledge:

 = 1 if respondent i truly knows the correct answer to financial literacy question  (k=1,2,3),

 = 0 otherwise.

We do not observe  , but we do observe some proxies for this variable: let  be the

individual's i answer to literacy question k in May (superindex m). Notice that  can take on

the following three values: 0 (incorrect answer), 1 (correct answer), 2 (do not know/refusal).
                                                                                   
Since the July module does not allow for a "do not know" option, the variable  (the answer
to question k in July) can only take on the values 0 and 1. As previously noted, instead of the
"do not know" option, the July module has a follow-up question to each financial literacy
question that measures the level of confidence in the response on a Likert scale (from 1 to 7).
                   
The variable  represents the answer to this question. Our goal is to use the information
                                                                                                
embodied in a vector of background characteristics  and in the variables  ,  , and 

to predict the probability that a respondent truly knows the answer to financial literacy question
k. In other words, for each respondent in our sample and for each of our three financial literacy
questions, we want to compute the following conditional probability:

                                                  
                      ( = 1| ,  ,  ,  );  = 1,2,3.                               (1)

Second, we construct a summary measure of financial literacy by adding up the probabilities of
having true knowledge for the three individual financial literacy questions:

                                         3
                                                                         
                            =                ( = 1| ,  ,  ,  ).                               (2)
                                         =1




                                               15
In the next subsection, we present a latent class model that can be used to predict the probability
(see equation 1) that the respondent truly knows the answer to financial literacy question  ( =
1,2,3).

4.1 The latent class model

We define a random variable,  , that summarizes the answers we observe in the May and July
                                                                    
modules into all possible combinations of answers:  = 3   +  . In other words, the

variable can take on six different values (from 0 to 5) depending on the combination of answers
given in the modules. For example,  = 0 if respondent i answers question k incorrectly in
both modules, and  = 4 if the respondent answers correctly in both modules. The log-
likelihood of our LCM is based on the conditional multinomial density of  :
                     
 =  ,  . This conditional probability can be written as a weighted average of
                                                             
two multinomial probabilities  =  = 1,  ,  , i.e., the probability of observing
                                                                                                  
answer pattern  =  given true knowledge ( = 1), and  =  = 0,  ,  ,
i.e., the probability of observing answer pattern  given a lack of true knowledge ( = 0),
                                                                                            
where the probabilities for having or not having true knowledge, i.e.  = 1 ,   and
                    
 = 0 ,  , serve as weights:

                                                                                               
 =  ,      =  = ,   = 1 ,   +  = ,  = 0 ,   =
                          
 =    = 1,  ,    = 1 ,   +
                          
 =    = 0,  ,    = 0 ,   =
1                   0              
   ,     = 1 ,    +   ,     = 0 ,      (3)

where the conditional multinomial probabilities are defined as

                        1                                               
                           ,   =  =  = 1,  ,  

                        0                                               
                           ,   =  =  = 0,  ,  .

We assume that, conditional on background characteristics,  true knowledge is independent
of confidence. This means

                                                     
                                = 1 ,   =  (
                                             = 1| ).                                        (4)

In other words, only the answers  are influenced by confidence, but whether a respondent
truly knows the correct answer or not is independent of confidence. In addition, we assume that


                                                16
the probability in equation (4) can be modeled by means of a probit specification, so that the
conditional probability that respondent i truly knows the answer to literacy question k is equal
to

                                          ( = 1| ) = (  ),                                          (5)

where (. ) denotes the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
                    1        1       0       0                                            
We also assume that    ,   =     and   ,   =    ; thus, the

observed answer pattern depends on true knowledge and confidence but not on any additional
background characteristics. These two probabilities are modeled by using a multinomial logit
                                                                    
specification ( =  = 1 if  =  and  =  = 0 otherwise):
                                                      17



                                                                    
                        1    1                      exp(7  1
                                                        =1  ( = ))
                           ;   =                                                                   (6a)
                                                5      7  1
                                                =0 exp(=1  (
                                                             =))

                                                                       
                        0    0                      exp(7  0
                                                        =1   ( = ))
                           ;                =                                                      (6b)
                                                5      7  0
                                                =0 exp(=1   (
                                                              =))

      1    1          1          1          1 )     0    0          0          0          0
Where   = (01 , ... , 07 , ... , 51 , ... , 57  and   = (01 , ... , 07 , ... , 51 , ... , 57 ) .
Assumptions (4), (5), and (6) imply that the density described in (3) can be rewritten as follows:

                  1    1       0    0                                           
         =  ,   =    ;  (  ) +    ;  (-  ).                                                         (7)

We base the log-likelihood function on the density function (7). Notice that there is an
                                              1   0              
identification problem: the parameter vector (  ,   ,  ) is observationally equivalent with
 0   1  
(  ,   , -  ) in the sense that they both result in the same probability distribution of
observable data. 18 We address this identification problem by making the following assumptions:




                                               1
17
   We assume without loss of generality that 4     = 0,  = 1, ... ,7 (i.e., for the " = 1 multinomial
logit model," the reference group consists of individuals who give a correct answer in both surveys,
                         
i.e., for which                                              0
                  =  = 1 , i.e.,  = 1  3 + 1 = 4) and 0 = 0,  = 1, ... ,7 (for the "        = 0
multinomial logit model," the reference group consists of individuals who give an incorrect answer in
                                    
both surveys, i.e., for which  =  = 0 , i.e.  = 0  3 + 0 = 0).
                                                                                             
                                                                1    1          exp(7  1
                                                                                    =1 0  ( = ))
18
     Notice   that   according   to      equation     (6a)      0 
                                                                   ;   =                                  .
                                                                             5      7  1
                                                                             =0 exp(=1  ( = ))
Since the reference group consists of individuals for which  = 4 , we can impose the condition
                                                                                   1
 = 0        = 1,   = 0 (see equation 8a) a priori by assigning the parameters k0l     ( = 1, ... ,7 )
                                                                                       1
a very small value. In the empirical application, we impose the following restriction: 0kl = -22 .
Assumptions mentioned in equations (8b),...,(8e) are imposed in an analogous way.
                                                      17
       1     1                                                              
       0 ( ;  ) =  = 0 = 1,   =  = 0,  = 0 = 1,   = 0                                          (8a)
       1     1                                                              
       1 ( ;  ) =  = 1 = 1,   =  = 1,  = 0 = 1,   = 0                                          (8b)
       1     1                                                              
       2 ( ;  ) =  = 2 = 1,   =  = 2,  = 0 = 1,   = 0                                          (8c)
       1     1                                                              
       3 ( ;  ) =  = 3 = 1,   =  = 0,  = 1 = 1,   = 0                                          (8d)
       0    0                                                               
       4  ;   =  = 4 = 0,   =  = 1,  = 1 = 0,   = 0                                            (8e)

Intuitively, these assumptions can be explained in the following way: First, regardless of the
confidence level, if a respondent truly knows the answer to a financial literacy question, he/she
will not pick a wrong answer twice (see equation 8a). Second, conditional on true knowledge,
respondents will answer consistently in both modules, i.e., they will not answer correctly in
May and incorrectly in July or vice versa (see equation 8b and 8d). Moreover, we exclude the
possibility that individuals with true knowledge would pick a "do not know" response in May
and answer incorrectly in July (see equation 8c). Thus, given true knowledge, the only possible
answer patterns are to provide the correct answer twice or "do not know" in May and the correct
answer in July. In other words, respondents who are truly knowledgeable do not randomly pick
an answer or make mistakes.

The assumption in equation (8e) refers to the structure we impose conditional on the lack of
knowledge. Here we impose that given that the respondent does not know the answer, the
probability of guessing the correct answer twice (in May and July) is zero. 19 The estimation
results of the LCM (see equation 7) are presented in appendix A.4.

4.2 A summary estimate for respondent's financial literacy based on the LCM

Once we have estimated the parameters, we can compute for each financial literacy question
                                               
the probability  = 1 = ,  ,   (see equation 1) as follows (Vermunt 2010):

                                 
          = 1 = ,  ,  
                                   
                       =  = 1,  ,  (   = 1| )
       =                                       
          =   = 1,  ,  (  = 1| ) +  =  = 0,  ,   ( = 0| )




19
  For an intuitive explanation of this assumption, recall that all respondents have the opportunity to
choose the "do not know" option in the May module. Our assumption implies that individuals with low
confidence who do not know the answer (      = 0) will choose the "do not know" option when it is
available rather than randomly choosing an answer. Individuals with high confidence who do not know
the correct answer (   = 0) will not randomly pick an answer either.
                                                  18
                                           1  ; 1    
                                                   
                             =         
                                 1  ; 1    +0  ; 0 (-   )                                      (9)
                                                      



Note that this probability can be thought of as the posterior probability of having true
knowledge (our latent variable), which results after updating the prior probability using
additional information from the two surveys (Bayes' rule).

Thus, for each respondent, we predict the probability of truly knowing the correct answer to a
given financial literacy question. This probability depends on the responses given in the May
and July modules (i.e.  = ) and on the respondent's reported level of confidence in the July
module. The higher the estimated posterior probability, the more knowledge the individual has.
Notice that the posterior distribution of  is degenerate if the following conditions are met:

                                    0    0                          
                = 1 = ,  ,   = 1 if    ;   =0

                                    1    1                          
                = 1 = ,  ,   = 0 if    ;   =0

Due to the assumptions (see equations 8a to 8e) presented in the previous subsection, the
posterior distribution of  is degenerate in many cases: that is,  = 0 with certainty if (a)
respondents answer inconsistently over time (once correctly, once incorrectly), (b) answer
incorrectly two times, or (c) pick the "do not know" answer in the May module and an incorrect
answer in the July module. The respondent truly knows the correct answer (  = 1) with
certainty if he/she answers the literacy questions correctly two times (irrespective of the
confidence level). For respondents who provide a "do not know" answer in the May module
and a correct answer in the July module, the LCM is used to predict the probability of true
                                          
knowledge,  = 1 = 5,  ,  , which could take on a value between 0 and 1 (see
equation 9 and table A.4 in the appendix). In section 6, we will argue that it is only these
respondents    who     are   "underconfident"        because      they   likely   have   knowledge
                              
( = 1 = 5,  ,   > 0) yet have selected the "do not know" response option.


Figure A.1 in the appendix displays the distribution of our estimated (posterior) probabilities of
true knowledge for each of the three questions. The probability of truly knowing the answer to
the interest question is 0 for 12.4% of respondents and 1 for 87.6%; we do not observe
probabilities between 0 and 1. The probability of truly knowing the answer to the inflation
question is 0 for 13.1% of the sample and 1 for 85.2% of the sample; 1.7% of respondents have
values in between. The probability of truly knowing the answer to the risk diversification

                                                19
question is 0 for 28.9% of respondents and 1 for 44.4%; 26.7% are assigned probabilities
between 0 and 1. These are reasonable findings considering that the first two questions are
rather simple and intuitive while the third question is, by design, more difficult.

We compute a measure of respondents' level of financial literacy by summing up the estimated
probabilities for each question (see equations 2 and 9). Unlike current financial literacy
indicators, which simply sum up the number of correct answers (giving a value of 1 to the
correct answers and 0 to the incorrect answers or "do not know" responses), this new measure
recognizes that respondents who select the "do not know" option may actually know the answer.
Moreover, using consistency in answering behavior over time, our measure is able to filter out
respondents without knowledge who simply guess and so are more likely to provide a correct
answer once in a single survey than to provide a correct answer in both surveys. In the next
section, we will compare the overall financial literacy measures for individual respondents
based on the observed total number of correct answers in the May and July modules and the
results from the LCM. We will then use our new measure of financial literacy to estimate the
relationship between stock market participation and financial literacy and compare it with
estimates using traditional measures of financial literacy.

5. Estimation results

5.1 Comparing measures of financial literacy

We present our measures of financial literacy in table 4. The comparison of panel A for the
May measure and panel B for the July measure was discussed extensively in Section 3.

                                      [Table 4 ­about here]

In panel C, we present our measure of true financial literacy based upon the LCM described in
the previous section (see equation 2). Since the standard way of measuring financial literacy
includes the DK option, we compare the May measure to the LCM results. The average
probability of a correct answer to the interest question is slightly lower in the LCM (87.6%)
than in the May survey module (88.6%), which indicates that for the interest question, there is
some (correct) guessing even when the DK option is available. The pattern is reversed for the
other two questions. According to the LCM, the average probability that respondents truly know
the answer to the inflation question is 86.3%, while only 85.8% of respondents correctly
answered this question in the May module. The average probability that respondents truly know
the answer to the risk diversification question is 64%, while only about half of respondents gave
                                                20
a correct answer to this question in the May module. The average value of true financial literacy
is 2.38, which is slightly above the May measure of 2.24.

We also display the gender gap in financial literacy based on the May module and the LCM.
When considering true knowledge, the gender gap is smaller for all three financial literacy
questions. Specifically, while the gender gap indicated by correct answers to the standard
interest (inflation / risk) question is 7.5 (9.2 / 27.5) percentage points, the estimated difference
in true knowledge is 5.7 (8.8 / 13.8) percentage points, respectively. Thus, when interpreting
gender differences in financial literacy based on responses to the standard set of questions,
which include the DK option, one has to bear in mind that women are more likely to select the
"do not know" option, making their financial literacy levels appear lower than men's.

To further investigate the financial literacy measures, we run ordinary least squares regressions
to show the relationship between the different financial literacy measures and gender. Table 5,
panel A, shows the results. The financial literacy gender gap excluding controls is 0.44 for the
May measure and 0.28 for the LCM. Thus, the gender gap in true knowledge predicted by the
latent class model is smaller than the gender gap that is identified based on responses to the
standard questions. In other words, more than one-third (0.44-0.28/0.44=0.36) of the financial
literacy gender gap identified in the May module can be attributed to differences in response
behavior and to confidence.

                                           [Table 5 ­about here]

Next, we include background variables to explain the variation in the financial literacy measures
(table 5 panel B); specifically, we control for education, marital status, income, and age. The
 2 of the regressions is 0.164 for the May measure and 0.152 for the LCM measure. For all
measures of literacy, we still find that women score worse than men. However, not surprisingly,
the gender difference becomes smaller when including socio-demographic variables; for
example, women on average have lower education and income. All other controls show the
usual patterns reported in the literature. 20 However, our main findings are similar to the
univariate estimates: around 38% of the gender difference can be explained by differences in
confidence rather than differences in knowledge.




20
     Full regression results are available upon request.
                                                      21
We performed an extensive set of robustness checks. Specifically, we estimate the LCM using
different specifications: alternative sets of financial literacy questions, added measures of
interest in finance, and restricted the sample to financial respondents, i.e., those responsible for
making financial decisions in the households. Overall, our results are robust to these different
specifications (see appendix A.6 for further details).

5.2 Financial literacy and stock market participation

It is important to measure financial literacy correctly because many studies have shown that
financial literacy can be linked to financial behavior (see Lusardi and Mitchell 2014 for a
review). We focus next on stock market participation, given our interest in initiatives such as
Fearless Girl, and because of the importance of investment and portfolio choice, in particular
now that individuals are more in charge of their retirement savings. We assess whether and the
extent to which the measures of financial literacy we have developed lead to different findings
regarding the effect of financial literacy on stock market participation. Traditional measures of
financial literacy have shown that higher financial knowledge increases stock market
participation (see Lusardi and Mitchell 2014 for a review and Van Rooij et al. 2011 for evidence
on Dutch data). However, the evidence in this paper shows that those measures reflect both true
knowledge and confidence. Therefore, the estimates found in previous studies reflect a mix of
both.

Below, we investigate what the use of different financial literacy measures say about the
relationship between financial literacy and stock market participation. The objective is to check
how our different measures of financial literacy perform in these estimations and what we can
learn about the potential bias plaguing these estimates. First, we run a regression using the
standard measure of financial literacy (May measure) and thereafter we compare the results
with regressions based on the LCM financial literacy measure. In discussing the results, we
focus on the financial literacy coefficient estimate as well as the gender coefficient estimate, as
both are likely to be impacted, as explained below.

Following the example of previous studies, we define a dummy for stock market participation
that equals 1 if the respondent holds investments in stocks and/or mutual funds and 0 otherwise.
As reported in table 6, there is a strong negative correlation between gender and stock market
participation: 33.9% of men in our sample own stocks versus 20.3% of women (table 6, column
1). If we control for the usual background characteristics and the traditional financial literacy


                                                22
measure (the May measure), we find a strong positive relationship between financial literacy
and stock market participation. 21 While the gender effect becomes much smaller than in column
1, it is still significant (column 2). Compared to men, women have a 4.61 percentage point
lower chance of owning stocks after controlling for a set of background variables, including
income, education, etc. Moreover, a one standard deviation higher level of financial literacy
results in a 9.01 percentage point higher probability of owning stocks (comparable to the effect
found in the literature). This is a sizeable effect, but note that this coefficient estimate reflects
both confidence and knowledge.

                       [Table 6 ­ Stock market participation - about here]

Next, we run a regression using the financial literacy measure from the July module, which
should be unconfounded by confidence (column 3). While still significant, the financial literacy
effect reduces to a 5.49 percentage point higher likelihood of investing in the stock market for
a one standard deviation higher level of literacy. Note that the female coefficient estimate
becomes more negative compared to the estimate in column 2, because it is now likely to pick
up part of the confidence effect; being less confident, women are less likely to invest in stocks.
The July measure for financial literacy is affected by measurement error due to guessing since
respondents are forced to pick an answer. As a result, the financial literacy coefficient may be
biased toward zero. Indeed, once we use the predicted measure of true financial literacy, the
financial literacy coefficient is somewhat higher (column 4). We estimate a 6.72 percentage
point higher likelihood of investing in the stock market for a one standard deviation higher level
of true financial literacy, and a smaller effect of being female. In other words, both the estimates
for the effect of financial literacy and the effect of gender are impacted by the financial literacy
measures used in the estimation.

Note that measurement error in financial literacy may not be the only problem biasing the
estimation results for the effect of financial literacy on stock market behavior. The regression
estimates could also be biased due to omitted variables (e.g., ability) and reverse causality (e.g.,
knowledge may increase due to investing in the stock market). Therefore, in many studies
researchers also report results from instrumental variables (IV) regressions (see, e.g., Van Rooij
et al. 2011). We discuss the use of IV estimation in section 7.



21
  The financial literacy variables are standardized so that they have mean 0 and variance 1, which
facilitates the comparison of the regression results across specifications.
                                                 23
6. Confidence

An additional question we investigate is whether we can get an estimate of the degree of
confidence and whether confidence matters for financial decisions. More specifically, we are
interested in the role of underconfidence. By underconfidence, we mean that respondents can
be financially literate, i.e., they may know the answers to the financial literacy questions even
though they respond by selecting the "do not know" option. Thus, we assume that
underconfidence is present only among those who respond to questions in the May module with
                m                                                     j
"do not know" (yik = 2) and answer the July questions correctly (yik = 1), i.e.  = 5. Those
respondents are underconfident if they truly know the correct answer to question k and respond
with "do not know" nevertheless. The probability of this event might be positive and equal to
                              
P y
   ik = 1 = 5,  ,  .


                                                                                           j
People who responded with "do not know" in May but an incorrect answer in July (yik = 0)
cannot be underconfident according to our LCM model because we have assumed that

                                     j    m              j                    j
            Pg ik = 2y
                      ik = 1, confik  = Pyik = 2, yi = 0y
                                                         ik = 1, confik  = 0

(see assumptions in Section 4.1). Consequently, those respondents (a) cannot be financially
                                                     
knowledgeable, i.e., Py
                       ik = 0 = 2,  ,   = 1 and (b) cannot be underconfident.

According to our definition, those who do not choose a "do not know" response in May do not
face the problem of underconfidence, i.e., the underconfidence measure is equal to zero for
those respondents. Thus, the underconfidence measure relates to the probability of true
knowledge conditional on a "do not know" response in May and a correct answer in July.

As before, we compute an overall measure of underconfidence for our respondents by summing
up the estimated probabilities for the individual questions

                                                                          
                       Und_conf = 3     ik = 1 = 5,  ,     (g ik = 5)
                                  k=1 Py


where  (. ) denotes an indicator function that is 1 if  = 5 and 0 otherwise (as before k is an
index for question k, k=1,2,3). 22


22
   We used a more restrictive definition of underconfidence by imposing that respondents report
confidence levels below the threshold level 6. This reduces the share of underconfident respondents
slightly, but does not change our conclusions.
                                                24
In table 7, we show the mean probability of being underconfident for women and men.
According to our measures, there are more underconfident women than men for all questions.
The fraction of underconfident women and men is higher for the more difficult questions, i.e.,
the risk diversification question. Overall, average underconfidence is equal to 0.187 for men
and 0.365 for women. When we run regressions on underconfidence (see table 5, column 4),
the gender difference in underconfidence is between 0.178 and 0.154.

                                          [Table 7 ­about here]

In the next step, we include underconfidence as an additional explanatory variable in the stock
market regression (see table 8, column 2); for ease of comparison we also report the results
from the regression of financial literacy on stock market participation using true financial
literacy (column 1) and the May measure of financial literacy (column 3). All variables are
standardized so that their point estimates can be compared. Controlling for true financial
literacy and consistent with the idea behind the Fearless Girl initiative, stock market
participation is lower for underconfident respondents. Interestingly, when including
underconfidence as an additional control variable, its estimated effect has about the same order
of magnitude as the effect of true financial literacy and the financial literacy estimate is almost
unaffected (see the estimates in table 8, columns 1 and 2). According to Hayashi (2000), in case
of an omitted variable, the difference in the estimated coefficients of a variable of interest (in
our case financial literacy) and the omitted variable (here underconfidence) is low if either the
coefficient of the omitted variable is small or if the correlation between the variable of interest
and the omitted variable is low (see section 3.9 in Hayashi 2000). The estimated coefficient of
underconfidence is not small. However, underconfidence is almost uncorrelated with true
financial literacy estimated from the LCM (correlation coefficient of -0.0085).

              [Table 8 ­ Stock market participation and underconfidence - about here]

Turning to the gender effect, the estimate becomes almost 30% smaller in column 2 compared
to column 1. The reason for this is that underconfidence and gender are highly correlated. In a
regression of underconfidence on gender, financial literacy and various control variables,
gender turns out to be the most important explanatory variable. 23 Comparing the size of the
gender effect between columns 2 and 3 reveals that the gender effect, when controlling for true
financial literacy and underconfidence, has about the same order of magnitude as the gender

23
     These additional regressions are available upon request.
                                                     25
effect in the regression when controlling for the May financial literacy measure (column 3). In
summary, the regression results show that it is important to control for both financial literacy
and confidence when explaining stock market participation.

The finding that both financial knowledge and underconfidence in financial knowledge matter
for financial behavior has important consequences not only for measuring financial literacy but
also for financial education interventions, as discussed in the next sections.

7. IV estimation and making use of the "do not know" answers

Researchers have often used instrumental variables estimation when assessing the effect of
financial literacy on financial decisions. This is necessary not only due to measurement error
but also because of potentially omitted variables, such as ability. There can also be the problem
of reverse causality. Financial literacy can itself be endogenous and dependent on wealth,
including stock market wealth (see Lusardi, Michaud, and Mitchell 2017). In order to address
these concerns, we have re-estimated all of our models, considered in table 6, using the
Generalized Method of Moments (GMM). The details are reported in appendix A.5, which also
described the instruments we have used in previous work. The GMM estimate of the literacy
coefficient is statistically significant at the 5% level and relatively similar across specifications
(around 0.20). This is a comforting result and differences between literacy measures become
less important when good instruments are available. However, one big challenge of this
literature is to find good instruments. The central outcome of our exercise is that finding strong
instruments is easier for more accurate measures of financial literacy. The predictive value of
the instruments is lowest for the July measure, which translates into a less precise GMM
estimate for the financial literacy coefficient and a higher standard error. 24 Thus, while
instrumenting financial literacy can address some of the problems noted in this paper, it is
notoriously difficult to find good instruments. Our paper provides an additional explanation for
why instruments are hard to find and how we can better address the measurement error problem.

As should be clear by now, properly measuring financial literacy is difficult. Hereafter, we
propose a simple way to proxy for confidence when having two measurements of financial
literacy (as we do) is not feasible. We have documented that "do not know" responses and
underconfidence are highly correlated. Accordingly, in table 8, column 4, we regress stock



24
 We interpret this as a sign that the July measure contains considerable measurement error, which
makes it difficult to find valid instruments.
                                                 26
market participation on the May measure of financial literacy (which is the measure commonly
available in most surveys) and the number of "do not know" responses to the three financial
literacy questions. The point estimate of the May financial literacy measure is now rather close
to the point estimate when using true financial literacy in the regression (compare column 1
with column 4). Moreover, the point estimate of the female dummy is similar to the point
estimate in column 2, where we accounted for underconfidence. Thus, controlling for the
number of "do not know" responses can fix the problem caused by not controlling for
underconfidence explicitly. However, note that the number of "do not know" responses is an
imperfect proxy for underconfidence, i.e., the point estimate is biased toward zero and
insignificant in the regression reported in column 4. Thus, while using this proxy does not
provide a good estimate of underconfidence, it does help to get a better estimate of the effect of
financial literacy. 25

Based on these findings, contrary to what has been done so far in most studies, we recommend
taking advantage of the "do not know" responses in financial literacy surveys and using that
information when investigating the relationship between financial literacy and financial
decision making; i.e., use information on both the correct answers and the "do not know"
answers in the empirical work.

8. Discussion and conclusion

The central result of our paper is that when it comes to financial literacy, women know less
than men, but they know more than they think they know. When measured using the standard
Big Three financial literacy questions, which have been used extensively in the literature, more
than one-third of the gender gap in financial knowledge can be attributed to differences in
confidence and the remainder to true knowledge differences. Crucially, the analysis of stock
market participation shows that both financial literacy and confidence matter for financial
decision making and that it is important to distinguish these two effects.

In our methodological framework, we provide a way to estimate both true knowledge and
confidence. We find that differences in response behavior have a direct impact on the
measurement of financial literacy and thereby on how results have to be interpreted. In our


25
  Note that, as an alternative short cut, we also estimated a model using the July measure and an
aggregate measure of confidence (on a scale from 1 to 7), as implemented in the July survey. It turns
out that the coefficient of the July measure is downward biased because of measurement error due to
guessing, even if we control for confidence. Results are available upon request.
                                                 27
setting, this applies to several dimensions: the observed gender difference in financial literacy,
the effect of gender on stock market participation, and the effects of financial literacy and
underconfidence, respectively, on stock market participation.

Disentangling the effects of confidence and knowledge matters greatly. First and foremost, our
paper shows that there is a substantial gender gap in financial knowledge even after correcting
for differences in confidence. Thus, financial education programs targeted to women may
provide a way to close the knowledge gap (see Driva et al. 2016, and Bottazzi and Lusardi,
2020). 26

Second, boosting knowledge might not be enough to close the financial literacy gender gap if
differences in confidence persist between women and men. Filippin and Paccagnella (2012)
develop a theoretical model and show that confidence plays an important role in the
accumulation of human capital. Small initial differences in confidence, such as those related to
gender, can result in large differences in human capital accumulation. The same argument
applies to the accumulation of financial literacy and wealth. Small initial differences in
confidence might lead to large differences in accumulated financial literacy and financial well-
being. Particularly in the context of long-term financial decisions such as investment, retirement
savings plans, private saving, and wealth accumulation, lower levels of confidence can be
detrimental to women. And the effect may be exacerbated because women, on average, have a
substantially longer life expectancy than men.

From this point of view, it seems crucial to support individuals not only in acquiring financial
knowledge but also in instilling confidence in their knowledge. An interesting example in this
context is the paper by Jha and Shayo (2020) who study a stock market trading experiment.
They show that gathering experience while trading stocks with modest stakes (of about $50)
for about four weeks increases women's financial literacy, confidence, and subsequent stock
market participation. Thus, closing the gender gap in stock market participation involves both
building knowledge and confidence. The statue of the Fearless Girl symbolizes this idea very
clearly and getting this right matters tremendously; the hope is that a fearless girl will grow into
a fearless woman. More research is needed to know what can be done to make women not only
more knowledgeable but also more fearless when it comes to finance. This might be an
important step in lowering the documented gender inequality in financial literacy, wealth

26
  For recent evidence on the effectiveness of financial education, see Frisancho (2020), Lührmann et al.
(2018), and Kaiser et al. (2020).
                                                  28
accumulation, and financial inclusion, including access to formal credit and high-quality
financial advice.




                                           29
References

Adda, Jérôme, Christian Dustmann, and Katrien Stevens. 2017. "The career costs of
   children." Journal of Political Economy 125(2): 293-337.

Aitkin, Murray, and Donald B. Rubin. 1985. "Estimation and hypothesis testing in finite
    mixture models." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological)
    47(1): 67-75.

Albanesi, Stefania, and Claudia Olivetti. 2016. "Gender Roles and Medical Progress." Journal
    of Political Economy 124(31): 650-695.

Alesina, Alberto F., Francesca Lotti, and Paolo Emilio Mistrulli. 2013. "Do women pay more
    for credit? Evidence from Italy." Journal of the European Economic Association 11(s1):
    45-66.

Alessie, Rob, Maarten Van Rooij, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2011. "Financial literacy and
    retirement preparation in the Netherlands." Journal of Pension Economics & Finance
    10(4): 527-545.

Allgood, Sam, and William B. Walstad. 2015. "The effects of perceived and actual financial
    literacy on financial behaviors." Economic Inquiry 54(1): 675-697.

Almenberg, Johan, and Anna Dreber. 2015. "Gender, stock market participation and financial
   literacy." Economics Letters 137: 140-142.

Angrisani, Marco, Jeremy Burke, Annamaria Lusardi, and Gary Mottola. 2020. "The Stability
   and Predictive Power of Financial Literacy: Evidence from Longitudinal Data." NBER
   Working Paper No. 28125.

Asiedu, Elizabeth, Isaac Kalonda-Kanyama, Leonce Ndikumana, and Akwasi Nti-Addae.
    2013. "Access to credit by firms in Sub-Saharan Africa: How relevant is gender?"
    American Economic Review 103(3): 293-297.

Aterido, Reyes, Thorsten Beck, and Leonardo Iacovone. 2013. "Access to finance in Sub-
    Saharan Africa: is there a gender gap?" World Development 47: 102-120.

Baldiga, Katherine. 2014. "Gender differences in willingness to guess." Management Science
    60(2): 434-448.

Baldiga Coffman, Katherine. 2014. "Evidence on self-stereotyping and the contribution of
    ideas." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4): 1625-1660.

Bannier, Christina E., and Milena Neubert. 2016. "Gender differences in financial risk taking:
   The role of financial literacy and risk tolerance." Economics Letters 145: 130-135.

Bannier, Christina E., and Milena Schwarz. 2018. "Gender-and education-related effects of
   financial literacy and confidence on financial wealth." Journal of Economic Psychology
   67: 66-86.

Beckmann, Daniela, and Lukas Menkhoff. 2008. "Will women be women? Analyzing the
   gender difference among financial experts." Kyklos 61(3): 364-384.

                                              30
Beyer, Sylvia. 1990. "Gender differences in the accuracy of self-evaluations of performance."
   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 59(5): 960-970.

Bhattacharya, Utpal, Amit Kumar, Sujata Visaria, and Jing Zhao. 2020. "Do Women Receive
    Worse Financial Advice?" SSRN Working Paper No. 3671377.

Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2017. "The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and
    explanations." Journal of Economic Literature 55(3): 789-865.

Bottazzi, Laura, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2020. "Stereotypes in financial literacy. Evidence
    from PISA. NBER Working Paper No. 28065, forthcoming Journal of Corporate
    Finance.

Bovenberg, Lans, Ralph Koijen, Theo Nijman, and Coen Teulings. 2007. "Saving and
   investing over the life cycle and the role of collective pension funds." De Economist
   155(4): 347-415.

Brush, Candida G., Nancy M. Carter, Elizabeth J. Gatewood, Patricia G. Greene, and Myra
    Hart. 2004. "Gatekeepers of venture growth: A Diana Project report on the role and
    participation of women in the venture capital industry." SSRN Working Paper No.
    1260385.

Brock, J. Michelle, and Ralph De Haas. 2019. "Gender discrimination in small business
    lending. Evidence from a lab-in-the-field experiment in Turkey". EBRD Working Paper
    No. 232.

Bucher-Koenen, Tabea, Annamaria Lusardi, Rob Alessie, and Maarten van Rooij. 2017.
   "How financially literate are women? An overview and new insights." Journal of
   Consumer Affairs 51(2): 255-283.

Bucher-Koenen, Tabea, Andreas Hackethal, Johannes Koenen, and Christine Laudenbach.
   2020. "Gender differences in financial advice." SSRN Working Paper No. 2572961.

Cameron, A. Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 2005. "Microeconometrics: Methods and
   Applications." Cambridge University Press.

Chen, Haiyang, and Ronald P. Volpe. 2002. "Gender differences in personal financial literacy
   among college students." Financial Services Review 11(3): 289-307.

Croson, Rachel, and Uri Gneezy. 2009. "Gender differences in preferences." Journal of
    Economic Literature 47(2): 448-474.

Deaux, Kay, and Elizabeth Farris. 1977. "Attributing causes for one's own performance: The
   effects of sex, norms, and outcome." Journal of Research in Personality 11(1): 59-72.

Driva, Anastasia, Melanie Lührmann, and Joachim Winter. 2016. "Gender differences and
    stereotypes in financial literacy: Off to an early start." Economics Letters 146: 143-146.

Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2004. "Do the rich save more?"
   Journal of Political Economy 112(2): 397-444.



                                             31
Eckstein, Zvi, Michael Keane, and Osnat Lifshitz. 2019. "Career and Family Decisions: Cohorts
    Born 1935-1975." Econometrica 87 (1): 217-253.

Filipiak, Ute, and Yabibal M. Walle. 2015. "The financial literacy gender gap: A question of
     nature or nurture?" Courant Research Centre: Poverty, Equity and Growth-Discussion
     Papers No. 176.

Filippin, Antonio, and Marco Paccagnella. 2012. "Family background, self-confidence and
     economic outcomes." Economics of Education Review 31(5): 824-834.

Fonseca, Raquel, Kathleen J. Mullen, Gema Zamarro, and Julie Zissimopoulos. 2012. "What
    explains the gender gap in financial literacy? The role of household decision making."
    Journal of Consumer Affairs 46(1): 90-106.

Frisancho, Veronica. 2020. "The impact of financial education for youth." Economics of
     Education Review 78.

Giuliano, Paola. 2017. "Gender: An historical perspective." NBER Working Paper No. 23635.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. "A most egalitarian profession: pharmacy and
    the evolution of a family-friendly occupation." Journal of Labor Economics 34(3): 705-
    746.

Goldin, Claudia, Sari Pekkala Kerr, Claudia Olivetti, and Erling Barth. 2017. "The expanding
    gender earnings gap: Evidence from the LEHD-2000 Census." American Economic
    Review 107(5): 110-114.

Goldin, Claudia, and Joshua Mitchell. 2017. "The new life cycle of women's employment:
    Disappearing humps, sagging middles, expanding tops." Journal of Economic
    Perspectives 31(1): 161-182.

Hasler, Andrea, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2019. "Financial fragility among middle-income
    households: evidence beyond asset building." GFLEC Working Paper 2019-1.

Hayashi, Fumio. 2000. "Econometrics." Princeton University Press.

Hsu, Joanne W. 2016. "Aging and strategic learning: The impact of spousal incentives on
    financial literacy." Journal of Human Resources 51(4): 1036-1067

Jha, Saumitra, and Moses Shayo. 2020. "Trading Stocks Increases Financial Literacy and
     Compresses the Confidence Gender Gap." Stanford University Graduate School of
     Business Research Paper No. 3673.

Kaiser, Tim, Annamaria Lusardi, Lukas Menkhoff, and Carly J. Urban. 2020. "Financial
    education affects financial knowledge and downstream behaviors." NBER Working
    Paper No. 27057.

Klapper, Leora, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2020. "Financial literacy and financial resilience:
    Evidence from around the world." Financial Management 49(3): 589-614.

Klapper, Leora F., and Simon C. Parker. 2010. "Gender and the business environment for new
    firm creation." The World Bank Research Observer 26(2): 237-257.

                                             32
Lührmann, Melanie, Marta Serra-Garcia, and Joachim Winter. 2018. "The impact of financial
    education on adolescents' intertemporal choices." American Economic Journal: Economic
    Policy 10(3): 309-332.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. "Planning and financial literacy: How do
    women fare?" American Economic Review 98(2): 413-417.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011a. "Financial literacy and planning:
    Implications for retirement wellbeing." In Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi
    (eds.), Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
    Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 17-49.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011b. "Financial literacy around the world: an
    overview." Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 497­508.

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. "The economic importance of financial
    literacy: Theory and evidence." Journal of Economic Literature 52(1): 5-44.

Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2017. "Optimal financial
    knowledge and wealth inequality." Journal of Political Economy 125(2): 431-477.

Mahdavi, Mahnaz, and Nicholas J. Horton. 2014. "Financial knowledge among educated
   women: Room for improvement." Journal of Consumer Affairs 48(2): 403-417.

Neelakantan, Urvi, and Yunhee Chang. 2010. "Gender differences in wealth at retirement."
    American Economic Review 100(2): 362-367.

Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2007. "Do women shy away from competition? Do
    men compete too much." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 1067-1101.

Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund. 2010. "Explaining the gender gap in math test scores:
    The role of competition." Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(2): 129-144.

Niessen-Ruenzi, Alexandra and Stefan Ruenzi. 2018. "Sex matters: Gender bias in the mutual
    fund industry." Management Science 65(7): 2947-3448.

OECD. 2013. "Women and financial education: Evidence, policy responses and guidance."
   http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264202733-en

Prince, Melvin. 1993. "Women, men, and money styles." Journal of Economic Psychology XIV:
    175-182.

Riener, Gerhard, and Valentin Wagner. 2017. "Shying away from demanding tasks?
    Experimental evidence on gender differences in answering multiple-choice questions."
    Economics of Education Review 59: 43-62.

Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock. 1997. "Instrumental variables regression with weak
    instruments." Econometrica 65: 557­586.

Sundén, Annika E., and Brian J. Surette. 1998. "Gender differences in the allocation of assets
   in retirement savings plans." The American Economic Review 88(2): 207-211.


                                             33
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2011. "Financial literacy and stock
   market participation." Journal of Financial Economics 101(2): 449-472.

Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2012. "Financial literacy,
   retirement planning and household wealth." The Economic Journal 122(560): 449-478.

Vermunt, Jeroen K. 2010. "Latent class modeling with covariates: Two improved three-step
   approaches." Political Analysis: 18(4), 450-469.

Webster, Robert L., and T. Selwyn Ellis. 1996. "Men's and women's self-confidence in
   performing financial analysis." Psychological Reports 79(s3): 1251-1254.

Weinhardt, Felix. 2017. "Ursache für Frauenmangel in MINT-Berufen? Mädchen
   unterschätzen schon in der fünften Klasse ihre Fähigkeiten in Mathematik." DIW-
   Wochenbericht 84(45): 1009-1014.

World Bank. 2013. "Gender at work ­ a companion to the world development report on jobs."
   World Bank Group Gender & Development.




                                            34
Figures and Tables

Table 1: Answers to the financial literacy questions in the two modules

                                              May module                              July module
A. Interest question:
                                    Men        Women           All          Men         Women          All
More than 102 euro                  91.9        84.4           88.6         94.7         91.2          93.2
Exactly 102 euro                     3.0         4.0            3.5          3.7          6.0           4.7
Less than 102 euro                   2.0         3.9            2.8          1.6          2.8           2.2
Do not know                          2.8         6.7            4.5           -            -             -
Refuse                               0.4         1.0            0.7           -            -             -
Total                               100         100            100          100          100           100

B. Inflation question:
                                    Men        Women           All          Men         Women          All
More                                 2.1         2.4            2.2          2.2          2.7           2.4
Exactly the same                     3.3         5.4            4.2          4.1          9.8           6.6
Less                                89.8        80.6           85.8         93.7         87.5          91.0
Do not know                          4.7        10.7            7.3           -            -             -
Refuse                               0.2         0.9            0.5           -            -             -
Total                               100         100            100          100          100           100

C. Risk Diversification question:
                                    Men        Women           All          Men         Women          All
Incorrect `right'                    7.6         9.7            8.5         17.7         27.0          21.7
Correct `false'                     61.9        34.4           49.9         82.4         73.0          78.3
Do not know                         30.1        54.7           40.9          -            -             -
Refuse                               0.5         1.2            0.8          -            -             -
Total                               100         100            100          100          100           100

D. No. of correct answers:
                                    Men        Women           All          Men          Women          All
 0                                   3.6          6.6          4.9           0.5            0.8          0.6
 1                                   7.3         16.8         11.5           3.3            6.9          4.8
 2                                  31.0         47.2         38.1          21.4           32.3         26.2
 3                                  58.1         29.4         45.5          74.9           60.1         68.4
Note: Data from the DNB Household Panel. Surveys on financial literacy were fielded in May and July 2012. In
the July module, the "do not know" option was not offered. We report percentages of total number of respondents.
Number of observations: Men: 861, Women: 671, Total: 1,532.




                                                      35
Table 2: Answers in the July module conditional on answers in the May module

                                          Men                                     Women
         May module        incorrect    correct    do not know      incorrect    correct     do not know
 July module
 A. Interest question:
 Incorrect                   23.3          3.5         29.6           28.3          5.0          30.8
 Correct                     76.7         96.5         70.4           71.7         95.0          69.2
 Total                       100          100          100            100          100           100

 B. Inflation question:
 Incorrect                   41.3          2.7         33.3           30.8          7.0          38.5
 Correct                     58.7         97.3         66.7           69.2         93.0          61.5
 Total                       100          100          100            100          100           100

  C. Risk Diversification question:
  Incorrect                   38.5         10.3        27.4            47.7       12.6          32.3
  Correct                     61.5         89.7        72.6            52.3       87.4          67.7
  Total                        100          100         100            100         100           100
Note: Data from the DNB Household Panel. Surveys on financial literacy were fielded in May and July 2012. In
the July module, the "do not know" option was not offered. We report the percentage of correct and incorrect
answers given in the July module depending on the responses given in the May module for each of the financial
literacy questions. Number of observations: Men: 861, Women: 671, Total: 1,532.




                                                     36
Table 3: Confidence in financial literacy

                                     ALL                          MEN                       WOMEN
                             N        mean       sd         N    mean        sd       N       mean        sd
Interest
Overall confidence          1532      6.34      1.35    861       6.52      1.24     671      6.11       1.44
Cond. on incorrect           96       5.45      1.74     43       5.47      1.86      53      5.43       1.66
Cond. on correct            1357      6.52      1.15    791       6.64      1.11     566      6.35       1.19
Cond. on "do not know"       79       4.39      1.88     27       4.81      1.62      52      4.17       1.98
Inflation
Overall confidence          1532      5.97      1.58    861       6.34      1.36     671      5.49       1.72
Cond. on incorrect           98       4.87      1.91     46       4.96      1.99      52      4.79       1.86
 Cond. on correct             1314     6.25    1.34      773       6.53      1.15      541      5.84      1.49
 Cond. on "do not know"        120     3.83    1.69       42       4.33      1.56       78      3.56      1.70
 Risk diversification
 Overall confidence           1532     4.82    1.73      861       5.33      1.60      671      4.15      1.66
 Cond. on incorrect            130     4.85    1.48       65       5.34      1.31       65      4.35      1.48
 Cond. on correct              764     5.55    1.47      533       5.84      1.35      231      4.90      1.53
 Cond. on "do not know"        638     3.93    1.64      263       4.31      1.63      375      3.66      1.60
Note: Data from the DNB Household Panel. Respondents report confidence levels on a Likert scale from 1 to 7
after each question in the July module. We report the overall confidence levels for each question and confidence
conditional on the answers given in the May module for each of the financial literacy questions. Number of
observations: Men: 861, Women: 671, Total: 1,532.




                                                       37
Table 4: Share of correct answers and average number of correct answers for alternative
financial literacy measures

                                                              Gender Difference
                                 Men           Women                                    Total
                                                               (Men-Women)
 Panel A: May measure
 Interest                           91.9               84.4                  7.5                88.6
 Inflation                          89.8               80.6                  9.2                85.8
 Risk                               61.9               34.4                 27.5                49.9
 Financial literacy measure         2.44               1.99                 0.45                2.24
 Panel B: July measure
 Interest                           94.7               91.2                  3.5                93.2
 Inflation                          93.7               87.5                  6.2                  91
 Risk                               82.4                 73                  9.4                78.3
 Financial literacy measure         2.71               2.52                 0.19                2.62
 Panel C: "true" financial literacy
  Interest                           90.1               84.4                   5.7              87.6
  Inflation                          90.2               81.3                   8.8              86.3
  Risk                               69.9               56.0                 13.8               63.8
  Financial literacy measure         2.50               2.22                 0.28               2.38
Note: In panels A and B, financial literacy refers to the observed percentage of respondents who answered a
specific question correctly. The financial literacy measure refers to the sum of the correctly answered questions.
In panel C, the probabilities of giving a correct answer are estimated from our latent class model. The gender
difference is the difference between the averages of men and women. Number of observations: Men: 861, Women:
671, Total: 1,532.




                                                       38
Table 5: OLS regression financial literacy

                            (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                              True Financial
 VARIABLES                 May                 July              Literacy       Underconfidence
 Panel A: Only controlling for gender
 Female                  -0.442***          -0.190***           -0.284***           0.178***
                          (0.0386)           (0.0291)            (0.0352)            (0.0249)
 R-squared                 0.068               0.024              0.036               0.033
             2
 Adjusted R                0.067               0.024              0.035               0.032
 Panel B: Controlling for marital status, age, education, income
 Female                  -0.361***          -0.147***           -0.225***           0.154***
                          (0.0394)           (0.0301)            (0.0362)            (0.0258)
 R-squared                 0.164               0.103              0.152              0.0538
             2
  Adjusted R                 0.156              0.094               0.143              0.044
Note: Results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is the number of correctly answered
financial literacy questions in the May module (column 1), in the July module (column 2), and estimated from
the latent class model (column 3). In column 4 the dependent variable is a measure for underconfidence. In panel
A, we include only gender as an explanatory variable. In panel B we add controls for marital status, age,
education and income. Robust standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Number of
observations: 1,532. The full regressions are available upon request.




                                                        39
Table 6: OLS regression stock market participation

                                    (1)             (2)              (3)                  (4)
 VARIABLES                                          May             July         True Financial Literacy

 Financial literacy                             0.0901***        0.0549***              0.0672***
                                                  (0.0105)         (0.0097)               (0.0101)
 Female                         -0.136***        -0.0461**       -0.0715***             -0.0646***
                                  (0.0207)          (0.0212)        (0.0213)               (0.0213)
 Constant                         0.339***          0.143*            0.101                   0.112
                                  (0.0161)         (0.0753)         (0.0731)                (0.0741)
  Controls                             -                x               x                       x
  Observations                      1,532             1,532          1,532                   1,532
  R-squared                         0.023             0.147          0.126                   0.132
  Adjusted R2                      0.0221             0.137          0.117                   0.122
Note: Results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy for stock market participation.
In column (1) we control only for gender. In columns (2) to (4) we add financial literacy measures and controls
for marital status, age, education, and income. The financial literacy measures in models (2), (3), and (4) differ;
we normalize them by subtracting the mean and dividing them by the standard deviation. We use the number of
correct answers to the three financial literacy questions in May (column 2), in July (column 3), and estimated from
the latent class model (column 4). Robust standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Number
of observations: 1,532.




                                                       40
Table 7: The share of underconfident respondents and the average underconfidence score
by gender

                                      Underconfidence
                              Men         Women         Total
 Interest question            0.015        0.042        0.027
 Inflation question             0.028     0.064       0.044
 Risk question                  0.144     0.259       0.194
 Underconfidence score          0.187     0.365       0.265
The probabilities of being underconfident is estimated from the LCM; the measure is defined according to
                                   j
3k=1 Py  ik = 1g ik = 5, xi , confik    ( = 5). Number of observations: 1,532.




Table 8: Explaining stock market participation

                                    (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)
VARIABLES                           True Financial Literacy                 May

"True" Financial Literacy       0.0672***           0.0707***
                                 (0.0101)            (0.0100)
Underconfidence                                    -0.0621***
                                                    (0.00940)
Financial Literacy (May)                                          0.0901***      0.0666***
                                                                   (0.0105)       (0.0187)
 DK (May)                                                                          -0.0279
                                                                                  (0.0170)
 Female                          -0.0646***        -0.0440**       -0.0461**     -0.0443**
                                   (0.0213)         (0.0212)        (0.0212)      (0.0213)
 Observations                       1,532            1,532            1,532         1,532
 R-squared                          0.132            0.150            0.147         0.148
 Adjusted R2                        0.122            0.140            0.137         0.138
Note: Results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy for stock market participation.
Additional controls for marital status, age, education, and income are included. The financial literacy measures
and underconfidence measure in columns (1) and (2) are based on the latent class model. The financial literacy
measures and the DK measure in columns (3) and (4) are based on the May module. We normalize the financial
literacy measures, underconfidence, and the DK variable by subtracting the mean and dividing them by the
standard deviation. Robust standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Number of
observations: 1,532.




                                                        41
APPENDIX

A.1 Financial literacy questions

1. Set Up May Module (2012):

   1. Interest question: Suppose you had 100 in a savings account and the interest rate was
      2% per year. After 5 years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you
      left the money to grow?       More than 102* / Exactly 102 / Less than 102 / Do not
      know/ Refuse to answer

   2. Inflation question: Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per
      year and inflation was 2% per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy
      with the money in this account?     More than today / Exactly the same / Less than
      today* / Do not know / Refuse to answer

   3. Risk question: Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. "Buying a single
      company's stock usually provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund."       True /
      False* / Do not know / Refuse to answer

* indicates the correct answer.

2. Set Up July Module (2012):

Questions 1 to 3 without the "do not know" and "refuse to answer" options

After each question ­ Confidence question: On a scale from 1 to 7, how confident are you in
this answer? 1--not confident at all ... 7--completely confident




                                            42
A.2 Summary statistics

Table A.1: Sample statistics

Variable                                                 Obs    Mean Std.Dev.   Min   Max
How much of high school education devoted to economics?
(ref: not applicable, hardly at all)
little, some, a lot                                     1,532   0.727   0.446    0     1
Don't know/refuse                                       1,532   0.038   0.191    0     1

Economics in high school exam? 1=yes                    1,532   0.416   0.493    0     1

Female                                                  1,532   0.438   0.496    0     1

Marital status (ref. group: single)
married, no child                                       1,532   0.495   0.500    0     1
married, child                                          1,532   0.255   0.436    0     1
single parent, other                                    1,532   0.043   0.203    0     1

Age_class (ref. group: <=35)
36-50                                                   1,532   0.249   0.432    0     1
51-65                                                   1,532   0.401   0.490    0     1
65 and older                                            1,532   0.299   0.458    0     1

Education level (ref. primary education)
Preparatory intermediate vocational                     1,532   0.277   0.448    0     1
Intermediate vocational                                 1,532   0.157   0.364    0     1
Secondary pre-university                                1,532   0.125   0.330    0     1
Higher vocational                                       1,532   0.258   0.438    0     1
University                                              1,532   0.138   0.345    0     1

Monthly net household income in Euros (ref. <1902)
1902<x~2600                                             1,532   0.250   0.433    0     1
2600<x~3471                                             1,532   0.245   0.430    0     1
x>3471                                                  1,532   0.247   0.431    0     1
refuse/dk                                               1,532   0.011   0.105    0     1




                                                43
A.3 Attrition and learning effects

Table A.2: Test for sample attrition and learning effects


 Panel A: Regression of gender and financial literacy in the May module on participation

                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)          (5)             (6)
                                                                                    Financial       Financial
                     Gender          Interest       Inflation         Risk
                                                                                    Literacy        Literacy
                        All             All              All              All          All             All
 Participation
                 0.05            0.01            -0.03            -0.02           -0.04           -0.05
 in May only
                 (0.031)         (0.023)         (0.029)          (0.037)         (0.064)         (0.058)
 Constant        0.44***         0.89***         0.86***          0.50***         2.24***         2.25***
                 (0.010)         (0.009)         (0.010)          (0.013)         (0.023)         (0.322)
 Controls        -               -               -                -               -               X
 Observations    1,753           1,753           1,753            1,753           1,753           1,753
 R-squared       0.001           0.000           0.001            0.000           0.000           0.152

 Panel B: Regression of financial literacy in the July module on first or second time of participation

                        (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                                   Financial         Financial       Financial
                      Interest        Inflation        Risk
                                                                   Literacy          Literacy         Literacy
                        All              All            All           All              Men            Women
 Participation 0.01                0.01           -0.02         0.00             -0.00            0.04
 in July only     (0.013)          (0.015)         (0.023)      (0.031)          (0.041)           (0.049)
                  0.93***          0.91***        0.78***       2.62***          2.71***          2.52***
 Constant
                  (0.007)          (0.008)        (0.011)       (0.017)          (0.019)          (0.025)
 Observations 1,977                1,977          1,977         1,977            1075             902
 R-squared        0.001            0.000          0.000         0.000            0.000            0.001
Note: Results are based on OLS regressions. We use the number of correct answers to the three financial literacy
questions in the May module (panel A) and the July module (panel B). Controls refer to marital status, age,
education, and income. All refers to men and women. Standard errors are clustered at the household level and
displayed in parentheses: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                      44
A.4 Results of the latent class model

In tables A.3 and A.4, we show the parameters estimated from the latent class model (LCM).
Table A.3 shows the parameter estimates of the probit equation explaining true knowledge for
each of the three financial literacy questions. This means that in columns (k=1), (k=2), and (k=3)
we show the parameters for truly knowing the correct answer to the interest, inflation, and risk
diversifications questions, respectively (cf. equation 5). The parameters refer to the  variables.
The patterns observed with respect to the socio-demographic variables are as expected. Men
and those with high income and high education have a higher likelihood of knowing the correct
responses to each of the questions compared to women and individuals with lower income and
education.
                                                                             1
The left panel of Table A.4 contains the estimates of the parameters            of the multinomial
                                                                    
logit model explaining the probability  ( = |         = 1,  ) (see equation (6a)). Again,
the index  refers to the parameters for the three different financial literacy questions. The index
          
(= 3   +   ) can take on six different values (from 0 to 5) depending on the combination
                                                                   
of answers given in the modules. The dummy variables  = , l = 1, ... ,7 refer to the
different confidence levels  . The right panel of Table A.4 reports the estimates of the
             0
parameters      of the multinomial logit model explaining the probability ( = |                =
        
0,       ) (see equation (6b)). In many cases we restricted a  parameter to be equal to -22 in
order to impose the restrictions (8a)-(8e) that some probabilities are equal to 0 (see also footnote
19).
                  1          0
The parameters        and       are used to predict the probability of observing a specific
combination of answers given confidence and (latent) true knowledge according to equation
(10). We show the predicted probabilities in Table A.5 for ease of interpretation, where g is the
                                                                               1       
observed answering pattern for answers in May,   , and July,   .                 ( ) is the
                                                                         0                       
probability of observing g=0,...,5 given confidence level  and  = 1; and   ( )
                                                                        
is the probability of observing g=0,...5 given confidence level  and            = 0. n refers to
the number of observations in the respective cells, i.e., the number of respondents with a
specific confidence level for each of the three questions. For example, looking into the first
                                                      
panel on the interest question, the line g=0 (                                  1
                                               1 =0; 1 =0) shows 0.000 for 10 (1). This means
that the probability of observing two incorrect answers given true knowledge and confidence
                                   0 (1)
level 1 is 0. In the same line 10        =0.308. Thus, the probability of giving two incorrect
answers given no true knowledge and confidence level 1 is 0.308. In this way all probabilities
can be interpreted. The probabilities over g from 0 to 5 add up to 1 for each question and each
confidence level. Comparing probabilities of observing two correct answers (g=4) over
confidence levels shows an increasing pattern in particular for the risk question. The pattern is
not so stable for the lower confidence levels of the interest and the inflation questions because
of a low number of observations in these cells. However, it is present for higher levels on the
confidence scale.




                                                45
Table A.3: Estimation results latent class model--parameter estimates of the probit equation
explaining true knowledge (see equation (5) of the paper)

                                                  (k=1)               (k=2)                  (k=3)
                                                                                                   Risk
 VARIABLES                                             Interest            Inflation     Diversification
 Female                                              -0.218**            -0.349***           -0.339***
                                                      (0.0904)             (0.0940)            (0.0906)

 How much of high school education devoted to economics? (ref: not applicable, hardly at all)
 Little, some, a lot                                 0.0253                 0.112                 0.0651
                                                    (0.112)               (0.113)                (0.104)
 Refuse/DK                                           -0.140            -0.486**               -0.535**
                                                    (0.212)               (0.198)                (0.228)
 Economics in high school exam? 1=yes              0.258**              0.216**                   0.0756
                                                    (0.104)               (0.104)              (0.0877)
 Marital status (ref. Single)
 Married, no child                                   -0.103                -0.170             -0.299**
                                                    (0.128)               (0.128)                (0.118)
 Married, child                                   -0.324**               -0.0664            -0.489***
                                                    (0.151)               (0.149)                (0.138)
 Single parent, other                            -0.571***                 -0.201           -0.597***
                                                    (0.204)               (0.219)                (0.215)
 Age (ref. <=35)
 36-50                                               0.0577                 0.315             0.564***
                                                    (0.226)               (0.198)                (0.190)
 51-65                                               0.0154            0.600***                 0.376**
                                                    (0.220)               (0.199)                (0.185)
 >65                                                 0.0211            0.717***                   0.0537
                                                    (0.231)               (0.217)                (0.193)
 Education level (ref. primary education)
 Preparatory intermediate vocational               0.363**                  0.107                 -0.294
                                                    (0.178)               (0.187)                (0.194)
 Intermediate vocational                          0.553***                 0.0503                 -0.307
                                                    (0.200)               (0.205)                (0.209)
 Secondary pre-university                         1.040***             0.718***                   -0.130
                                                    (0.229)               (0.231)                (0.212)
 Higher vocational                                0.679***             0.568***                 -0.0440
                                                    (0.190)               (0.204)                (0.198)
 University                                       1.017***             0.906***                   0.383*
                                                    (0.231)               (0.291)                (0.222)
 Monthly net household income in Euros
 (ref. first quartile)
 1902<x<=2600                                     0.431***                  0.178                  0.102
                                                    (0.123)               (0.123)                (0.121)
 2600<x<=3471                                      0.257**                 0.227*             0.358***
                                                    (0.129)               (0.133)                (0.131)
 x>3471                                           0.522***             0.441***               0.464***
                                                    (0.146)               (0.162)                (0.139)
 Refuse/dk                                            0.468                -0.157                  0.305
                                                    (0.413)               (0.355)                (0.387)

 Constant                                                 0.442               0.208                0.348
                                                        (0.298)             (0.289)              (0.289)

 Observations                                              1,532               1,532              1,532
 Log likelihood                                           -864.2              -980.6              -1890
 No. estimated parameters                                     55                  55                 55



                                                   46
                                                                    0     1
Table A.4: Estimation results latent class model--parameter vectors   and   of the
multinomial logit models (see equations (6a) and (6b) of the paper)

                1    1                                                0    0                                          
                   ;    = ( = | = 1,  = 1)                               ;    = ( = | = 0,  = 1)
              (k=1)         (k=2)        (k=3)                   (k=1)              (k=2)                 (k=3)
VARIABLES     Interest      Inflation    Risk diversification    Interest           Inflation             Risk diversification
              g=0: incorrect in May, incorrect in July           g=0: incorrect in May, incorrect in July
      
    = 1       -22           -22          -22                     REFERENCE GROUP
              (0)           (0)          (0)
      
    = 2       -22           -22          -22
              (0)           (0)          (0)
      
    = 3       -22           -22          -22
              (0)           (0)          (0)
      
    = 4       -22           -22          -22
              (0)           (0)          (0)
      
    = 5       -22           -22          -22
              (0)           (0)          (0)
      
    = 6       -22           -22          -22
              (0)           (0)          (0)
      
    = 7       -22           -22          -22
              (0)           (0)          (0)
              g=1: correct in May, incorrect in July             g=1: correct in May, incorrect in July
      
    = 1       -22           -22          -22                     -0.693             -16.68                1.946*
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.866)            (2,958)               (1.069)
      
    = 2       -22           -22          -22                     16.45              -0.223                -4.34e-05
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (2,155)            (0.671)               (1.000)
      
    = 3       -22           -22          -22                     -0.406             1.792*                0.405
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.913)            (1.080)               (0.645)
      
    = 4       -22           -22          -22                     0.539              0.442                 0.288
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.476)            (0.427)               (0.382)
      
    = 5       -22           -22          -22                     0.693              0.629                 0.154
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.866)            (0.438)               (0.278)
      
    = 6       -22           -22          -22                     1.386*             1.946*                0.642
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.791)            (1.069)               (0.391)
      
    = 7       -22           -22          -22                     1.273***           0.368                 0.693
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.428)            (0.434)               (0.707)
              g=2: DK in May, incorrect in July                  g=2: DK in May, incorrect in July
      
    = 1       -22           -22          -22                     0.405              0.916                 3.091***
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.645)            (0.837)               (1.023)
   
         =2   -22           -22          -22                     16.04              -2.64e-05             2.565***
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (2,155)            (0.632)               (0.734)
   
         =3   -22           -22          -22                     -0.406             1.792*                1.792***
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.913)            (1.080)               (0.540)
   
         =4   -22           -22          -22                     0.357              0.693*                1.749***
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (0.493)            (0.408)               (0.313)
   
         =5   -22           -22          -22                     1.22e-05           -4.94e-06             0.256
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (1.000)            (0.500)               (0.272)
   
         =6   -22           -22          -22                     6.12e-05           -2.61e-05             0.182
              (0)           (0)          (0)                     (1.000)            (1.414)               (0.428)


                                                            47
        
    = 7               -22         -22            -22                -16.67             -2.197**              1.099*
                                                                                                             (0.667)
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (1,578)            (1.054)
Table A.4 continued

                      g=3: incorrect in May, correct in July        g=3: incorrect in May, correct in July
        
    = 1               -22         -22            -22                -1.386             0.916                 1.099
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (1.118)            (0.837)               (1.155)
        
    = 2               -22         -22            -22                16.45              -0.223                0.405
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (2,155)            (0.671)               (0.913)
        
    = 3               -22         -22            -22                -1.099             1.609                 0.405
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (1.155)            (1.095)               (0.645)
        
    = 4               -22         -22            -22                0.133              -0.405                0.460
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (0.518)            (0.527)               (0.369)
        
    = 5               -22         -22            -22                1.504*             0.405                 -0.405
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (0.782)            (0.456)               (0.323)
        
    = 6               -22         -22            -22                2.251***           2.485**               -0.223
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (0.743)            (1.041)               (0.474)
        
    = 7               -22         -22            -22                1.455***           0.747*                1.846***
                      (0)         (0)            (0)                (0.420)            (0.405)               (0.621)
                      g=4: correct in May, correct in July          g=4: correct in May, correct in July
        
    = 1               REFERENCE GROUP                               -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
        
    = 2                                                             -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
        
    = 3                                                             -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
        
    = 4                                                             -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
        
    = 5                                                             -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
        
    = 6                                                             -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
        
    = 7                                                             -22                -22                   -22
                                                                    (0)                (0)                   (0)
                      g=5: DK in May, correct in July               g=5: DK in May, correct in July
        
    = 1               -1.946*** -1.032**         1.052***           -14.89             -3.101                2.281*
                      (0.617)     (0.511)        (0.354)            (1,517)            (32.85)               (1.189)
   
           =2         -1.504*     -0.0953        1.069***           -0.187             -15.57                0.449
                      (0.782)     (0.437)        (0.347)            (3,664)            (1,495)               (1.830)
   
           =3         -0.540      -1.386***      0.748**            -14.64             -14.04                0.523
                      (0.476)     (0.423)        (0.301)            (1,626)            (2,059)               (1.035)
   
           =4         -1.099*** -0.959***        0.321*             -15.52             -15.65                0.781
                      (0.348)     (0.245)        (0.180)            (972.3)            (1,079)               (0.595)
   
           =5         -1.653*** -2.100***        -1.096***          -14.68             -15.75                0.364
                      (0.364)     (0.306)        (0.278)            (4,828)            (1,305)               (0.398)
   
           =6         -2.859*** -3.683***        -2.131***          -13.82             -0.554                1.162***
                      (0.343)     (1.109)        (0.476)            (2,512)            (7.873)               (0.429)
   
           =7         -19.15      -6.308***      -17.38             0.693              -0.0644               2.457***
                      (800.9)     (2.031)        (633.5)            (0.463)            (0.591)               (0.602)



                                                               48
Table A.5: Estimation results latent class model--predicted probabilities


                                                                                   Interest question
                                                                                                                                                                     
                     1 = 1                1 = 2                   1 = 3                      1 = 4                   1 = 5                 1 = 6                  1 = 7
 g              1    1 (1)
                     1      0 (1)
                            1        2    1 (2)
                                          1      0 (2)
                                                 1          3     1 (3)
                                                                  1      0 (3)
                                                                         1           4       11 (4)  0 (4)
                                                                                                     1         5     1 (5)
                                                                                                                     1      0 (5)
                                                                                                                            1        6     1 (6)
                                                                                                                                           1      0 (6)
                                                                                                                                                  1         7     1 (7)
                                                                                                                                                                  1      0 (7)
                                                                                                                                                                         1
 0   0    0     37    0.000  0.308   19    0.000  0.000     27     0.000  0.375       81       0.000  0.189    73     0.000  0.118   197    0.000  0.065   1098    0.000  0.092
 1   0    1     37    0.000  0.154   19    0.000  0.375     27     0.000  0.250       81       0.000  0.324    73     0.000  0.235   197    0.000  0.258   1098    0.000  0.329
 2   0    9     37    0.000  0.462   19    0.000  0.250     27     0.000  0.250       81       0.000  0.270    73     0.000  0.118   197    0.000  0.065   1098    0.000  0.000
 3   1    0     37    0.000  0.077   19    0.000  0.375     27     0.000  0.125       81       0.000  0.216    73     0.000  0.529   197    0.000  0.613   1098    0.000  0.395
 4   1    1     37    0.875  0.000   19    0.818  0.000     27     0.632  0.000       81       0.750  0.000    73     0.839  0.000   197    0.946  0.000   1098    1.000  0.000
 5   1    9     37    0.125  0.000   19    0.182  0.000     27     0.368  0.000       81       0.250  0.000    73     0.161  0.000   197    0.054  0.000   1098    0.000  0.184

                                                                                   Inflation question
                                                                                                                                                                     
                     2 = 1                 2 = 2                  2 = 3                       2 = 4                  2 = 5                 2 = 6                  2 = 7
                     1 (1)  0 (1)         1 (      0 (2)          1 (3)  0 (3)                 1 (4)  0 (4)          1 (5)  0 (5)          1 (6)  0 (6)           1 (7)  0 (7)
 g              1    2      2        2    2   , 2) 2        3     2      2            4       2       2        5     2      2        6     2      2        7      2      2
 0   0      0   46    0.000  0.165   39     0.000   0.278   53     0.000  0.056      130        0.000  0.191   153    0.000  0.186   202    0.000  0.046   909      0.00   0.18
 1   0      1   46    0.000  0.000   39     0.000   0.222   53     0.000  0.333      130        0.000  0.298   153    0.000  0.349   202    0.000  0.324   909      0.00   0.26
 2   0      9   46    0.000  0.414   39     0.000   0.278   53     0.000  0.333      130        0.000  0.383   153    0.000  0.186   202    0.000  0.046   909      0.00   0.02
 3   1      0   46    0.000  0.414   39     0.000   0.222   53     0.000  0.278      130        0.000  0.128   153    0.000  0.279   202    0.000  0.556   909      0.00   0.38
 4   1      1   46    0.737  0.000   39     0.524   0.000   53     0.800  0.000      130        0.723  0.000   153    0.891  0.000   202    0.975  0.000   909      1.00   0.00
 5   1      9   46    0.263  0.007   39     0.476   0.000   53     0.200  0.000      130        0.277  0.000   153    0.109  0.000   202    0.025  0.027   909      0.00   0.17

                                                                             Diversification question
                                                                                                                                                                     
                     3 = 1                3 = 2                   3 = 3                    3 = 4                     3 = 5                 3 = 6                  3 = 7
                     1 (1)  0 (1)         1 (2)  0 (2)            1 (3)  0 (3)             1 (4)      0 (4)          1 (5)  0 (5)          1 (6)  0 (6)           1 (7)  0 (7)
 g              1    3      3        2    3      3          3     3      3        4       3           3        5     3      3        6     3      3        7      3      3
 0   0      0   93    0.000  0.023   87     0.00   0.06     109    0.000  0.086 342          0.000     0.084   319    0.000  0.180   251    0.000  0.124   331      0.00   0.04
 1   0      1   93    0.000  0.164   87     0.00   0.06     109    0.000  0.128 342          0.000     0.113   319    0.000  0.210   251    0.000  0.235   331      0.00   0.08
 2   0      9   93    0.000  0.514   87     0.00   0.72     109    0.000  0.513 342          0.000     0.485   319    0.000  0.232   251    0.000  0.148   331      0.00   0.12
 3   1      0   93    0.000  0.070   87     0.00   0.08     109    0.000  0.128 342          0.000     0.134   319    0.000  0.120   251    0.000  0.099   331      0.00   0.26
 4   1      1   93    0.259  0.000   87     0.26   0.00     109    0.321  0.000 342          0.420     0.000   319    0.750  0.000   251    0.894  0.000   331      1.00   0.00
 5   1      9   93    0.741  0.229   87     0.74   0.09     109    0.679  0.144 342          0.580     0.184   319    0.250  0.259   251    0.106  0.395   331      0.00   0.49
                                                                1     1    1                   0     1    1                                        
Note: This presents predictions of the following probabilities:     =    ;    =  =  = 1,   and     =    ;   =
                                                                                              0     1
 =  = 1,   , see equations (6a) and (6b) of the paper). Th estimates of the parameter vectors   and   are presented in Table A.4.




                                                                                  49
Figure A.1 Distribution of "true" knowledge for the Big Three financial literacy
questions and the financial literacy summary measure




                                                                .8
      .8




                                                                .6
      .6
 Fraction




                                                            Fraction
                                                            .4
 .4   .2




                                                                .2
      0




                                                                0
              0   .2    .4              .6    .8   1                   0   .2         .4               .6       .8   1
                             Interest                                                      Inflation
      .5




                                                                .4
      .4




                                                                .3
         .3
 Fraction




                                                            Fraction
                                                            .2
      .2




                                                                .1
      .1
      0




                                                                0




              0   .2    .4               .6   .8   1                   0        1                           2        3
                       Risk diversification                                         fin. lit. measure LCM




                                                       50
Table A.6: Explaining stock market participation--OLS results (N = 1,532)
                                             (1)                (2)               (3)                  (4)
                                                                                                True financial
 VARIABLES                                                     May                July
                                                                                                    literacy
 Financial literacy                                         0.0901***          0.0549***          0.0672***
                                                             (0.0105)          (0.00970)           (0.0101)
 female                                  -0.136***          -0.0461**         -0.0715***         -0.0646***
                                          (0.0207)           (0.0212)           (0.0213)           (0.0213)
 Marital status (ref. Single)
 married, no child                                         -0.0943***         -0.0896***         -0.0839***
                                                             (0.0320)           (0.0326)           (0.0324)
 married, child                                             -0.123***          -0.119***          -0.110***
                                                             (0.0371)           (0.0375)           (0.0373)
 single parent, other                                        -0.132**           -0.133**           -0.124**
                                                             (0.0548)           (0.0557)           (0.0556)
 Age (ref. <=35)
 36-50                                                      0.139***           0.149***           0.140***
                                                            (0.0475)           (0.0473)           (0.0472)
 51-65                                                      0.202***           0.207***           0.203***
                                                            (0.0465)           (0.0460)           (0.0460)
 >65                                                        0.201***           0.209***           0.207***
                                                            (0.0496)           (0.0490)           (0.0491)
 Education level (ref. primary
 education)
 Preparatory intermediate
 vocational                                                  -0.0872*           -0.0623            -0.0647
                                                             (0.0510)          (0.0516)           (0.0519)
 Intermediate vocational                                      -0.0237           -0.0108           -0.00916
                                                             (0.0555)          (0.0564)           (0.0566)
 Secondary pre-university                                     -0.0659           -0.0338            -0.0464
                                                             (0.0589)          (0.0595)           (0.0599)
 Higher vocational                                           -0.00615            0.0166            0.00994
                                                             (0.0557)          (0.0567)           (0.0569)
 University                                                   0.141**          0.174***           0.163***
                                                             (0.0618)          (0.0621)           (0.0624)
 Monthly net household income in
 Euros (ref. first quartile)
 1902<x<=2600                                                    0.0470            0.0682**            0.0590*
                                                               (0.0305)            (0.0311)           (0.0309)
  2600<x<=3471                                                0.0958***            0.122***           0.110***
                                                               (0.0352)            (0.0351)           (0.0352)
  x>3471                                                       0.183***            0.214***           0.198***
                                                               (0.0381)            (0.0385)           (0.0385)
  Refuse/DK                                                     0.198**             0.198*              0.192*
                                                               (0.0950)             (0.103)           (0.0997)
  Constant                                 0.339***              0.143*              0.101              0.112
                                           (0.0161)            (0.0753)            (0.0731)           (0.0741)
  Observations                               1,532               1,532               1,532              1,532
  R-squared                                  0.023               0.147               0.126              0.132
  Adjusted R2                               0.0221               0.137               0.117              0.122
Note: Results from OLS regressions in which the dependent variable is a dummy for stock market participation.
In column (1) we control only for gender. The financial literacy measures in models (2), (3), and (4) differ.
Specifically, we use the number of correct answers to the three financial literacy questions in the May module
(column 2), in the July module (column 3), and estimated from the latent class model (column 4). Robust
standard errors in parentheses: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                      51
A.5 Instrumental variables regressions

Here we report the results of regressions that are similar to those presented in the text but based
on GMM, using high school financial education as instruments for financial literacy. The
instruments we use are similar to those used in Van Rooij et al. (2012) and are based upon
information on exposure to economic education when young. In the Dutch Household Panel,
respondents are asked how much attention has been paid to economics during their high school
education. Moreover, respondents report whether and the extent to which economics was part
of their final high school exam.

We measure exposure to education before entering the job market using the responses to the
questions "How much of your education in high school was devoted to economic subjects?"
with the following answer categories: "a lot," "some," "little," "hardly at all," "not applicable,
I did not complete high school," "do not know," or "refuse to answer." We distinguish three
groups. The first group consists of respondents who did not get economics in high school; i.e.,
those who answer "hardly at all" or "not applicable." This is the reference group in our empirical
analysis. The second group is a dummy variable for respondents who were exposed to
economics during high school; i.e., those who answered "a lot," "some," and "little." The third
group consists of those who answered with do not know or refuse to answer (very few
respondents refused to answer this question). The instruments have high predictive power for
financial literacy, as shown in table A.7; the F-values of the first stage regression are mostly
above 10 (bottom of table A.8 (cf. columns 2, 4, and 6).

Unless respondents indicate they did not complete high school, they are asked this follow-up
question: "Did you have at least one economics subject in your final examination year?" with
the response options "yes," "no," "not applicable, I didn't do a final exam," "do not know," or
"refuse to answer." We create an additional instrument dummy variable that takes the value 1
for those respondents who answer "yes" and the value 0 otherwise. When we include this
variable in the instrument set, we obtain F-values in excess of or very close to 10 (which, in the
literature, is the recommended threshold to avoid weak instrument problems; see Staiger and
Stock 1997) for the other measures (see columns 1, 3, and 5 of table 7). One may argue, however,
that the third dummy is not a valid instrument, as for some students, the economic subject in
their final exam may have been a choice variable and, thus, is likely to be correlated with interest
in financial matters (interest in financial matters is an omitted variable in our regression) which
in turn may affect financial decision making. Therefore, we present the results including and
excluding this variable in the set of instruments.

Table A.8 presents the GMM results for stock market participation. The Hansen J test results
indicate that the over-identifying restrictions cannot be rejected in any of the specifications. The
GMM C tests (see Hayashi 2000) show mixed results for stock market participation. Using the
extended set of instruments, the test suggests that financial literacy is endogenous to stock
market participation; while using the smaller set of instruments we cannot reject that financial
literacy is an exogenous variable. The latter result is consistent with previous findings (Van
Rooij et al. 2011).




                                                52
Table A.7: First stage regression
                                               (1)                (2)            (3)
 VARIABLES                                    May                July    True Knowledge
 Female                                   -0.351***         -0.141***       -0.218***
                                           (0.0395)          (0.0299)        (0.0360)
 How much of high school education devoted to economics? (ref: not applicable, hardly at
 all)
 Little, some, a lot                         0.104*            0.0566          0.0561
                                           (0.0568)          (0.0442)        (0.0495)
 Refuse/dk                                 -0.265**          -0.229**       -0.386***
                                            (0.125)          (0.0999)         (0.107)
 Economics in high school exam? 1=yes     0.186***           0.101***        0.107***
                                           (0.0464)          (0.0322)        (0.0399)
 Marital status (ref. Single)
 Married, no child                          -0.0316         -0.0930**       -0.156***
                                           (0.0669)          (0.0436)        (0.0529)
 Married, child                             -0.0757          -0.128**       -0.228***
                                           (0.0740)          (0.0511)        (0.0625)
 Single parent, other                       -0.243*         -0.283***       -0.375***
                                            (0.132)           (0.106)         (0.114)
 Age (ref. <=35)
 36-50                                      0.227**           0.162**        0.262***
                                            (0.106)          (0.0733)        (0.0851)
 51-65                                      0.240**          0.197***        0.254***
                                            (0.106)          (0.0736)        (0.0837)
 >65                                         0.212*             0.131          0.165*
                                            (0.112)          (0.0796)        (0.0893)
 Education level (ref. primary education)
 Preparatory intermediate vocational          0.207           0.00365          0.0381
                                            (0.130)           (0.116)         (0.120)
 Intermediate vocational                      0.148            0.0780          0.0611
                                            (0.135)           (0.119)         (0.125)
 Secondary pre-university                 0.399***              0.190        0.329***
                                            (0.135)           (0.121)         (0.124)
 Higher vocational                        0.349***             0.216*         0.290**
                                            (0.131)           (0.118)         (0.122)
 University                               0.559***           0.349***        0.477***
                                            (0.136)           (0.121)         (0.126)
 Monthly net household income in Euros (ref. first quartile)
 1902<x<=2600                             0.251***             0.0667        0.170***
                                           (0.0701)          (0.0502)        (0.0591)
 2600<x<=3471                             0.322***            0.110**        0.235***
                                           (0.0757)          (0.0524)        (0.0633)
 x>3471                                   0.410***           0.157***        0.334***
                                           (0.0781)          (0.0565)        (0.0661)
 Refuse/DK                                   0.0721            0.0760          0.161
                                            (0.219)           (0.147)         (0.171)
 Constant                                 1.542***           2.320***        1.951***
                                            (0.172)           (0.133)         (0.146)
 Observations                                 1,532             1,532          1,532
 R-squared                                    0.189             0.121          0.172
 Adjusted R2                                  0.179             0.110          0.161




                                                 53
Table A.8: Explaining stock market participation--GMM results
                                                                                          Prob "True
                                          May                        July                 knowledge"
VARIABLES                          (1)              (2)        (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)
Financial literacy              0.192***        0.166**    0.222***       0.185*    0.204*** 0.168**
                                (0.0671)        (0.0815)   (0.0842)     (0.0947)    (0.0751) (0.0800)
Female                          -0.00335         -0.0142    -0.0310      -0.0399     -0.0235     -0.0341
                                (0.0369)        (0.0415)   (0.0308)     (0.0321)    (0.0325) (0.0331)
Marital status (ref. Single)
Married, no child               -0.090***   -0.091***      -0.0627*     -0.0681*     -0.0555   -0.0621*
                                 (0.0328)    (0.0324)      (0.0364)     (0.0363)    (0.0365)   (0.0364)
Married, child                  -0.115***   -0.115***      -0.087**     -0.092**    -0.0724*   -0.0806*
                                 (0.0379)    (0.0374)      (0.0416)     (0.0412)    (0.0421)   (0.0420)
Single parent, other             -0.0998*     -0.106*       -0.0511      -0.0681     -0.0547    -0.0712
                                 (0.0601)    (0.0601)      (0.0739)     (0.0740)    (0.0695)   (0.0689)
Age (ref. <=35)
36-50                            0.111**         0.118**    0.106*       0.115**     0.0942     0.105*
                                (0.0545)        (0.0549)   (0.0576)     (0.0569)    (0.0576)   (0.0569)
51-65                           0.176***        0.183***   0.161***     0.170***    0.163***   0.172***
                                (0.0523)        (0.0524)   (0.0563)     (0.0557)    (0.0540)   (0.0532)
>65                             0.181***        0.186***   0.183***     0.188***    0.185***   0.189***
                                (0.0545)        (0.0539)   (0.0558)     (0.0542)    (0.0537)   (0.0524)
Education level (ref. primary
education)
Preparatory intermediate
vocational                      -0.119**         -0.110*    -0.0699      -0.0664     -0.0760    -0.0714
                                (0.0563)        (0.0577)   (0.0587)     (0.0559)    (0.0559)   (0.0542)
Intermediate vocational          -0.0530         -0.0459    -0.0432      -0.0355     -0.0278    -0.0227
                                (0.0593)        (0.0600)   (0.0656)     (0.0635)    (0.0608)   (0.0592)
Secondary pre-university         -0.128*          -0.112     -0.103      -0.0862      -0.120    -0.0993
                                (0.0716)        (0.0770)   (0.0741)     (0.0745)    (0.0735)   (0.0741)
Higher vocational                -0.0615         -0.0466    -0.0562      -0.0389     -0.0534    -0.0360
                                (0.0669)        (0.0716)   (0.0729)     (0.0736)    (0.0693)   (0.0696)
University                        0.0622          0.0826     0.0652       0.0905      0.0657     0.0913
                                (0.0812)        (0.0885)   (0.0880)     (0.0912)    (0.0846)   (0.0859)
Monthly net household
income in Euros (ref. first
quartile)
1902<x<=2600                     0.0145          0.0216     0.0485       0.0518       0.0287     0.0354
                                (0.0364)        (0.0382)   (0.0346)     (0.0337)    (0.0356)   (0.0352)
2600<x<=3471                     0.0540          0.0632    0.0888**     0.0938**      0.0672    0.0760*
                                (0.0442)        (0.0467)   (0.0405)     (0.0399)    (0.0428)   (0.0425)
x>3471                          0.130**         0.143**    0.166***     0.176***    0.134***   0.150***
                                (0.0508)        (0.0558)   (0.0474)     (0.0479)    (0.0518)   (0.0530)
Refuse/DK                       0.190**         0.192**     0.179*       0.185*       0.167*     0.173*
                                (0.0869)        (0.0881)   (0.0998)     (0.0992)    (0.0908)   (0.0923)
Constant                        0.220**         0.200**     0.170*       0.155*      0.180**     0.163*
                                (0.0933)        (0.0985)   (0.0875)     (0.0867)    (0.0873)   (0.0864)

Observations                      1,532          1,532      1,532           1,532    1,532       1,532
R-squared                         0.104          0.123      0.002           0.051    0.054       0.089
F stat first stage                14.19          11.12      9.189           7.694    11.26       12.18
p-value Hansen overid test        0.551          0.335      0.670           0.576    0.606       0.840
p-value GMM C exogeneity
test                              0.111          0.332      0.0255          0.121    0.0480      0.171




                                                     54
A.6 Robustness checks

In order to establish the robustness of the latent class model and the results derived from it, we
conducted a series of robustness checks. We summarize the most important ones here. Detailed
results are available upon request.

Reduced set of financial literacy questions: We also ran the LCM based on the interest and
inflation questions only. The results are similar but less strong than the results based on all three
questions. Overall about 10-12% of the gender difference measured in those two questions is
explained by confidence. The reason for the smaller effect is that the interest and inflation
questions have fewer respondents who answer with "do not know" and, thus, the LCM adds
less information. In other words, the two questions are less influenced by confidence. In the
stock market participation regressions, the financial literacy coefficients based on the interest
and inflation questions are slightly smaller compared to our baseline results, but still highly
significant. The estimated coefficients in the GMM models are in the same order of magnitude
as before, however, the first stage F-statistic is low, indicating a weak instrument problem.

Extended set of financial literacy questions: In our survey, we have an additional financial
literacy question--on bond pricing--that is not normally used in the literature. 27 We reran the
model including this additional question and again our results overall are similar to our original
results. Confidence accounts for about 34-35% of the measured gender difference. Overall,
there is a slightly higher fraction of underconfident men and women because of the addition of
a comparably difficult question to the literacy measure. There is also a larger gender difference
in financial literacy when including this measure. The relationship with stock market
participation is qualitatively and quantitatively similar in the OLS regressions. The effects
become somewhat smaller in the GMM, but are still highly significant, and the first stage F-
stats are also high.

Interest in financial matters: One reason why women are less likely to answer the financial
literacy questions correctly and opt instead for a "do not know" response could be less interest
in financial matters. In our module, we asked "How would you rate your interest in financial
matters?" with responses given on a Likert scale from 1 (very little) to 7 (a lot). 28 We include
interest in financial matters among the control variables of the LCM (X variables). Thus, the
weighting function, i.e., the probit, includes interest in financial matters. The LCM shows that
financial interest is especially relevant for knowledge about interest compounding but less so
for the inflation and risk diversification questions. Our estimated financial literacy gender gap
is qualitatively unaffected by including this additional control variable. Around 35% of the
gender gap is explained by confidence. Underconfidence is also unaffected.

Financial respondents: In our data set, we know which respondents are the financially
responsible person in their household (financial respondent). We restricted our analysis to the
financial respondents only, which reduced our sample size from 1,532 to 1,266 observations.
Again the results do not change dramatically. However, we note that overall the gender
differences become stronger when we use the sample of financial respondents only.




27
   Stocks are normally riskier than bonds. True/False/DK/refuse to answer. This question is also included
in the extended financial literacy measure in Van Rooij et al. (2011).
28
   Women have a mean score of 4.06 and men of 4.69 on this scale, indicating a lower interest in financial
matters among women. The difference is highly significant.
                                                   55
