                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           STRATEGIC FRAGMENTED MARKETS

                                          Ana Babus
                                        Cecilia Parlatore

                                      Working Paper 28729
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28729


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Markus Baldauf, Darrell Duffie, Piotr Dworczak, Joel Hasbrouck, Ricardo Lagos, Ben
Lester, Guillermo Ordo\~{n}ez, Thomas Sargent, Laura Veldkamp, Venky Venkateswaran,
Xavier Vives, and Pierre-Olivier Weill for their comments, as well as seminar participants at the
Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, BI Norwegian Business School, the Board of Governors, FIRS,
LACEA, LAEF OTC Markets and Securities Workshop, the New York Federal Reserve Bank,
NYU Stern, University of Minnesota, UT Austin, SED, and WUSTL. Sung Kwan Lee, Botao
Wu, Josh Mohanty and Luke Min provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Ana Babus and Cecilia Parlatore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Strategic Fragmented Markets
Ana Babus and Cecilia Parlatore
NBER Working Paper No. 28729
April 2021
JEL No. D43,D47,G12

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the determinants of asset market fragmentation in a model with strategic investors that
disagree about the value of an asset. Investors' choices determine the market structure.
Fragmented markets are supported in equilibrium when disagreement between investors is low. In
this case, investors take the same side of the market and are willing to trade in smaller markets
with a higher price impact to face less competition when trading against a dealer. The maximum
degree of market fragmentation increases as investors' priors are more correlated. Dealers can
benefit from fragmentation, but investors are always better off in centralized markets.


Ana Babus
Washington University in St. Louis
One Brookings Dr.
St. Louis, MS 63130
anababus@gmail.com

Cecilia Parlatore
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
cps272@stern.nyu.edu
1        Introduction
The structure of financial markets is crucial in determining their efficiency and liquidity. A key aspect
of the market structure is the degree of fragmentation, interpreted as the number of venues in which an
asset is traded. Under this interpretation, most financial markets are fragmented. The conventional
example of fragmented markets are over-the-counter (OTC) markets, in which trading is typically
bilateral. However, fragmentation is also prevalent in equity markets. For instance, transactions at
the NYSE account only for 25 of the trading volume of its listed assets, with the remaining volume
being split over 12 other exchanges and 30 dark pools and other electronic platforms.1 In many
fragmented markets, participants have market power when they trade, and typically, a few large
dealers intermediate a large share of the trading volume. Recently, market fragmentation has sparked
the interest of regulators and has put the market structure at the center of recent regulatory discussions
and proposals. Still, a fundamental question remains unsettled. What are the determinants of market
fragmentation?
        To address this question, we develop a model that emphasizes the role of investors in determining
the market structure in which an asset is traded. The main insight from our analysis is that market
fragmentation arises when there is little disagreement among strategic investors.         In our model,
investors have market power and disagree about the value of an asset. The value for an investor
of trading in a particular market depends on the number of participants in that market and on the
disagreement among them. A larger market has a lower cost of trading, since investors face a lower
price impact. However, when disagreement is low, all investors trade on the same side of the market
against a dealer. In this case, a larger market also increases the competition for the liquidity provided
by the dealer. An investor has incentives to trade in a smaller market only when the benefit from a
larger share of the gains from trading with the dealer, i.e., when disagreement among investors is low,
dominates the increase in trading costs from having a higher price impact. In this case, investors'
choices to trade in smaller markets give rise to fragmented market structures.
        Our model has three dates and a finite number of strategic investors and dealers. Investors are
ex-ante homogeneous, but ex-post disagree about the value of an asset that is in zero-net supply. The
degree of disagreement in the market is captured by the correlation between investors' priors about the
value of the asset. Dealers are homogeneous and do not value the asset intrinsically. Before investors'
priors about the asset value are realized, investors choose a dealer with whom to trade and their choices
determine the market structure. After the market structure is decided, trade takes place sequentially.
First, each dealer and the investors that chose her trade in a local market. Second, dealers participate
in an interdealer market. We model both investors' and dealers' trading strategies as quantity-price
schedules. When each agent chooses her trading strategy, she understands the impact of her trade on
the price (taking all other agents' strategies as given). Each investor also understands that her choice
of dealer affects the market structure. Thus, investors act strategically both when markets form, as
well as when they trade.
        There are three main assumptions in our model: a) the heterogeneity in priors, b) the timing, and
    1
        See Rostek and Yoon (2020).



                                                      2
c) the trading protocol. First, a pervasive feature of financial markets is to have traders trading against
each other based on opposing views about the future value of an asset. Both academics and regulators
consider disagreement among investors to be an inherent attribute of financial market participants,
and frequently track disagreement to gauge the health of the financial system.2 However, our model
is also consistent with other interpretations of heterogeneity in investors' private valuations based on
liquidity needs, the use of the asset as collateral, or risk management constraints.
      Second, in our set-up investors choices determine a market structure. This is consistent with end-
users who prefer to trade through intermediaries in many asset markets, as argued by Spatt (2017).
For example, about 80% of U.S. investment-grade corporate bond trading is initiated by investors
who choose dealers from whom to request quotations (see Bessembinder, Spatt and Venkataraman
(2020)). Similarly, in swap execution facilities customers typically initiate requests for trade as Riggs
et al. (2018) document. Moreover, most dealer intermediated markets have a tiered structure as
documented in Afonso, Kovner and Schoar (2013) and Li and Schurhoff (2018). For instance, Collin-
Dufresne, Junge and Trolle (2018) and Duffie, Scheicher and Vuillemey (2015) find evidence that in
the CDS market dealers use interdealer markets to manage inventory risk after trading with clients.
In the corporate bond market, interdealer trades account for up to 70% of the total trading volume
(see Hollifield, Neklyudov and Spatt (2020)). More generally, as discussed in Bessembinder, Spatt and
Venkataraman (2020), many fixed-income securities are traded in two-tiered markets with interdealer
trades accounting for a significant amount of total volume. By assuming that trade takes place
sequentially, we can study the role of the interdealer market in determining the degree of market
fragmentation.
      Third, representing agents' strategies as quantity-price schedules allows us to capture common
elements of the increasingly diverse set of trading protocols that are used in practice in decentralized
markets. For instance, in the swap markets, customers interested in trade receive indicative quotes
from dealers. However, the final terms of trade adjust to reflect the quantity that the customer
wishes to trade. More importantly, a common characteristic of most decentralized markets is that
a relatively small number of dealers intermediate a vast proportion of transactions and that trading
outcomes reflect dealers' market power relative to other dealers as well as relative to investors (Rostek
and Yoon (2020)). By allowing agents to trade strategically in quantity-price schedules, our model
reflects these features.
      The main insight from our paper is that a fragmented market structure is an equilibrium when
disagreement among investors is low. When choosing to trade in a larger market, investors benefit
from a lower price impact but potentially have lower gains from trade with the dealer. The gains from
trading with a dealer in a larger market depend on the correlation between investors' priors. When
disagreement is low, investors take similar positions against the dealer. This increases the competition
among investors, which allows the dealer to exploit her position in the market better. In consequence,
the investors' gains from trading with the dealer decrease. The decrease in gains from trade with a
dealer in a larger market dominates any improvement in the price impact when investor priors are
sufficiently correlated. In this case, market fragmentation is sustained in equilibrium.
  2
      See Hong and Stein (2007) for a survey on the topic.



                                                             3
   Even though the investors' choices determine the market structure, the dealers' strategic behavior
in the interdealer market is crucial for supporting market fragmentation. We show this by studying
two limiting cases of our baseline model: the case of no interdealer market and the case in which
the interdealer market is perfectly competitive. To begin with, we show that fragmentation arises
in equilibrium even in the absence of an interdealer market when disagreement among investors is
low. In addition, we show that fragmentation unravels as the interdealer market becomes perfectly
competitive. These polar cases show that the dealers' strategic trading behavior is necessary for
market fragmentation to arise. Moreover, we study an extension of our model with dealer entry to
examine the maximum degree of fragmentation that can be supported in equilibrium, and find that
it is decreasing in the disagreement among investors.
   Moreover, we use our model to explore the implications of market fragmentation and disagreement
on liquidity and welfare. Our results are consistent with the intuition that assets that are traded
in fragmented markets have intrinsically low liquidity, as proxied a by a high correlation between
investors' priors. However, a fragmented market structure itself further contributes to lowering the
traded volume. Indeed, trading volume is lower in fragmented markets than in centralized ones keeping
the degree of disagreement among investors constant. We analyze investor and dealer welfare when
they trade in a fragmented market and compare it to the welfare they would attain if they were to
trade in a centralized market. We show that although dealers benefit from trading in a fragmented
market provided investors disagreement is high enough, investors are always better off trading in a
centralized market. Thus, trading in a fragmented market can be inefficient.
   Lastly, we extend our model to allow for learning from prices. The principal difference with the
main set-up is that dealers do not observe the aggregate market sentiment and can only infer it from
prices. We find that a fragmented market structure can still be supported in equilibrium. However,
learning from prices weakens investors' incentives to trade in fragmented markets. Although investors
face the same trade-off between a lower price impact in a larger local market versus lower expected
gains of trading with the dealer, the decrease in gains from trading with the dealer is lower when
dealers learn from prices. This implies that the increase in competition among investors is lower when
dealers have imperfect information and either a higher correlation in investor valuations or fewer active
dealers are needed to support a symmetric fragmented market structure.
   In practice, the mechanism we present in this paper interacts with other characteristics associated
with fragmented markets, such as asymmetric information, search frictions, or execution fees. However,
by focusing on investors' incentives, our approach brings a novel perspective that complements other
theories that seek to explain market fragmentation through the lens of trading services providers, such
as dealers, exchanges, and other trading platforms.

Literature Review

This paper relates to several strands of literature. The more relevant studies are those on endogenous
market structure and intermediation in decentralized markets.
   A series of papers have developed models where the market structure in which assets are traded
is endogenously determined. Most of these works emphasize the role of trading services providers,


                                                   4
focusing on transaction costs or fees charged by exchanges, or on the competition between venues as
potential explanations for market fragmentation. An early contribution is Pagano (1989) who studies
a set-up in which traders can choose to enter one of two exchanges in which the same asset is traded.
In Rust and Hall (2003) buyers and sellers choose between trading with a market maker at publicly
observable bid and ask prices, or with middlemen at privately observed quote prices. In both models,
traders concentrate in one market in the absence of fees or transaction costs.3 In contrast, in our
model markets fragmentation arises in equilibrium even when there are no fees or exogenous trading
costs.
      A related set of papers studies competition between venues.               In Pagnotta and Philippon
(2018) when two venues compete in the speed with which traders can find counterparties, markets
fragmentation arises. Competition also plays a role in segmenting markets in Lester, Rocheteau and
Weill (2015), as dealers compete to attract order flow by posting the terms at which they execute
trades.4 Baldauf and Mollner (2019), Cespa and Vives (2019), and Chao, Yao and Ye (2019) propose
models in which exchanges compete in the fees charged for trading services and evaluate the impact
of fragmentation on market quality. We abstract from competition between venues. Instead, in our
model investors choose a dealer with whom to trade based on the size of her local market, which is,
in turn, determined by the other investors' choices.
      The market structure has also been linked to informational asymmetries. For instance, in Zhu
(2014) exchanges attract informed traders who want a fast execution of their order, while uninformed
traders, who only have idiosyncratic liquidity needs, trade in dark pools. In contrast, in Kawakami
(2017) trading in multiple venues is optimal to avoid excessive information aggregation as revealed
risk cannot be traded away. Most recently, Lee and Wang (2018) propose a model in which informed
investors trade in exchanges and uninformed hedgers select themselves to trade in OTC markets as
dealers are able to attract them with targeted quotes. In our baseline model, there are no information
asymmetries, and market fragmentation is driven by the investors' disagreement about the asset value.
      Recently, Dugast, Weill and Uslu (2019) explore how heterogeneity in investors' types affects the
market structure in which trade occurs. Their model trades off risk sharing and earning intermediation
profits. When the latter force dominates, trade takes place in decentralized, over-the-counter markets.
In our paper, investors choosing to trade in a fragmented market trade off lower competition for the
liquidity in the market, as proxied by the gains from trade with a dealer, and a higher price of that
liquidity, as proxied by their price impact. When the former force dominates, trade takes place in
fragmented markets.
      Some recent papers explore the efficiency of trade in different market structures. In Malamud
and Rostek (2017) agents, who take into account their price impact, may benefit from trading in
interconnected venues relative to a centralized market. Similarly, in Manzano and Vives (forthcoming),
trading in segmented markets may be beneficial to privately-informed investors that trade strategically.
  3
      In Rust and Hall (2003) consumers and producers are indifferent between trading against a single middleman
(concentration), or against a middleman and the market maker (fragmentation) at the Walrasian price.
   4
     Although not directly concerned with studying market fragmentation, some other papers analyze models of
competition between venues. These studies include Biais (1993), Glosten (1994), Hendershott and Mendelson (2000),
Parlour and Seppi (2003), and Santos and Scheinkman (2001).


                                                        5
Duffie and Wang (2016) show that OTC markets can be efficient if agents write contingent bilateral
contracts. Glode and Opp (2020) illustrate that a market in which agents face costly trading delays
can be more efficient than a centralized market in which trade occurs without delays. In contrast
to our paper, these models take the market structure as given while we focus on endogeneizing the
market structure.
     There is a growing literature that studies the role of intermediaries in decentralized markets.
Hugonnier, Lester and Weill (2015), Neklyudov (2014), and Chang and Zhang (2016) propose models
in which intermediaries facilitate trade between counterparties that otherwise would need to wait a
long time to trade. Other papers explore the informational role of intermediaries. In Glode and Opp
(2016) the role of intermediaries is to restore efficient trading by reducing adverse selection, while in
Boyarchenko, Lucca and Veldkamp (2016) interdealer information sharing improves risk sharing and
welfare. Our model complements these works by highlighting the intermediaries' strategic trading
behavior as a key determinant of market fragmentation.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We present the model in Section 2. In Section 3,
we define and characterize the equilibrium of the model when markets are fragmented. In Section 4
we investigate the role of interdealer trading in determining the degree of market fragmentation. We
analyze the welfare and liquidity properties in fragmented markets relative to centralized markets in
Section 5. Section 6 extends the baseline model to allow for learning from prices. Finally, we conclude
in Section 7. All omitted proofs are in the Appendix.


2      The model
There are three dates, t = 0, 1, 2, and a finite number of agents that trade a risky asset in zero-net
supply. There are two types of agents, dealers and investors. There are nD  3 dealers indexed by
    = 1, ..., nD . We denote by ND the set of dealers. The utility of a dealer who holds x units of the
asset at time date 2 is given by
                                                        
                                            UD (x) = - x2 .
                                                         2
For tractability, we implicitly normalize the dealers' intrinsic value for the asset to zero.
     There are also nI = nS · nD investors indexed by i = 1, ..., nI , where nS is an integer and nS  3.
The set of investors is denoted by NI . An investor i derives utility

                                                    ¯ -    2
                                           UI (x) = x       x
                                                          2
from holding x units of the asset at time 2. ¯ represents the value of the asset for an investor, which is
random and is realized at date 2. The quadratic term in the utility functions for dealers and investors
can be interpreted as the cost of holding the asset.
   Investors disagree about the value of the asset. At date 1, investors have heterogeneous priors
about ¯ given by
                                            ¯ i N i ,  2
                                                       ¯ ,
                                                      

where


                                                    6
                        t=0                                t=1                                t=2


                Market Formation                  Priors are realized                interdealer market
                                                    Local market                             p2
                                                          p1


                                                  Figure 1: Timing



                                                      i =  + i ,
                              iid
with   N (0, 2 ),  i  N (0,  2 ), and    i . Investors' priors over the value of the asset have
                            
a common component , which can be interpreted as the market sentiment for the asset, and an
idiosyncratic component  i that governs the heterogeneity in beliefs. Both components of the investors'
valuations are realized at date 1. The market sentiment  is observed by all agents when it is realized,
while the idiosyncratic component  i is private information of investor i. Investors take their priors as
given and do not learn from the price since they observe .5 We adopt this information structure in the
baseline model to focus on the agents' strategic trading behavior as a driver of market fragmentation.
In Section 6 we extend our analysis to consider the case in which there is learning from prices.
       The degree of disagreement among investors is given by the dispersion in the idiosyncratic
component of priors, 2 . When  2 = 0, there is no disagreement and investors have common priors.
                              
When 2   disagreement is maximal. It is helpful to map the degree of disagreement among

investors to the correlation in their priors. In the remainder of the paper we will measure the extent
to which investors disagree about the value of the asset by 1 - , where

                                                             2
                                      Corr i , j =        2 + 2       i, j  Nl , i = j.
                                                               

When 2 = 0, the heterogeneity among investors vanishes and  = 1. When disagreement is maximal

2  , which implies  = 0.6

       Figure 1 illustrates the timing of the model. Before any heterogeneity among investors is realized,
the structure of the market is determined by the investors' choices. At date 0, each investor chooses
a dealer with whom to trade. An investor can choose at most one dealer. However, multiple investors
can choose the same dealer.7 Once investors make their dealer selection, markets open and trade
takes place in two rounds. At date 1, each dealer                trades with the investors that chose her at date
   5
       Heterogeneous beliefs are featured in a large literature following De Long et al. (1990) and Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003). Our formulation using heterogeneous priors is closest to Dávila and Parlatore (forthcoming).
   6
     The heterogeneity in investors' priors leads to heterogeneous perceived valuations which can also be attributed to
differences in liquidity needs, in the use of the asset as collateral, in risk management constraints. While these factors
may play a role in dealers valuation for an asset, we consider that heterogeneity across dealers is relatively less marked
than across investors.
   7
     Trade in many markets relies on relationships that are very concentrated. Hendershott et al. (2020) document that
an investor in the corporate bond market trades on average with six dealers over the course of more than a decade.


                                                            7
                                                       I          I
             I        I                        I                          I                           I       I
        I                     I                                                                 I                      I

                                           I           D         D            I
   I         D        D           I                                                        I         D       D             I



                                           I           D         D            I
   I         D        D           I                                                        I         D       D             I

                                               I                          I
        I                     I                        I          I                             I                      I
             I        I                                                                               I       I

       t=0: Market Formation                       t=1: Local Markets                          t=2: Interdealer Market


                                  Figure 2: Fragmented market structure


0, in a local market . At date 2, dealers trade in an interdealer market. There is a finite number
of participants in the local markets and in the interdealer market. Hence, all market participants act
strategically and take into account their price impact when making their trading decisions.
   The investors' choices at date 0 determine a market structure, m, in which each dealer                         interacts
with n  2 investors. When an investor i chooses a dealer , we say that i  m. We denote by NI ( )
the set of investors that choose dealer . A fragmented market structure exists when there are at
least three local markets each with n  2 investors. A fragmented market is symmetric when in each
local market     there is the same number of investors nS . We denote by mnS a symmetric fragmented
market. Figure 2 illustrates a symmetric fragmented market structure.
   Dealers and investors submit quantity-price schedules when trading, as in Kyle (1989) and Vives
(2011). Each investor i with a prior i submits a demand function X1
                                                                  i , which maps each price p in
                                                                                             1
the local market , into a quantity xi
                                    1 she wishes to trade

                                                    i
                                                   X1 p1 ; i = xi
                                                                1.                                                     (1)

   When trading in local market         at date 1, the demand function of a dealer                  who observes , is a
function Q1 which maps each price p1 in the local market              into a quantity q1 she wishes to trade

                                                   Q1 p1 ;  = q1 .                                                     (2)

At date 2, a dealer       who observed  and acquired q1 units of the asset in the local market submits
a demand function Q2 that maps each possible price in the interdealer market, p2 , into a quantity q2
she wishes to trade
                                               Q2 p2 ; , q1 = q2 .                                                     (3)

   Finally, given a market structure m, the expected payoff for an investor i at date 0, when the
demands submitted by the dealers and investors are X1
                                                    i, Q , Q
                                                        1   2                                  is
                                                                                   iNI , ND

                                                                              2
                    V1i (m) = E0 i X1
                                    i
                                      p1 ;  i -               i
                                                             X1 p1 ;  i              i
                                                                                  - X1 p1 ; i p1 ,                     (4)
                                                           2

                                                            8
where p1 is the price at which local market              clears, i.e., p1 is such that

                                   Q1 p1 ;  +                 i
                                                             X1 p1 ; i = 0,               ND .                                   (5)
                                                   iNI ( )

    Similarly, the expected payoff of a dealer               at date 0 is
                                                                     2
         V1 (m) = E0 -           Q1 p1 ;  + Q2 p2 ; , q1                 - Q2 p2 ; , q1 · p2 - Q1 p1 ;  · p1 ,                   (6)
                               2
where p2 is the price at which the interdealer market clears

                                                        Q2 p2 ; , q1 = 0.                                                        (7)
                                                   ND


3     Equilibrium
In this section, we define and characterize the equilibrium of the model. We start by computing the
equilibrium in the interdealer market at date 2 taking as given a market structure m and the dealers'
choices in their local markets at date 1. Then, we characterize the equilibrium in the local market
given a market structure m. Lastly, we look at the equilibrium conditions in the market formation
game which determines the equilibrium market structure, m. All omitted proofs are in the Appendix.

Definition 1. (Equilibrium) An equilibrium is a market structure m and demand functions
 Q1 , Q2          for dealers and X1
                                   i
                                           iNI     for investors such that given the pricing functions in Equation
             ND
(5) and Equation (7)

    1. Q2 solves each dealer 's problem in the interdealer market at date 2

                                                                              2
                                               max -        q + Q2                 - p2 Q2                                       (8)
                                                   Q2     2 1

      taking as given the other dealers' demand functions in the interdealer market Ql
                                                                                     2                                       ;
                                                                                                                   lND ,l=

    2. Q1 solves each dealer 's problem in her local market at date 1

                                                                          2
                             max E1 -     Q1 + Q2 p2 ; , Q1                   - p2 Q2 p2 ; , Q1          - p1 Q1                 (9)
                              Q1        2

      taking as given investors' demand function in local market                              i
                                                                                             X1   iNI ( ) ;

    3. X1
        i solves each investor i's problem in the local market at date 1


                                                                               2
                                              max i X1
                                                     i
                                                       -               i
                                                                      X1                 i
                                                                                   - p1 X1                                   (10)
                                                i
                                               X1                   2

      taking as given dealer 's and the other investors' demand functions in local market , Q1 and
         j
        X1                   , respectively; and
             j NI ( ),j =i




                                                                9
  4. no investor i in local market        benefits from deviating and joining a different local market
          = , for all ,      ND , i.e., the expected payoff an investor receives from deviating to the
      market structure (m - i + i ) is not larger than the expected payoff she obtains in the market
      structure m, for any      = ,

                               V1i m - i + i        V1i (m)   i  NI ( ) ,   ND .                         (11)

Our notion for the equilibrium market structure, described in condition 11 in Definition 1, is related
to the concept of pairwise stability introduced in Jackson and Wolinsky (1996). Since there is a
finite number of agents, all agents trade strategically and take into account their price impact when
submitting their demand. For the same reason, when an investor evaluates the benefit of leaving the
local market    and joining the local market       , she understands that trading outcomes in the market
structure m - i + i are different than in the market structure m. To keep our analysis tractable, we
restrict our attention to equilibria in which the market structure is symmetric and agents have linear
trading strategies. We discuss the existence of asymmetric market structures in equilibrium at the
end of this section.

3.1      Interdealer market

At date 2, after each dealer trades with the investors that chose her, the interdealer market opens. A
dealer    enters the interdealer market with an inventory q1 of the asset, which she acquired in local
market . In the interdealer market, dealers choose their trading strategies taking as given the other
dealers' demand functions, as well as the distribution of their inventories acquired at date 1.
   As it is usual in demand submission games, we simplify the optimization problem in Equation (8),
which is defined over a function space, to finding the functions Q2 p2 ; , q1 point-wise. To do this,
we fix the realization of the set of idiosyncratic shocks to priors  i    iNI .   This maps into a realization
of inventories q1           that dealers bring to the interdealer market. Then, we solve for the optimal
                       ND
quantity that dealer      demands in the interdealer market as she takes as given the demand functions
of the other dealers. This procedure allows us to derive the optimal demand function of dealer          point
by point. We follow this approach below.
   The first order condition for dealer     is
                                                           p2,-
                                       q1 + q2 + p 2 +          q = 0,                                   (12)
                                                           q2 2

where p2,- is the inverse residual demand of dealer        implied by

                                                  2 p2 ; , q1 + q2 = 0.
                                                 Ql         l

                                      lND ,l=


Since holding the asset has no intrinsic value for dealers, each dealer     chooses q2 to minimize her cost
of holding the asset, net of any cash transfers in the interdealer market. The first two terms on the
left-hand side of Equation (12) represent the direct costs of demanding an additional unit of the asset
in the interdealer market. The first term represents the marginal increase in the holding cost whereas


                                                      10
the second term is the cost of purchasing an additional unit of the asset. Since the interdealer market
is strategic, there is an additional, indirect cost of increasing the quantity demanded: the impact this
quantity has on the market clearing price. The third term in the first order condition for dealers
captures this indirect cost. The following proposition establishes the existence and uniqueness of the
equilibrium in the interdealer market.

Proposition 1. (Existence and Uniqueness) Given a market structure m and inventories
 q1          , there exists a unique symmetric equilibrium in linear strategies in the interdealer market.
        ND

      The equilibrium in the interdealer market is straightforward. The first order condition in Equation
(12) implies that the demand function of a dealer           is
                                                        1
                                    Q2 p2 ; , q1 = -        q1 + p2 ,                                   (13)
                                                        + 2
               p2,-
where 2        q2
                      is dealer 's price impact in the interdealer market. Market clearing in the interdealer
market implies that the equilibrium price p2 is given by
                                                                 l
                                                            lND q1
                                              p2 = -                 .                                  (14)
                                                             nD

From Equation (13) and Equation (14) it follows that the equilibrium quantity traded by dealer
when the dealers' inventories are q1
                                   l             is
                                           lND

                                                              l
                                                         lND q1
                                       q2 =                          - q1 .                             (15)
                                               + 2          nD

      A dealer trades in the interdealer market to off-load some of her inventory as she faces quadratic
holding costs. The interdealer market allows dealers to smooth idiosyncratic shocks they face in local
markets. The term between parenthesis in Equation (15) captures the gains from trading in the
interdealer market for an individual dealer. The larger the difference between the average inventory
in the market and an individual dealer's inventory, the larger the amount the individual dealer will
trade. If all dealers hold the same amount of inventory at the beginning of date 2, there are no gains
from trading in the interdealer market.
      However, even when there is scope for off-loading inventories, a dealer restricts her trade because
she has an impact on the price. As the first term in Equation (15) shows, a larger price impact 2
makes dealers less willing to trade. The price impact captures how strategic the interdealer market
is and it depends on the market structure only through the number of dealers participating in the
market. The larger the number of dealers in the interdealer market, the less strategic (the deeper) the
interdealer market is, and the lower the price impact of each dealer. Therefore, for a given level of
heterogeneity in inventories, dealers will trade more in deeper markets. As nD  , and the market
becomes perfectly competitive, all dealers hold the same amount of the asset at the end of period 2
irrespective of their inventory choice at date 1. In this case, dealers can share the idiosyncratic shocks
they face in the local markets perfectly.



                                                       11
3.2   Local markets

At date 1, after each investor chooses a dealer with whom to trade and all idiosyncratic priors are
realized, strategic local (investor-dealer) markets open. Each market              is comprised of dealer   and
the n investors who chose to trade with her. Each of these market participants chooses her demand
optimally taking the other participants' demands as given. As in the interdealer market, we solve
for the demand functions that solve the optimization problems in Equation (10) for investors and
Equation (9) for dealers point-wise.
   Investors. The first order condition for an investor i in local market                is
                                                             p1,-i i
                                       i - p1 - xi
                                                 1-               x1 = 0,                                   (16)
                                                             xi 1

where p1,-i is the inverse residual demand function for investor i implied by

                                            j
                                           X1 p1,-i ; j + xi
                                                           1 + Q1 p1,-i ;  = 0.
                           j NI ( ),j =i

   Each investor i demands a quantity xi
                                       1 so that her marginal utility equalizes her marginal cost of
trading. The first term in Equation (16) is the marginal benefit of increasing the final asset holdings
for an investor i, which is given by her prior i . The following three terms in Equation (16) represent
investor i s marginal cost of increasing her demand. The second and third terms represent the price
the investor pays to acquire an additional unit of the asset and the marginal increase in her holding
costs, respectively. The last term is investor i's price impact, which captures the cost of trading in a
strategic market.
   Dealer. The first order condition for dealer          in the local market is

                                       dV2 q1                p1,-
                                                    - p1 -           q1 = 0,                                (17)
                                            dq1               q1

where V2 q1 represents the payoff that dealer           expects to receive in the interdealer market given by

                                                                 2
                    V2 q1 = E1 -        Q2 p2 ; , q1 + q1            - p2 Q2 p2 ; , q1    , q1 ,
                                      2

where p2 is the equilibrium price and q2 is the equilibrium quantity traded by dealer in the interdealer
market.
   Since all agents are strategic, each dealer       takes into account the effect of her trade on the inverse
residual demand function, p1,- , in her local market which is implied by

                                                   j
                                                  X1 p1,- , i + q1 = 0.
                                       j NI ( )


   Analogous to the investor's problem, dealer          will demand a quantity q1 to equalize the marginal
benefit and the marginal cost associated with increasing the quantity demanded. Dealers do not
attach any intrinsic value to the asset. However, since dealers can access both the local and interdealer
markets, they can benefit from the price differences across both markets. The first term in Equation

                                                        12
(17) is the expected marginal benefit of increasing the quantity that the dealer acquires in the local
market, which is given by the dealer's expected value of increasing her inventory in the interdealer
market. The second term captures the pecuniary cost of increasing q1 by one unit and the third term
captures the cost of trading in strategic markets, measured by the dealer's price impact. The next
proposition establishes the existence and uniqueness of the equilibrium in the local markets.

Proposition 2. (Existence and uniqueness) Given a market structure m, there exists a unique
symmetric equilibrium in linear strategies at date 1.

   To compute the equilibrium at date 1, we derive the equilibrium trading strategies of the investors
and the dealer in each local market . The first-order condition in Equation (16) implies that the
demand function of an investor i in local market                     is
                                                                           i - p1
                                                    i
                                                   X1 p1 ; i =                    ,                                 (18)
                                                                           + 1
            p1,-i
where 1     xi
                      is investor i's price impact in local market . Similarly, the first-order condition for
               1
dealer   in her local market in Equation (17) implies that the demand function of the dealer                   is
                                                                                        
                                                              1      dV2 q1
                                      Q1 p1 ;  =                                  - p1  ,                           (19)
                                                              1           dq1

            p1,-
where 1     q1        represents dealer 's price impact in her local market. The quantity that an agent
trades in a local market is proportional to her perceived marginal gain of holding the asset, which
is given by the difference between her expected marginal valuation for the asset at date 1 and the
price of the asset in the local market. An investor's marginal valuation is simply her prior i , while a
dealer's marginal valuation for the asset is given by her expected payoff from bringing an additional
                                                         dV2
unit of the asset to the interdealer market,             dq1
                                                               . As in the interdealer market, the price impact in the
local market restricts the amount traded by dealers and investors. The following lemma characterizes
the investors' and dealer's equilibrium price impact in the local market.

Lemma 1. (Equilibrium price impacts) In each local market , the investors' and the dealer's
equilibrium price impact satisfy the following system of equations

                                                     1                                        + 1
                             1 =                                                and    1 =        ,                 (20)
                                   n -1
                                          +
                                                          +2                                  n
                                    +1         (          )    2
                                                   2 +1 +1 2 + n
                                                                D

              
where 2 =   nD -2 .   Moreover, the price impacts satisfy the following properties

                             1                 1                     1                           1
                        a)     < 0,       b)     < 0,           c)      < 0,          and   d)      < 0.
                             n                 n                     nD                          nD
   Lemma 1 shows that investors and dealers trade more aggressively when local markets are larger,
and when the interdealer market is less strategic (i.e., deeper). As it is usual in models of strategic
trading, the larger the number of investors in the local market, the lower the price impact of a market
participant and the more investors and dealers react to the price. When the interdealer market is less

                                                                 13
strategic, it is less costly for the dealer to unload her inventory at date 2, which makes the dealer
trade more aggressively in her local market. In turn, the dealer's lower sensitivity to the price implies
that investors face a flatter inverse residual demand and have a lower price impact.
   Using Equation (20) in Lemma 1 and the definition of 2 , it can be seen that the price impact
in local market    for the investors, 1 , and for the dealer, 1 , depend on the market structure m
only through the number of dealers participating in the interdealer market, nD , and the number of
investors in the local market , n , but not through the number of investors in other local markets.
   The demands of investors and dealers depend on the structure of the market in different ways. The
investors' equilibrium demand functions depend on the market structure m only through an investor's
price impact 1 , as can be seen from Equation (18). The dealer's equilibrium demand function in her
local market in Equation (19) depends on the market structure through her price impact 1 , as well
as through the dealer's valuation for the asset in her local market, as given by the marginal value of
                                                                 dV2
bringing an additional unit to the interdealer market            dq1
                                                                       . The dealer's price impact determines the
slope of the dealer's inverse demand while her valuation for the asset determines its intercept.
   The dealer's valuation for the asset in her local market depends on the market structure through
her price impact in the local market and through the equilibrium in the interdealer market. More
specifically, the dealer's marginal valuation of the asset depends on the gains from trade she expects
to attain in the interdealer market, which depend on number of dealers and on the distribution of
investors across local markets. Differentiating V2 , using Equation (12) and substituting in dealer 's
demand function in the local market in Equation (19), as well the price in the local market in Equation
(25), we obtain that the dealer's expected marginal valuation for the asset at date 1 is given by

                       dV2 q1                           i
                                             iNI ( )                      
                                   =w                       + 1-w             E p2 | , p1 ,                  (21)
                         dq1                   n                          + 2

where the weight w is given by
                                                        2
                                           w =                    .
                                                    21 + 2 + 21 2
   As one can see from Equation (21), dealer 's marginal valuation of the asset has two components.
                                   i
The first component,     iNI ( )
                           n
                                       , represents the benefit from trading with the investors in her local
                                              
market, while the second component,           +2
                                                 E   p2 | , p1 , is the benefit from trading in the interdealer
market. The weight the dealer attaches to these two components depends on her price impacts in
the local and interdealer markets. When the dealer's price impact in the local market 1 increases,
the dealer weighs the gains from trade in the local market less in her marginal valuation of the asset,
i.e., w decreases. Analogously, when the dealer's price impact in the interdealer market 2 increases,
the dealer weighs the gains from trade in the interdealer market less in her marginal valuation of the
asset, i.e., w increases. If trading in the interdealer market is perfectly competitive and 2 = 0, the
dealer only cares about her trades in the interdealer market and w = 0.
   The expected price at date 2 is determined by the extent of the opportunities to re-trade among
dealers in the interdealer market, which depends on the market structure. More specifically, dealer




                                                            14
expects the price in the interdealer market to be
                                                                               
                                               
                            E p2 | , q1   =-    q1 +                       l
                                                                        E q1  .                          (22)
                                             nD      lN         D ,l=


The expected price in Equation (22) depends on dealer 's trade in her local market and on all the
other dealers' expected trades in their local markets, which, in turn, depend on the conditions in their
local markets. Therefore, the market structure affects dealer 's valuation for the asset beyond the
conditions in local market .
   All the equilibrium outcomes at dates 1 and 2 are conditional on the market structure m. Similarly,
the payoffs of investors and dealers depend on the correlation among investors' priors, . So far, we
have omitted the dependence on these objects to simplify the notation. In the next section, we make
this dependence explicit at times to highlight the trade-offs faced by investors when choosing a dealer
with whom to trade.

3.3   Market Formation

At date 0, before any uncertainty is realized, each investor i chooses a dealer with whom to trade.
Since each investor i takes the other investors' choices as given, from investor i's perspective, choosing
a dealer with whom to trade is the same as choosing between two market structures.
   The expected utility of an investor of participating in a local market with n investors when the
market structure is m is given by
                                                          
                                                 2            + 1                        2
                   V1i (m) =     + 1 E      xi       =    2
                                                                     2E   i - p1 (m, )       ,           (23)
                               2             1
                                                           + 1

where 1 and p1 (m, ) are, respectively, the price impact and the equilibrium price in local market
when the aggregate component of the priors is  and the market structure is m.
   For a symmetric fragmented market to be an equilibrium, it must be the case that no investor
wants to deviate from her local market to a larger one. Formally, a symmetric fragmented market
structure mnS can be supported in equilibrium if

           i (; nD )  V1i (mnS ) - V1i mnS - i + i            > 0,      i  NI ,  = ,  ,           ND ,   (24)

where i (; nD ) represents the marginal benefit for investor i of participating in symmetric market
structure, mnS , relative to participating in market structure (mnS - i + i ), when the correlation
across investor priors is  and when there are nD dealers. When choosing a dealer, an investor weighs
the benefit of trading in a local market    against one dealer and other nS - 1 investors, against the
benefit of trading in a local market      against one dealer and other nS investors, while taking into
account the effect of each market structure on the equilibrium in the interdealer market and on the
dealers' behavior in the local markets.
   Equation (23) shows that there are two ways through which the market structure m affects the
investors' expected utility. First, the number of investors in the local market determines the price
impact she will face in her local market (see Lemma 1). Second, the price at which an investor expects

                                                     15
to trade in the local market depends on the whole market structure. To see this, note that substituting
the investors' and dealer's demand functions, respectively in Equation (18) and Equation (19), into
the market clearing condition in Equation (5), and using the expression for the dealer's price impact
in Equation (20), the price in the local market can be written as
                       n                                    1
                                                                                                                                  
                                                j                     dV2 q1 , m                            j       dV2 q1 , m
                       +1           j NI ( )                1                           1       j NI ( ) 
 p1 (m, ) =                                         +                                  =                        +                  . (25)
                   n
                        +   1         n                  n
                                                              +   1           dq1       2         n                     dq1
                   +1       1                            +1       1

Equation (25) shows that the equilibrium price in the local market is a weighted average of each market
participant's marginal valuation, where each weight is given by the relative slopes of an agent's demand
function and the aggregate demand. Everything else equal, when the price impact of an agent increases,
her demand becomes less responsive to the price. In consequence, the agent's marginal valuation puts
less weight on the equilibrium price. Using Lemma 1 one can see that the dealer's demand is as
elastic as the aggregate demand of investors and, hence the equilibrium price in the local market is an
                                                                         j                                                    dV2
average of the investors' average priors,                     j NI ( )
                                                                  n
                                                                             , and the dealer's valuation of the asset,       dq1
                                                                                                                                    . From
the characterization of the equilibrium in the local market, we know that a dealer's valuation for the
asset at date 1 depends on the equilibrium in the interdealer market, which in turn depends on the
distribution of investors across dealers.
   Using the expression for the equilibrium price in the local market in Equation (25) in Equation
(23) we have that the expected utility of an investors of participating in a local market                                        when the
market structure is m can be written as
                                                                                                              2 
                                
                                    + 1    1                          j NI ( )   j        1  i dV2     q1 , m
              V1i (m) =         2
                                        2E                  i -                       +      -                  .                     (26)
                                 + 1                    2                n                2        dq1

   The first term in the investor's expected utility captures the cost of trading in a strategic market.
Intuitively, everything else equal, an investor's expected utility is higher when her price impact in the
local market, 1 , is lower. The second term in Equation (26) captures the expected gains from trade
in the local market for an investors i. The expected gains from trade have two components. The term
                  j
i -    j NI ( )
         n
                      captures the gains that the investor obtains from trading with other investors in her
                                                    dV2 (m)
local market, while the term i -                      dq1
                                                              captures the gains that the investor obtains from trading
with the dealer.
   The gains from trading with other investors are increasing in the size of the local market. However,
the gains from trading with the dealer may decrease with the size of the market. As we have explained
in Section 3.2, a lower price impact in the local market tilts the dealer's marginal valuation for the
asset towards the average investor prior. Everything else equal, this effect decreases the investor's
gains from trading with the dealer. At the same time, in a larger market the average prior of the
investors is closer to the common component of the priors which increases the gains from trading with
the dealer. Hence, there may be a trade off between lower price impacts and higher gains from trade
with investors, and lower gains from trade with the dealer that determines an investor's incentives to
deviate from a market structure m. The following theorem states when symmetric market structures
may arise in equilibrium.

                                                                         16
Theorem 1. (Market fragmentation) There exists a threshold nD > 3 such that for all nD  nD
there exists a threshold  (nD )  1 such that a symmetric fragmented structure with nI = nD nS
investors and nD dealers can be supported in equilibrium if and only if    (nD ).

    Theorem 1 shows that when the interdealer market is sufficiently strategic and investor priors are
sufficiently positively correlated, a fragmented market structure is an equilibrium and no individual
investor has incentives to deviate to a larger local market. When choosing to trade in a larger market,
the investor benefits from a lower price impact and higher gains from trade with the other investors
at the cost of receiving a lower share of the gains from trade with the dealer.
    The change in the gains from trading with the dealer in a larger market is easiest to understand
in the limiting case in which investors have common priors and   1. In this case, an additional
investor in the local market will trade the exact same amount as the other investors. While this does
not affect the average prior in the local market, it decreases the gains from trading with a dealer.
This is because a dealer's price impact will be lower in a larger local market which will shift the
dealer's marginal valuation closer to . Put differently, the competition among investors increases,
which allows the dealer to better exploit her position in the market. Hence, even though a dealer's
lower price impact increases the amount she trades, the increase is less than proportional to the size
of the market.
    As  departs from 1 and investors disagree about the value of the asset, the loss in gains from
trading with a dealer in a larger local market decreases. However, this loss in gains from trade still
outweighs the benefit from having a smaller price impact and higher gains from trading with more
investors, as long as the correlation in investors' priors is high enough, i.e.  >  . In this case,
deviating from a fragmented symmetric market structure is not profitable for any investor.
Remark. (Asymmetric market structures) Although the trading equilibrium in the interdealer
and the local markets were derived for an arbitrary market structure, the main result in Theorem 1
characterizes the existence of symmetric market structures. However, there are also equilibria in the
class of asymmetric market structures. That is, market structure in which at least one local market
is larger than the other local markets. For example, a market structure in which there are nD = 3
dealers, two local markets each with 6 investors and a third local market with 16 investors can be
sustained in equilibrium for   (0.895, 0.897), when  = 1 and  = 1. This example suggests that
while local markets with different number of participants can co-exist, these equilibria may not be as
robust as symmetric markets structures absent of other forces. The heterogeneity in dealers' customer
base in various OTC markets could be explained by other factors, such as reputation, that are beyond
the scope of our paper.


4    Interdealer trading and market fragmentation
The strategic behavior of dealers plays a crucial role in determining the equilibrium market structure.
As we mentioned in the introduction, most dealer intermediated markets have a tiered structure.
However, the number of participants in the interdealer markets varies, and so does their capacity
to move prices. For instance, in the Treasury market there are only 23 dealers (see Afonso, Kovner

                                                  17
and Schoar (2013)), while in the muni bond market there are 10 to 30 core dealers and up to 2000
periphery dealers (see Li and Schurhoff (2018)). In this section we examine the role of the interdealer
market for market fragmentation. We start by analyzing two polar cases: the case of a perfectly
competitive interdealer market, and the case of no interdealer market. As we explain below, the first
case is equivalent to taking the limit of dealer 's price impact in the interdealer market 2                          0 in
our main model, while the second case is equivalent to taking the limit of dealer 's price impact in
the interdealer market 2           . We end this section by extending the model to allow for free-entry of
dealers.

4.1      Perfectly competitive market

In our framework the interdealer market becomes perfectly competitive when the number of dealers
grows large, i.e., when nD  . The following proposition shows the effect of interdealer trading on
the equilibrium market structure in this limit.

Proposition 3. (Competitive interdealer market) No fragmented symmetric market structure
can be supported in equilibrium as nD  .

      Proposition 3 shows that dealers strategic trading behavior is a key determinant of market
fragmentation. Indeed, as nD   and the interdealer market becomes perfectly competitive, the
price impact of each dealer in the interdealer market goes to 0. This implies that the marginal cost of
unloading inventories in the interdealer market is independent of the size of the inventories. Therefore,
it becomes cheaper for dealers to trade an additional unit and dealers are willing to trade more in
larger local markets. Joining a larger local market becomes desirable for an investor, as she benefits
from a lower price impact and higher gains from trade with other investors without facing lower gains
from trade with the dealer. Formally, we have that limnD  i (; nD ) < 0 for all .

4.2      No interdealer market

The other limiting case is when there is no interdealer market. The set-up is identical to the one
described in Section 2, except that dealers do not have any opportunity to trade at date t = 2. Thus,
at t = 0 investors choose a dealer with whom to trade, and at t = 1 each dealer trades with the
investors that chose her in a local market. Even though they do not value the asset intrinsically,
dealers are willing to trade with investors provided the price is favorable to them. In particular, each
dealer     chooses a demand function, Q1 p1 ;  , to maximize her objective function8
                                                                  2
                                       max -     Q1 p1 ;              - p1 Q1 p1 ;  ,
                                        Q1     2

taking into account the effect of her trade on the inverse residual demand function, p1,- , in her local
market which is implied by
                                                       j
                                                      X1 p1,- ; ,  i + q1 = 0.
                                           j NI ( )
  8
      Since the case of no interdealer market is a special case of the general model, and to avoid burdening the reader, we
keep the same notation as above.


                                                             18
The first-order condition for dealer      implies that her optimal demand function is

                                                                 p1
                                              Q1 p1 ;  = -           ,                                     (27)
                                                                 + 1
               p1,-
where 1 =      q1
                       represents her price impact in local market . The investors' optimization problem
is the same as described in Section 3.2. That is, the optimal demand of an investor i in local market
 is given by
                                                                 i - p1
                                               i
                                              X1 p1 ; i =               ,
                                                                 + 1
               p1,-i
where 1 =      xi
                       is investor i's price impact in the local market. As before, the price impact of the
                  1
dealer and of the investors in the local market              are equilibrium objects. In equilibrium, the price
impacts are given by
                                                     
                                                 1 = 1 = .                                     (28)
                                                  n -1
   The model without an interdealer market is equivalent to taking the limit of the model presented
in Section 2 when the price impact in the interdealer market goes to infinity, i.e., 2   for all
  ND . In this case, since dealers no longer access an interdealer market, the marginal value of the
asset for each dealer       is simply the expected marginal benefit of increasing the quantity that the
dealer acquires in the local market and is given by

                                                                             i
                                            dV2                   iNI ( ) 
                                           lim  =w
                                         2  dq1                       n
                                              dV2
where w  lim               w =          and         is given by Equation 21. The investor i's value function
                      2           +21         dq1
given by Equation (26) becomes
                                                                                                       
                                                                  j                            j   2
                               + 1
                               1 i                    j NI ( )          1 i        j NI ( ) 
            V1i (m) =      2
                           2E     -                                   +    -w                          .
                               2                                        2
                              
                       + 1                               n                            n

   The market formation stage is just as in the setup with the interdealer market, described in Section
3.3. That is, an investor in a symmetric market structure, mnS , weighs the benefit of trading in a
local market     against one dealer and other (nS - 1) investors, against the benefit of trading in a local
market    against one dealer and other nS investors. We obtain the following result.

Proposition 4. (No interdealer market) There exists a threshold ^ (nS )  [0, 1) such that for all
^ (nS ) a fragmented symmetric market structure with nD dealers and nI = nS nD investors is an

equilibrium.

   Proposition 4 shows that fragmentation can be supported in equilibrium even in the absence of an
interdealer market. When dealers do not have access to an interdealer market, the dealer's willingness
to intermediate in each local market is limited. Access to an interdealer market provides a dealer the
opportunity to re-trade, which increases her willingness to intermediate. Thus, the presence of the
interdealer market weakens the incentives of investors to trade in fragmented markets as it makes the



                                                         19
dealer's demand more elastic to the size of their local market and decreases the competition among
investors for the dealer's liquidity.
   While an interdealer market is not necessary to support market fragmentation in equilibrium, the
role of dealers' strategic trading behavior can only be examined if we allow dealers to intermediate
through the interdealer market. The results above imply that allowing dealers to intermediate acts
as a force against market fragmentation, while both dealers' and investors' market power represent a
force that supports market fragmentation.
Remark. (Asymmetric market structures with no interdealer market) As in the model with
an interdealer market, asymmetric market structures may arise in equilibrium. When there is no
interdealer market, local markets of different sizes can coexist in equilibrium as long as all markets
remain strategic. In this case, a market structure in which there are nD = 3 dealers, two local markets
each with 6 investors and a third local market with 16 investors can be sustained in equilibrium for
  (0.881, 0.886), when  = 1 and  = 1. These asymmetric market structures are consistent with
equity markets, in which alternative trading systems and exchanges with large players coexist (see
Frazzini, Israel and Moskowitz (2018)).

4.3   Dealer entry and the degree of market fragmentation

A key determinant of market fragmentation is dealers' strategic behavior. Outside of the two polar
cases presented above (competitive interdealer market and no interdealer market) the degree of
fragmentation depends on the number of dealers nD that provide intermediation services. To provide
insights about the degree of fragmentation that prevails, we extend our model to allow for dealer entry.
   More specifically, we consider a large number of dealers n that can enter the market.                 Let
e  {0, 1} be an indicator function that takes the value 1 if dealer              enters the market. Denote
by e =    e1 , e2 , . . . , en   the vector of ex-post entry decisions. For a given vector of entry decisions
e, let N D =        |e = 1       be the set of dealers that decided to enter. After dealers make their entry
decision, the game is identical to the one described in Section 2. At t = -1 dealers make their entry
choice, at t = 0 investors choose a dealer with whom to trade, at t = 1 each dealer trades with the
investors that chose her and at t = 2 all dealers that provided intermediation services at t = 1 trade
in the inter-dealer market. The market structure is determined by the dealers' decision at t = -1
and by the investors' decisions at t = 0. While investors' choices determine whether fragmentation is
an equilibrium, as we discuss in Section 3.3, the dealers' choices to enter the market determine the
maximum degree of market fragmentation.
   At date -1, a dealer that enters expects to receive a payoff that depends on the market structure
that is formed at date 0. We assume that dealers with no investors in their local market at date 1
are not allowed to participate in the interdealer market. This is in line with the main role of the
interdealer market that stands to provides intermediation services between investors in local markets.
Thus the payoff of a dealer           that enters and has n investors in the market structure m at date 0, is
given by Eq. 6, while a payoff of a dealer that enters and has no investors obtains a payoff of 0.
   Dealers have rational expectations and understand that investors make optimal choices at date 0.


                                                         20
This implies that dealers understand that their payoff upon entry will depend on the market structure
that arises in equilibrium at date 0. However, there are two challenges. First, when there are a finite
number of investors and a finite number of dealers, a strictly symmetric market structure, one in which
all dealers have the same number of investors, does not always exist. To address the non-divisibility
of investors we will focus on market structures in which the dispersion in the distribution of investors
across dealers is minimized. We refer to these market structures as generalized symmetric.

Definition 2. A generalized symmetric market structure, mG , with nI investors and all nD active
                                                                                    -
dealers in the set ND  N D is a market structure in which all x dealers in the set ND  ND have
                                                           -
    nI
    nD   investors and all nD - x dealers in the set ND \ ND have       nI
                                                                        nD   + 1, where

                                                     nI
                                          x = nD        + 1 - nI .
                                                     nD

Under the generalized symmetric market structure mG the remaining N D \ ND dealers are not chosen
by any investors and remain inactive.

     Second, as Theorem 1 shows, there can be multiple symmetric market structures supported in
equilibrium given a dispersion in investors beliefs  (the number and identity of active dealers is not
uniquely determined). The dealers' payoffs from entering depend on the equilibrium that will be
played in the market formation game at date 0. Therefore, the dealers' decisions to enter depends on
the likelihood of each equilibrium being played. To simplify the analysis, we will assume that there
is a random variable E N D , on which investors coordinate their beliefs about the other investors'
choices (sunspot), that determines the equilibrium generalized symmetric market structure that will
be played at date 0 when the set of dealers N D chooses to enter. To be more specific, each realization
of E N D determines which dealers will be active and the size of their local markets in the market
formation game.
     Thus, at date t = -1, a dealer's expected utility of entering the market is

                                      V D,   N D = EE (ND ) V1 (mG ) ,                                     (29)

where the expectation EE (N D ) is taken over the realization of E N D .

Definition 3. An equilibrium of the dealer entry game is a random variable E N D that determines
the probability with which each equilibrium generalized symmetric market structure is played at date
0 and a vector of entry decisions for dealers, e, such that a dealer      chooses to enter if V D,   ND  0
.

     If dealer entry is free, it is straightforward that all dealers decide to enter as their expected payoff in
Equation (29) is (weakly) positive. Therefore, it follows that any (generalized) symmetric fragmented
market structure that can be supported in equilibrium can also be sustained with free entry provided
the number of dealers that can enter, N , is sufficiently large relative to the number of investors. Figure
3 illustrates the maximum degree of fragmentation as a function of the correlation between investors'
valuations. As the figure shows, the maximum degree of fragmentation increases the more correlated

                                                       21
                           35



                           30



                           25

                       D

                           20
                      n




                           15



                           10



                           5
                                0.94      0.95      0.96        0.97    0.98   0.99
                                                            


Note: Figure 3 shows the maximum number of active dealers in a generalized symmetric market structure as a function
                                                                   2
of the correlation in investor's priors, , for nI = 100,  = 1, and   = 1.

                                 Figure 3: Maximum degree of fragmentation


investors' valuations are. The higher the correlation between investors' valuations, the more attractive
it is for investors to trade in small local markets. Thus, a market structure with many small local
markets can be supported in equilibrium if  is high enough.
    If dealers cost of entry is r > 0 , a dealer will choose to enter if

                                                  V D,     N D  r.

In this case, if the entry cost for dealers is high enough, the maximum degree of fragmentation in
Figure 3 may not be sustained in equilibrium.


5     Liquidity and welfare in fragmented markets
In this section we analyze the welfare and liquidity properties of the equilibrium when markets
are fragmented and contrast it with finding in the empirical literature. To provide a meaningful
characterization, we start by studying the most natural benchmark of a centralized market before
analyzing the liquidity and welfare in fragmented markets. For all the numerical illustrations in this
section, we consider the case with nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1, and 2 = 1.



5.1    Centralized market

A useful benchmark to study the implications of market fragmentation is a centralized market. We
consider that in a centralized market structure, mc , trade takes place between all investors and dealers

                                                           22
only at date 1. Just as in the case of fragmented markets, the agents' trading strategies in a centralized
market are represented by price-quantity schedules. The results in this section are standard, and we
present them for completeness.
   The strategy of an agent is a map from her information set to the space of demand functions,
as follows. The demand function of an investor i with prior i is a continuous function Xc
                                                                                        i : R  R,

which maps the price pc
                      1 that prevails in the centralized market into a quantity xc she wishes to trade.
                                                                                 i

Similarly, the demand function of dealer         who observes the common component  is a continuous
function Qc : R  R, which maps the price pc , into a quantity qc she wishes to trade. The expected
payoff for an investor i at date 0, corresponding to the strategy profile Xc
                                                                           i, Q
                                                                               c                             is
                                                                                                  iNI , ND

                                                                            2
                        Vci (mc ) = E0 i Xc
                                          i
                                            pc ;  i -      i
                                                          Xc pc ;  i                  i
                                                                                - pc Xc pc ;  i
                                                        2
while the expected payoff of a dealer       at date 0 is
                                                                  2
                               Vc (mc ) = E0 -     Qc (pc ; )         - pc Qc (pc ; ) ,
                                                 2
where each pc is the price at which the market clears, and it is given by

                                           i
                                          Xc pc ; i +           Qc (pc ; ) = 0.
                                    iNI                    ND

   In a centralized market, all of the nI + nD market participants solve the same problem as the one
solved by an investor in a fragmented market structure. It is straightforward to show that there is
a unique equilibrium at date 1 in a centralized market structure. In this equilibrium, the demand
function for an investor i is given by

                                                             i - pc
                                             i
                                            Xc pc ; i =             ,                                             (30)
                                                              + i c

               pc,-i
where i
      c =      xi
                       is the price impact of an investors in the centralized market. The demand function
                  c
for a dealer    is given by
                                                              pc
                                            Qc (pc ; ) = -        ,                                               (31)
                                                              + c
               pc,-
where c =      qc
                       is the price impact of a dealer in the centralized market. In equilibrium, the price
impacts are given by
                                                             
                                           c = c =
                                           i                        ,
                                                        nI + nD - 2
and the price is
                                                         j NI j
                                               pc =             .                                                 (32)
                                                        nI + nD
   As in the interdealer market, the equilibrium price in Equation (32) in the centralized market is
equal to the average priors of the market's participants. Putting together Equation (30) and Equation
(32) we can see that a market participant h will hold a larger position the larger the difference between
her prior h and the average prior in the market, where h = 0 for dealers. The detailed derivations
are presented in the Appendix.


                                                        23
5.2    Liquidity

As we discussed in the sections above, disagreement among investors is a key determinant of market
fragmentation in our model. Implicitly, disagreement also influences the liquidity in the local and
interdealer markets. Empirically, disagreement and volume are tightly related. For example, it
has been well established that trading volume and disagreement are correlated in equity markets
(see Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002) and Garfinkel (2009)). More recently, the relationship
between volume and disagreement has also been documented in over-the-counter markets.              For
instance, Oehmke and Zawadowski (2017) find that disagreement is a strong determinant of trading
volume in the CDS market. Similarly, Carlin, Longstaff and Matoba (2014) document that increased
disagreement is associated with larger trading volume in the mortgage-backed security market.
   In this section, we study the implications of our model for market liquidity. We start by looking at
the liquidity of the interdealer market, which measures the amount of intermediation in the economy,
and then focus on the liquidity of date 1 markets both in fragmented and centralized markets.
Consistent with the empirical findings described above, in our model, volume in the interdealer and
local markets are positively associated with disagreement among investors. Our model shows that
there are two channels that gives rise to this relation. First, assets that are traded in fragmented
markets have intrinsically low fundamental liquidity, proxied by low disagreement. Second, market
fragmentation itself also contributes to low volumes associated with decentralized markets. Lastly,
our model suggests that disagreement also affects the ratio between interdealer volume and the local
market volume, which can be measured empirically by the volume in the interdealer market relative
to the volume in the customer-dealer market.

Intermediated volume

Dealers act as intermediaries between investors in different local markets through the interdealer
market. The amount traded in the interdealer market is the intermediated volume in a fragmented
market structure. The expected average trading volume in the interdealer market is
                                                                    
                                               1         ND    q2
                                    VD (mnS ) = E                   .
                                               2          nD

   As argued above, the dealers' willingness to intermediate decreases as the correlation in investors'
priors approaches 1. Lemma 2 formalizes this intuition and shows that intermediated volume decreases
with the correlation in investor priors and goes to zero as this correlation goes to 1.

Lemma 2. (Intermediated Volume) In a symmetric fragmented market structure, the volume
intermediated by dealers in the interdealer market increases with the level of disagreement (1 - ),
 VD
      < 0 with lim1 VD = 0.

   When markets are fragmented, a higher correlation in investor priors leads to a smaller price
dispersion in local markets. This smaller dispersion implies a smaller dispersion in dealer inventories
and, thus, decreases the gains from trade in the interdealer market, which leads to a lower interdealer
volume, as shown by Lemma 2. As the correlation in investor priors approaches 1, price dispersion

                                                   24
                                                               4
                                                                                             *




                           Volume in the interdealer market
                                                              3.5

                                                               3

                                                              2.5

                                                               2

                                                              1.5

                                                               1

                                                              0.5

                                                               0
                                                               0.9    0.92     0.94          0.96                   0.98   1



Note: Figure 4 shows traded volume in the interdealer market in a symmetric market structure as a function of the
correlation in investor valuation, . The dashed vertical line represents the threshold  above which a symmetric market
                                                                                          2
structure is an equilibrium. The parameters for the figure are nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1, and   = 1.

                                                                     Figure 4: Intermediated volume


among local markets is 0 and intermediated volume goes to 0.9 As we discuss in Section 5.3, when
 = 1 and intermediated volume is zero, dealers do not profit from intermediation and they are better
off in a centralized market than in a fragmented one. Figure 4 shows intermediated volume as a
function of the correlation in investor priors .

Volume

The liquidity of the markets at date 1 depends on the market structure. In a fragmented market
structure, expected average trading volume in local market                                          is given by

                                                                                1 x1 + iNI (
                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                           q1
                                                                                                       )
                                                                     V (mnS ) =                                     .
                                                                                2     n +1
Analogously, in a centralized market structure, expected average trading volume is given by

                                                                          1   ND      xc +       iNI
                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                           qc
                                                                     Vc =                                       .
                                                                          2           nI + nD
       The amount of trade in local markets also depends on the level of disagreement between investors.
Lemma 3 shows that volume decreases with the correlation in investor priors in symmetric market
structures, regardless of whether the market is fragmented.

   9
       Note that the observation that intermediated volume goes to 0 as  goes to 1 holds only in a symmetric fragmented
market. Typically, trade in the interdealer market is positive if there is a different number of investors in each local
market, even when  = 1.



                                                                                   25
                                 0.16


                                 0.14                                        *


                                 0.12



                        Volume    0.1


                                 0.08


                                 0.06
                                          Fragmented market
                                          Centralized market
                                 0.04
                                    0.9         0.92           0.94          0.96   0.98     1



Note: Figure 5 shows the traded volume at date 1 in fragmented and centralized market structures as a function of the
correlation in investor priors, . The solid line represents aggregate volume in local markets in a symmetric fragmented
market structure and the dashed line represents volume in a centralized market structure. The dashed vertical line
represents the threshold  above which a symmetric market structure is an equilibrium. The parameters for the figure
                               2
are nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1, and   = 1.

                                                        Figure 5: Volume


Lemma 3. (Volume) Expected trading volume in local markets increases with the level of
disagreement in the market (1 - ) a) in the local markets in a fragmented symmetric market structure,
V
    < 0, and b) in a centralized market structure,                     Vc
                                                                            <0.

    As can be seen from Lemma 3, the less disagreement among investors, the lower the gains from
trade and, thus, the lower the incentives to trade in the market at date 1. Figure 5 depicts date 1
trading volume in centralized and fragmented symmetric market structures. The solid line represents
the expected average volume in a fragmented market at date 1 measured as the average of the expected
volume in all local markets,              ND nD .
                                             V
                                                    The dashed line is the expected average volume in a centralized
market and the dotted black line is the threshold  above which a symmetric fragmented market is an
equilibrium. Lemma 3, together with Theorem 1, confirms the intuition that assets that are traded in
fragmented markets have intrinsically low fundamental liquidity, proxied by high . However, Figure
5 shows that the market structure itself also contributes to low volumes associated with decentralized
markets. For a given level of disagreement (1 - ), the volume traded is lower in fragmented markets
than in centralized ones.




                                                                  26
5.3   Welfare

Over the past decade, there have been proposals for a substantial regulatory overhaul of fragmented
markets, with many calling for centralizing trade. While price transparency and counterparty risk
have been the main targets of these reforms, their effect on dealer and investor welfare has been an
important consideration. In this section, we compare the investor and dealer welfare in fragmented
and centralized market structures. We find that while dealers may prefer to trade in a fragmented
market, investors always benefit from trading in a centralized market structure. However, without
the ability to coordinate, investors may not be able to trade in the centralized market. This lack of
coordination is reminiscent of the problem faced by customers for many OTC derivatives who choose
to trade in the venue currently providing the greatest level of liquidity, but cannot move to a welfare
improving market structure without the intervention of a higher level authority (see Spatt, Duffie and
Kyle (2010)).

Investor welfare

The expected welfare of an investor i who chooses a dealer        in a symmetric market structure mnS
when the level of disagreement is 1 -  is given by
                                                        i    2
                               V1i (mnS ) = E0 i xi
                                                  1-     x       - p1 xi
                                                                       1 ,
                                                       2 1

where xi
       1 and p1 are, respectively, the quantity of the asset the investor purchases and the price she
pays for this quantity in equilibrium. The investor's expected welfare in a centralized market is
                                                        i    2
                                Vci (mc ) = E0 i xi
                                                  c-     x       - p c xi
                                                                        c ,
                                                       2 c

where xi
       c and pc are, respectively, the quantity of the asset the investor purchases and the price she
pays for this quantity in equilibrium.

Lemma 4. (Gains from trade) For a given symmetric fragmented market structure mnS , an
investor's welfare is continuous and monotonically increasing in the level of disagreement (1 - ),
     V i (mn )
i.e., 1  S < 0.

   Lemma 4 shows that the lower the disagreement in the market, the lower the investors' expected
welfare in a symmetric fragmented market. A higher correlation in investor priors implies lower gains
from trade between investors in the local markets and between dealers in the interdealer market. The
lower these gains from trade, the lower the investors' expected welfare.
   Let V i  Vci (mc ) - V1i (mnS ) be the difference between investors' expected utility in centralized
and fragmented numbers with the same number of dealers. The following proposition compares
investor welfare in centralized and fragmented markets.

Proposition 5. (Investor welfare) Investors are always better off in a centralized market structure,
i.e, V i > 0 .



                                                  27
                                           0.07


                                           0.06                                          *


                                           0.05




                        Investor welfare
                                           0.04


                                           0.03


                                           0.02


                                           0.01
                                                     Fragmented market
                                                     Centralized market
                                             0
                                             0.9           0.92            0.94          0.96        0.98      1



Note: Figure 6 shows investor welfare in centralized and fragmented markets as a function of the correlation in investor
priors, . The solid line represents dealer welfare in a symmetric fragmented market structure and the dashed line
represents dealer welfare in a centralized market structure. The dashed vertical line represents the threshold  above
which a symmetric market structure is an equilibrium. The parameters for the figure are nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1, and
2
  = 1.

                                                             Figure 6: Investor welfare


    As Proposition 5 shows, investors are always better off in a centralized market structure than in a
fragmented one. Figure 6 illustrates this result. The solid line represents investor welfare in fragmented
markets, the dashed line represents investor welfare in centralized markets, and the vertical dotted
line is the threshold  above which the symmetric fragmented market structure is an equilibrium. A
centralized market structure reduces the investors' price impact and it increases the expected gains
from trade. When all investors trade in the same market, the expected gains from trade for an
investor are larger than when her trade with investors in other local markets is intermediated by
dealers. Though the effect on the expected gains from trade disappears when  = 1, the lower price
impact associated with trading in a bigger market is always present and investors are always strictly
better off in a centralized market structure.

Dealer welfare

A dealer's expected welfare in a symmetric fragmented market structure is
                                                                                     2
                                                  V1 (mnS ) = E -           q + q2       - p 1 q1 - p 2 q2 ,
                                                                          2 1

where q1 and q2 are, respectively, the quantities the dealer buys in the local market at price p1 and
in the interdealer market at price p2 , in equilibrium. In a centralized market structure, a dealer's


                                                                              28
expected welfare is
                                                           2
                                    Vc (mc ) = E -     q       - p c qc ,
                                                     2 c
where qc is the quantity the dealer purchases at price pc in the market, in equilibrium.

Lemma 5. (Gains from intermediation) For a given symmetric fragmented market structure
                                                                              V (mn )
mnS , a dealer's welfare is continuous and monotonically decreasing in , i.e., 1  S < 0.

   Lemma 5 states that dealer welfare is increasing in the level of disagreement in the market, (1 - ).
A higher correlation in investors' priors leads to a smaller price dispersion among the local markets.
The only difference among dealers in their local markets in a symmetric market structure is the
local price they face. Therefore, the more similar the prices in the local markets, the more similar
the inventories dealers carry to the interdealer market and the smaller the gains for dealers from
intermediating trade between the local markets through the interdealer market.
   Let V D  Vc (mc ) - V1 (mnS ) be the welfare gain for dealers from trading in a centralized
market. The following proposition compares dealer welfare in centralized and fragmented markets.

Proposition 6. (Dealer welfare) There exists a W  (0, 1) such that for  < W dealers are better
off in symmetric fragmented markets and for  > W dealers are better off in centralized markets, i.e.,
                                            
                                             > 0 if  > W
                                            
                                      V D      = 0 if  = W .
                                            
                                               < 0 if  < W
                                            


   Proposition 6 shows that dealers benefit from trading in a fragmented market structure when
disagreement among investors is high and in a centralized market when disagreement is low. Trading
in a fragmented market structure allows dealers to profit from intermediating trades between investors
in different local markets through the interdealer market. The profits from intermediation disappear
when the market structure is centralized. However, a centralized market offers a lower price impact
than a fragmented one, making it cheaper for dealers to achieve their desired positions. When investor
priors are very dispersed,  < W , the dealers' profits from intermediation are high and overcome the
higher price impact associated with trading in fragmented market structures. In this case, dealers are
better off in fragmented markets. When investor priors are very correlated and  > W , the dealers'
profits from intermediating are small and the effect on price impact dominates. In this case, dealers
are strictly better off trading in a centralized market.
   Figure 7 illustrates a dealer's expected welfare in a fragmented market structure and in a centralized
market structure. The solid line represents dealer welfare in fragmented markets which, consistent
with Lemma 5, is decreasing in . The dashed line represents dealer welfare in centralized markets and
the vertical dotted line is the threshold  above which the symmetric fragmented market structure
is an equilibrium. The threshold W above which dealers are better in a centralized market is given
by the intersection of the dotted and solid lines.




                                                     29
                                                                              *
                                        0.422


                                         0.42




                       Dealer welfare
                                        0.418
                                                  Fragmented market
                                                  Centralized market
                                        0.416


                                        0.414


                                        0.412


                                            0.9         0.92           0.94   0.96   0.98    1



Note: Figure 7 shows dealer welfare in centralized and fragmented markets as a function of the correlation in investor
priors, . The solid line represents dealer welfare in a symmetric fragmented market structure and the dashed line
represents dealer welfare in a centralized market structure. The dashed vertical line represents the threshold  above
which a symmetric market structure is an equilibrium. The parameters for the figure are nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1, and
2
  = 1.

                                                          Figure 7: Dealer welfare


Efficiency

From Propositions 5 and 6 it follows that investors and dealers benefit differently from different market
structures. When there is enough disagreement in the market, so that  < W , dealers are better off
in fragmented markets, while investors are better off in centralized ones. If there is little disagreement,
so that  > W , both investors and dealers are better off trading in a centralized market than trading
in a fragmented one, and a fragmented symmetric market structure is inefficient. If  > W , a
fragmented market is inefficient even if it is supported in equilibrium. The inefficiency is due to a
coordination failure which prevents investors from choosing to trade in a centralized market structure.
Indeed, when  >  , there is no benefit for an individual investor from deviating from a fragmented
market structure mnS given that all other investors trade in the structure mnS . Naturally, our model
abstracts from regulatory changes, that could have a major impact on how various assets are traded.
However, if one thinks of regulatory reforms as a coordination device between market participants,
centralization can arise when market fragmentation is inefficient. If this is the case, assets for which
investors have very highly correlated priors could be traded in centralized markets.




                                                                         30
6         Learning from prices
So far, we have assumed that there is perfect information about the aggregate state of the economy. In
this section, we modify the information structure in our baseline model to consider the case in which
there is learning from prices.
         The model is the same as the baseline with the difference that neither investors nor dealers observe
the aggregate sentiment in the market, . After choosing a dealer, each investor i observes her prior
about the value of the asset, i , but cannot distinguish the idiosyncratic component in her beliefs  i
from the aggregate sentiment .10 We assume that each investor's prior is private information of the
investor. Before trading in her local market, each dealer                   observes a private signal of the aggregate
                                                                          i.i.d.
sentiment in the economy given by s =  +  where                             N 0, 2 .11 Note that the model with

2 = 0 is exactly the model with full information presented in Section 2.

         As in the model with perfect information, the price in the interdealer market and, hence, the
dealers' valuation for the asset in their local markets depend on . While dealers do not observe 
directly, they learn about it from their private signal and from the price in their local market. Since
each investor trades based on her prior, i , the price in the local market reflects the priors of the
investors in that market and contains information about . Therefore, dealers learn from the price
in their local market to predict the price in the interdealer market. The informativeness of the local
price p1 about  depends on the number of investors in that local market and on the dispersion of
their priors. In particular, the larger the number of investors in the local market, the more precise
the signal contained in the price. Moreover, if all investors share the same prior, the price in the local
market is fully revealing and the dealer infers  perfectly from the price. However, the equilibrium
in this case is not the same as in the case with full information since dealers learn from prices, and
therefore, react less to prices than they would if they observed  directly. On the other extreme, if the
investors' priors are uncorrelated, the local price is not helpful in predicting the price in the interdealer
market and there is no learning from prices.
         An investor's problem in the local market and a dealer's problem in the interdealer market remain
the same as in the baseline model. The dealer's problem in her local market                           when she observes a
signal s
                                               max V2 q1 , p1 , s , m - p1 q1 ,
                                                 q1

where V2 q1 , p1 , s , m is the expected payoff of participating in the inter-dealer market for dealer
and it is given by
                                                                            2
                     V2 q1 , p1 , s , m = E -           Q2 p2 ; q1 + q1         - p2 Q2 p2 ; q1   s , p1 , q1 ,
                                                      2
with Q2 p2 ; q1 given by Equation (13).12 Note that the main difference between the model in this
section and the one with full information is the information set over which the dealers condition their
    10
         Whether investors observe  is irrelevant since their utility, and therefore their demand, depends only on i .
    11
         Alternatively, dealers could observe a public signal. The analysis below does not depend on the dealers' information
being private.
  12
     There is no learning in the interdealer market. Dealers do not value the asset intrinsically and only care about  to
predict p2 .


                                                               31
       0.11                                                         0.11


      0.108                                                        0.108


      0.106                                                        0.106


      0.104                                                        0.104


      0.102                                                        0.102


         0.1                                                         0.1


      0.098                                                        0.098


      0.096                                                        0.096


      0.094                                                        0.094


      0.092                                                        0.092
               0        0.5             1               1.5                0         0.5             1           1.5




                   (a) Dealer price impact                                     (b) Investor price impact
Note: Figure 8 shows price impacts in the local markets in a symmetric equilibrium in the local market for a symmetric
fragmented market structure for the baseline model and the model with imperfect information as a function of the
                                  2
variance of the dealers' signals,   . Panel a shows the price impact of a dealer and Panel b shows the price impact of
an investor. The dotted lines represent the price impacts in the baseline model and the solid lines represent the price
impacts in the model imperfect information. The parameters for the figure are nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1,  = 0.9, and
2
  = 1.

                                             Figure 8: Price Impacts


expected utility. When dealers do not observe , they learn about it from their signals s and from
the price in the local market p1 . The definition of equilibrium is analogous to the one in the baseline
model and the characterization of the equilibrium and of the information contained in the price is in
the Appendix.
    The equilibrium demand functions are analogous to the ones derived in Proposition 2 for the
baseline model. However, the expectation over the price in the interdealer market and the price
impacts in the local market will be depend on the precision of the private signal received by the
dealers and the precision of the information contained in the price. The added uncertainty about 
decreases a dealer's incentives to provide liquidity in her local market and increases the cost of trading
in the strategic local markets for investors and dealers alike.
    In contrast to the baseline model, when dealers learn from the price in their local market the
price impacts in the local markets are no longer independent on the market structure. The dealer's
sensitivity to the price depends on how much weight she puts on the information contained in the
price which is determined by the amount she can learn from the price and how much she values that
information. Since a dealer essentially needs to forecast how much other dealers are learning form the
price in their local market in order to predict the price in the interdealer market, how much she values
the information depends on the entire market structure. A full characterization of the equilibrium can
be found in the Appendix.
    Figure 8 shows the price impacts in a symmetric equilibrium in linear strategies for a symmetric


                                                              32
                                      1




                                    0.98




                                    0.96




                                    0.94




                                    0.92




                                     0.9




                                    0.88
                                           5       10      15       20       25       30




Note: Figure 9 shows the combinations of nD and  such that a fragmented market with nD dealers and nI = nS nD
investors can be supported in equilibrium for the baseline case with full information and for the case in which investors'
                                   2                                                        2
signals are not informative, i.e.,    . The parameters for the figure are nS = 4,  = 1, and   = 1.

                          Figure 9: Market fragmentation and learning from prices


market structure as a function of 2 . As it can be seen in the figure, when the signal is perfectly

informative, i.e., 2 = 0, we are back in the full information case. As  2 increases the signal received
                                                                       
by the dealers becomes noisier and dealers face higher uncertainty about the price in the interdealer
market, which leads to higher price impacts in the local markets.



    As in the baseline model, at date 0, before any uncertainty is realized, each investor i chooses a
dealer with whom to trade. Each investor i takes the other investors' choices as given so, from investor
i's perspective, choosing a dealer with whom to trade is the same as choosing between two market
structures. An investor i will choose not to deviate from a symmetric fragmented market structure if
                              ~ i ; nD ,  2 > 0,
                                                        i  NI ,  = ,  ,             ND ,                             (33)
                                         

where, analogously to the baseline model, ~ i ; nD ,  2 is the marginal benefit for investor i of
                                                     
participating in symmetric market structure, mnS , relative to participating in market structure
(mnS - i + i ), when the correlation across investor priors is , when there are nD dealers, and
the variance of the noise in the dealers' signals is 2 . When comparing the benefits of trading in a

market with nS or nS + 1 investors, an investor anticipates how the change in the market structure
affects the dealer trades in the interdealer market.

                                                                                    ~D > 3
Proposition 7. (Market fragmentation learning from prices) There exists a threshold n
                      ~ D there exists a threshold 
such that for any nD  n                            ~ (nD ) 1 such that a symmetric fragmented
structure with nI = nD nS investors and nD dealers can be supported in equilibrium if   ~ (nD ) .

    The proposition above shows that when investor priors are sufficiently positively correlated a
symmetric fragmented market structure is an equilibrium. The proof of Proposition 7 relies on the

                                                           33
                                   0.935


                                  0.9345


                                   0.934


                                  0.9335


                                   0.933


                                  0.9325


                                   0.932


                                  0.9315


                                   0.931


                                  0.9305
                                           0         0.5             1              1.5




                                                        2
 Note: Figure 10 shows the threshold ~ as a function of   . The dotted line represents the threshold for the model
with imperfect information and learning from prices. The solid line is the threshold  for the baseline model with full
                                                                                           2
                 information. The parameters for the figure are nD = 7, nS = 10,  = 1, and   = 1.

                         Figure 10: Correlation in beliefs and learning from prices


continuity of the equilibrium on 2 and using that setting  2 = 0 gives us the baseline model with full
                                                          
information. In what follows we resort to numerical examples to further explore how learning from
prices affects market fragmentation.
   As in the baseline model, when considering whether to deviate investors trade-off a lower price
impact in a larger local market versus lower expected gains of trading with the dealer. Relative to the
case with full information, the decrease in gains from trading with the dealer is lower when dealers
learn from prices. As we explained in our discussion of Theorem 1, the lower price impact in a a
larger local market induces the dealer increase her trades but less than proportionally to the size of
the market. When there is imperfect information, there is an additional effect on the dealers trade
coming from learning from prices. The price in a larger local market has more precise information
about the aggregate sentiment  (it aggregates one additional signal) and leads to the dealer increasing
her position beyond the increase due to the lower price impact. Therefore, the change in the dealer's
position in a larger local market is increasing in how much the dealer learns from the price. This implies
that the increase in competition among investors is lower when dealers learn from prices and either
a higher correlation in investor valuations or fewer active dealers are needed to support a symmetric
fragmented market structure. Figures 9 and 10 illustrates this mechanism.
   Figure 9 shows the combinations of  and nD for which market fragmentation can be supported
in equilibrium for the cases with full information and without signals for dealers. This figure shows
that when dealers learn from the price, it is harder to support fragmentation in equilibrium. However,
even when learning from the price is strongest, i.e., when  = 1 and the price is fully revealing, a
fragmented market structure can still be supported in equilibrium as long as the inter-dealer market is
strategic enough. This shows that the effects highlighted in the baseline model with full information
are of first-order importance even when there is learning from prices. Figure 10 show the threshold
~ in Proposition 7 as a function of the variance of the noise in the signals received by the dealers.



                                                           34
Consistent with our intuition above, ~ is increasing in 2.




7    Conclusion
We develop a model of market formation in which investors have heterogeneous priors about the
value of an asset to study the determinants of asset market fragmentation. When choosing a dealer,
investors trade off the lower price impact that a larger market offers and a larger share of gains from
trade with a dealer attained in a smaller market. When disagreement between investors is low, the
decrease in gains from trade with the dealer dominates the decrease in price impact, and investors
have no incentives to deviate from a fragmented market structure. We find that dealers can benefit
from trading in fragmented asset markets, while investors are always better off in centralized ones.
When the correlation in investor priors is high enough, equilibrium fragmented markets are inefficient.
Fragmented markets contribute to lower trading volume relative to a centralized markets. Our model
emphasizes the role of investors' strategic behavior in determining the market structure in which an
asset is traded. By focusing on the investors' choices, we add to the current view on the optimal
market structure, which often considers that investors are passive player in the emergence of the
market structure.
    There are several important mechanisms that can contribute to markets having different degrees of
fragmentation. Some of the mechanisms that have been proposed focus on information considerations
through order flows, regulation (e.g., Reg ATS), technological advancements (e.g., automation,
electronic LOBs), and minimum tick size (e.g., fees make effective prices almost continuous). In
this paper, we focus on disagreement as the driving force for market fragmentation through the lens
of a model that explores the interaction between two liquidity proxies: the price impact of the market
participants and the amount of intermediation that dealers are willing to offer. Looking at these
features allows us to identify a novel mechanism that contributes to the determination of the market
structure. This mechanism is present even in the absence of differences in fee schedules, informational
asymmetries or regulatory constraints. Though we find suggestive evidence consistent with our model's
results, it remains an open empirical question to quantify the magnitudes of these competing forces.




                                                  35
References
Afonso, Gara, Anna Kovner, and Antoinette Schoar. 2013. "Trading partners in the interbank lending
  market." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report, 620.
Baldauf, Markus, and Joshua Mollner. 2019. "Trading in Fragmented Markets." working paper.
Bessembinder, Hendrik, Chester Spatt, and Kumar Venkataraman. 2020. "A Survey of the
  Microstructure of Fixed-Income Markets." JOURNAL OF FINANCIAL AND QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS,
  55 (1): 1­45.
Biais, Bruno. 1993. "Price Formation and Equilibrium Liquidity in Fragmented and Centralized Markets."
  The Journal of Finance, 48(1): 157­185.
Boyarchenko, Nina, David Lucca, and Laura Veldkamp. 2016. "Taking Orders and Taking Notes: Dealer
  Information Sharing in Financial Markets." working paper NYU Stern.
Carlin, Bruce I., Francis A. Longstaff, and Kyle Matoba. 2014. "Disagreement and asset prices." Journal
  of Financial Economics, 114(2): 226­238.
Cespa, Giovanni, and Xavier Vives. 2019. "Market Transparency and Fragility." working paper.
Chang, Briana, and Shengxing Zhang. 2016. "Endogenous Market Making and Network Formation."
  working paper University of Wisconsin.
Chao, Yong, Chen Yao, and Mao Ye. 2019. "Why Discrete Price Fragments U.S. Stock Exchanges and
  Disperses Their Fee Structures." The Review of Financial Studies, 32 (3)(3): 1068­1101.
Collin-Dufresne, Pierre, Benjamin Junge, and Anders B. Trolle. 2018. "Market Structure and
  Transaction Costs of Index CDSs." Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann. 1990.
  "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets." The Journal of Political Economy, 98 (4): 703­738.
Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina. 2002. "Differences of Opinion and the
  Cross Section of Stock Returns." The Journal of Finance, 57(5): 2113­2141.
Duffie, Darrell, and Chaojun Wang. 2016. "Efficient Contracting in Network Financial Markets." working
  paper Stanford University.
Duffie, D., M. Scheicher, and G. Vuillemey. 2015. "Central Clearing and Collateral Demand." Journal of
  Financial Economics, 116: 237­256.
Dugast, Jerome, Pierre-Olivier Weill, and Semih Uslu. 2019. "A Theory of Participation in OTC and
  Centralized Markets." working paper.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Cecilia Parlatore. forthcoming. "Trading Costs and Informational Efficiency."
  Journal of Finance.
Frazzini, Andrea, Ronen Israel, and Tobias J Moskowitz. 2018. "Trading costs." Available at SSRN
  3229719.
Garfinkel, Jon A. 2009. "Measuring Investors Opinion Divergence." Journal of Accounting Research, 47
  (5): 1317­1348.
Glode, Vincent, and Christian Opp. 2016. "Asymmetric Information and Intermediation Chains." American
  Economic Review, 106: 2699­2721.
Glode, Vincent, and Christian Opp. 2020. "Over-the-Counter vs. Limit-Order Markets: The Role of
  Traders' Expertise." Review of Financial Studies, 33 (2): 866­915.
Glosten, Lawrence R. 1994. "Is the Electronic Open Limit Order Book Inevitable?" The Journal of Finance,
  49(4): 1127­1161.
Hendershott, Terrence, and Haim Mendelson. 2000. "Crossing Networks and Dealer Markets:
  Competition and Performance." The Journal of Finance, 55(5): 2071­2115.
Hendershott, Terrence, Dan Li, Dmitry Livdan, and Norman Schhrhoff. 2020. "Relationship Trading
  in OTC Markets." Journal of Finance, 75 (2): 683­734.
Hollifield, Burton, Artem Neklyudov, and Chester Spatt. 2020. "Volume and Intermediation in
  Corporate Bond Markets." working paper.
Hong, Harrison, and David Sraer. 2016. "Speculative Betas." The Journal of Finance, 71(5): 2095­2144.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein. 2007. "Disagreement and the Stock Market." Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 21(2): 109­128.


                                                  36
Hugonnier, Julien, Benjamin Lester, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2015. "Heterogeneity in Decentralized
  Asset Markets." working paper UCLA.
Jackson, Matthew, and Asher Wolinsky. 1996. "A strategic model of social and economic networks."
  Journal of Economic Theory, 71: 44­74.
Kawakami, Kei. 2017. "Welfare Consequences of Information Aggregation and Optimal Market Size."
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 9(4): 303­323.
Kyle, Albert. 1989. "Informed Speculation with Imperfect Competition." Review of Economic Studies, 56: 317­
  55.
Lee, Tomy, and Chaojun Wang. 2018. "Why Trade Over-the-counter? When Investors Want Price
  Discrimination." Wharton working paper.
Lester, Benjamin, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2015. "Competing for Order Flow
  in OTS Markets." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, S2: 77­126.
Li, Dan, and Norman Schurhoff. 2018. "Dealer Networks." Journal of Finance, 74 (1): 91­144.
Malamud, Semyon, and Marzena Rostek. 2017. "Decentralized Exchange." The American Economic
  Review, 107: 3320­3362.
Manzano, Carolina, and Xavier Vives. forthcoming. "Market Power and Welfare in Asymmetric Divisible
  Good Auctions." Theoretical Economics.
Neklyudov, Artem V. 2014. "Bid-Ask Spreads and the Over-the-Counter Interdealer Markets: Core and
  Peripheral Dealers." working paper University of Lausanne.
Oehmke, Martin, and Adam Zawadowski. 2017. "The Anatomy of the CDS Market." Review of Financial
  Studies, 30(1): 80­119.
O'Hara, Maureen, and Mao Ye. 2011. "Is market fragmentation harming market quality?" Journal of
  Financial Economics, 100: 459­474.
Pagano, Marco. 1989. "Trading Volume and Asset Liquidity." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May: 255­
  274.
Pagnotta, Emiliano, and Thomas Philippon. 2018. "Competing on Speed." Econometrica, 86(3): 1067­
  1115.
Parlour, Christine A., and Duane J. Seppi. 2003. "Liquidity-Based Competition for Order Flow." The
  Review of Financial Studies, 16(2): 301­343.
Riggs, Lynn, Esen Onur, David Reiffen, and Haoxiang Zhu. 2018. "Swap Trading after Dodd-Frank:
  Evidence from Index CDS." working paper MIT.
Rostek, Marzena J., and Ji Hee Yoon. 2020. "Equilibrium Theory of Financial Markets: Recent
  Developments." working paper.
Rust, John, and George Hall. 2003. "Middlemen versus Market Makers: A Theory of Competitive
  Exchange." Journal of Political Economy, 111(2): 353­403.
Santos, Tano, and José A. Scheinkman. 2001. "Financial Intermediation without Exclusivity." The
  American Economic Review, 91(2): 436­439.
Scheinkman, José A.., and Wei Xiong. 2003. "Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles." The Journal of
  Political Economy, 111(6): 1183­1219.
Spatt, Chester. 2017. "Designing Reliable Clearing and Settlement Systems for Enhancing the Transparency
  and Stability of Derivatives Markets." Wharton e-book on Strengthening the Liquidity of Financial System.
Spatt, Chester, Darrell Duffie, and Albert Kyle. 2010. "Reforming the OTC Derivatives Markets
  Statement of the Financial Economists Roundtable." Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 22: 40­47.
Vives, Xavier. 2011. "Strategic Supply Function Competition with Private Information." Econometrica,
  79: 1919­1966.
Yu, Jialin. 2011. "Disagreement and return predictability of stock portfolios." Journal of Financial Economics,
  99(1): 162­183.
Zhu, Haoxiang. 2014. "Do Dark Pools Harm Price Discovery?" The Review of Financial Studies, 29(8): 2110­
  2160.




                                                      37
                                                Appendix
A     Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
The first order condition in Equation (12) for the dealer's optimization problem yields

                                                                 -q1 - p2
                                              Q2 p2 ; , q1 =
                                                                   + 2
             p
where 2 = q  2,-
                 . We conjecture and subsequently verify that each dealer's equilibrium strategy is a linear
               2
demand function as follows

                                          Q2 p2 ; , q1 = aD q1 + bD p2 .
Market clearing implies
                                                nD
                                         aD      =1 q1                     1
                                  p2 =                   , and 2 = -               .                             (A.1)
                                              nD bD                    (nD - 1) bD
Then, matching coefficients
                                                                                     1
                               aD = -              1       , and bD = -           1          .                   (A.2)
                                         -     (nD -1)bD                  -   (nD -1)bD

The unique solution for the system in Equation (A.2) is given by
                                                nD - 2             1 nD - 2
                                     aD = -            , and bD =-          .
                                                nD - 1              nD - 1
Therefore, the equilibrium strategy of a dealer in the interdealer market is

                                                            nD - 2          1
                                     Q2 p2 ; , q1 = -                q1 +     p2
                                                            nD - 1          
and, using the market clearing condition, the equilibrium price is
                                                                             l
                                                                     lND    q1
                                         p2      l
                                                q1    lND
                                                             = -                 .
                                                                     nD

Proof of Proposition 2
We conjecture and subsequently verify that in each local market           the dealer's equilibrium strategy is a linear
demand function given by

                                               Q1 p1 ;  = a  + b p1 ,
and each investor's equilibrium strategy is a linear demand function given by

                                               i
                                              X1 p1 ; i =  i +  p1 .
Market clearing implies

                                                n  +a        +         iNI ( )       i
                                    p1 = -                                               ,
                                                            n  +b
and
                                               1                   1
                                   1 = -         , and 1 = -              .                                      (A.3)
                                              n              (n - 1)  + b

                                                            A1
The first order condition in Equation (16) for the investor's optimization problem yields

                                                                 i - p1
                                                         1 =
                                                        xi              ,                                                   (A.4)
                                                                  + 1
            p1,-i
where 1 =   xi
                  .   The first order condition for the dealer's optimization problem is
               1


                                              dV2 (m)        p1,-
                                                      - p1 -      q = 0,
                                                dq1          q1 1
where V2 (m) represents the payoff that dealer          expects to receive after participating in the interdealer market
and it is given by
                                                   
                                         V2 (m) = E - q + q1 - p2 q2 | , p1 .
                                                   2 2
Differentiating the profits of the dealer from participating in the interdealer market, we obtain

                                           dV2 (m)   V2 (m) V2 (m) dq2
                                                   =       +           .
                                             dq1      q1     q2 dq1
Using the first order condition for the dealer in the interdealer market we have that

                                                        V2 (m)
                                                               = 0,
                                                         q2
which immediately implies that

                                     dV2 (m)
                                             = - q1 + E Q2 p2 ; , q1 | , q1                       .
                                       dq1
Thus we can rewrite the first order condition for the dealer as

                                                                                     p1,-
                                 - q1 + E Q2 p2 ; , q1 |, q1             - p1 -                 q1 = 0.
                                                                                      q1
Substituting the equilibrium demand function of the dealer in the interdealer market, Q2 p2 ; , q1 , we obtain
that

                                             + 2                  
                                 q1 =                                 E p2 | , p1 - p1 .
                                         2 + 1  + 2               + 2
It follows that

                                                                               l
                                                             E                q1 |
                                                       -2)         lND ,l=
                                                 - (nD
                                                     nD               nD -1          - p1
                                          q1 =                          p
                                                                                            ,                               (A.5)
                                                              n2
                                                               D
                                                                      + q1
                                                                          1

where

                                                                                                                        
                                                                         nh h + ah  + h               iNI (h) 
                                                                                                               i
           E                 l
                            q1 |, q1  = E               ah  - bh                                                     | 
                                                                                      nh  h + bh
                  lND ,l=                   hND ,h=

                                                                 nh h + ah                                 ah  h - h bh
                                     =              ah - bh                          =                nh                .
                                                                 nh  h + bh                                 nh  h + bh
                                         hND ,h=                                         hND ,h=

Using the demand functions in equations (A.4) and (A.5), and matching the coefficients with our guess for an
equilibrium in linear strategies we get the following system



                                                                 A2
                                           nD - 2 1                           al  l - l bl
                                 a =b                                    nl                                                 (A.6)
                                            nD nD - 1                          nl  l + bl
                                                             lND ,l=

                                        n  nD
                                  bl = -
                                     2n  - nD
                                        n -1  +b
                                  =
                                     ((n - 1)  + b ) - 1
                                          n -1  +b
                                  =-
                                      ((n - 1)  + b ) - 1

We solve for  in the system of equations (A.6). It follows that  is given by the negative solution to

                                                        H ( ) = 0,
where

                                       2
            H ( ) = -2n    n - 1 ( ) +            2n - 1 nD + 2n - 2n             n -1          + 2 n - 1 nD .
Since H (0) > 0 and H (·) < 0, a solution to H ( ) = 0 always exists and there is a unique negative root which
determines  . Then,  ,  , b N D are uniquely determined. Let        -a = a1 , a2 , ..., anD . From (A.6) we have

                                                    -
                                                    a = A-
                                                         a + B,
                                                                                      l   l
                                                           -2)
where A is a nD × nD matrix where the element A l = b  (nD
                                                         nD    nD -1 nl  l +bl  (-1, 0) for all l = , l,  ND ,
                                                                 1     n 

A = 0 for all  ND , and B is a nD -dimensional column vector where the element

                                   (nD - 2)   1                            al bl
                        B = -b                                     nl              for all l  ND .
                                     nD     nD - 1                      nl  l + bl
                                                         lND ,l=

Then,

                                                   [InD - A] -
                                                             a = B,
where [InD - A] is invertible. Thus, -
                                     a is uniquely determined.

Characterization of price sensitivities
The following two lemmas characterize the price sensitivities of investors and dealers in the local markets. We
use these intermediate results in the proofs of the propositions in the main text.

Lemma 6. (Characterization of  ) Investors' price sensitivity                                 -1
                                                                                                 ,0   satisfies: a)   
                                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                                          < 0, b)
                            2(n -1)
           ¯
nD < 0, c)   limnD    -  (2n -1) and limn  = -  .
                                                        1


Proof. Recall that  (n, nD ) is defined by the negative root of
                                              2
                  H ( ) = -2n (n - 1) ( ) + ((2n - 1) nD - 2n (n - 2))  + 2 (n - 1) nD .                                    (A.7)

 (n, nD ) is uniquely defined and H ( (n, nD )) > 0 since H (0) > 0, and H < 0. Also,  (n) > - 1
                                                                                                 since

                                                    1
                                            H -          = -2n - nD < 0.
                                                    

   a) Using the implicit function theorem we have
                                                        H ( )
                                            (n, nD )          | (n,nD )
                                                     = - n
                                             n          H ( (n, nD ))

                                                           A3
and, since H ( (n, nD )) > 0,
                                      (n)                         H ( )
                             sign                  = -sign              | (n,nD )         = -sign (X ) ,
                                     n                            n
where
                 H ( )                                        2
                         | (n,nD ) = nD - (2n - 1) ( (n, nD )) + (nD - 2 (n - 1))  (n, nD )                                         (A.8)
                    n
Since H ( (n, nD )) = 0, using Equation (A.7) we have
                                     2     ((2n - 1) nD - 2n (n - 2))  (n, nD ) + 2 (n - 1) nD
                       ( (n, nD )) =                                                           .
                                                                2n (n - 1)
Then, using this expression in Equation (A.8) we have
             H ( )                   1                             2                                                    2
                   | (n,nD ) = -                     nD (n - 1) + (nD + 2) n2  (n, nD ) + 2nD (n - 1)                           .
             n                   2n (n - 1)
Then,
                                                  H ( )
                                         sign           | (n,nD )        =  (n, nD ) - X,
                                                  n
where
                                                                                2
                                                              -2nD (n - 1)
                                            X                                              .
                                                                    2
                                                     nD (n - 1) + (nD + 2) n2
Note that  (n) < X because
                                    2nnD (n-1)((2n2 -2n+1)n2
                                                           D +4n(n -n+1)nD +4n (n -2n+2))
                                                                  2           2  2
                        H (X ) =                                                                            >0
                                                        (nD (n-1)2 +(nD +2)n2 )
                                                                                      2




for all n  1 and for all nD  0. Therefore, H   ( )
                                               n | (n,nD ) < 0 which implies
                                                                                                  (n,nD )
                                                                                                   n        < 0.
    b) Also, using the implicit function theorem we have
                                                               H ( )
                                                  (n, nD )           | (n,nD )
                                                           = - nD
                                                  nD          H ( (n, nD ))
and
                                             (n, nD )                          H ( )
                                    sign                      = -sign                | (n,nD ) ,
                                             nD                                nD
where
                                   H ( )
                                         | (n,nD ) = (2n - 1)  (n, nD ) + 2 (n - 1) .
                                   nD
                   2(n-1)
Note that  (n) > - (2 n-1) because

                                                2 (n - 1)                 n2
                                     H -                      = -4                   (n - 1) < 0,
                                                (2n - 1)               (2n - 1)
                                                                                 2

                  H ( )
and, therefore,   nD | (n)   > 0, which implies

                                                             (n, nD )
                                                                           < 0.
                                                             nD
      c) Finally, from the definition of  (n, nD ) we can write
                                                              2
                                            16n(n-1) nD
                            1 1 - 1 + ((2n-1)nD -2n(n-2))2
                                                                                                 4(n-1)nD
                                                              1                             ((2n-1)nD -2n(n-2))
               (n, nD ) = -              4 n (n - 1)
                                                           =-                                                               .
                                 - ((2n-1)nD -2n(n-2))         1+                           1+       16n(n-1)2 nD
                                                                                                 ((2n-1)nD -2n(n-2))2

Taking limits gives
                                                     2 (n - 1) ¯ and lim  (n, nD ) = - 1 .
                             lim  (n, nD ) = -                 
                          nD                          (2n - 1)       n                 



                                                                  A4
Lemma 7. (Characterization of b ) Dealers' price sensitivity b satisfy a)                  b
                                                                                           n
                                                                                               < 0, b)   b
                                                                                                         nD   < 0, and c)
            2n (n -1)
limnD  b = -  (2n -1) and limn  b = - n 2 .
                                         D




Proof. Using the definition of b in Equation (A.6) and Lemma 6 we have that

                                     b       n2                           
                                       =      D
                                                     2                n     +      <0
                                     n   (2n  - nD )                      n

and
                                                                2
                                       b    -2 n      + n n2 
                                                           D nD
                                          =                2    < 0,
                                       nD      (nD - 2n   )
which proves a) and b) in the lemma above.
   Moreover, it also follows that

                                               n
                               lim b = lim - 2n                    =n ¯ = - 2n n - 1
                              nD          nD                    -1            (2n - 1)
                                                          nD

and
                                                                  nD       nD
                                        lim b = lim -                   =-    ,
                                      n               n         2 - nn
                                                                      D
                                                                           2
which proves the statement in c).


Proof of Lemma 1
Consider a local market . The first order condition in Equation (16) for the investor's optimization problem
yields

                                                                     i - p1
                                                     i
                                                    X1 p1 ; i =             .
                                                                      + 1
Using that the inverse residual demand function of dealer             in her local market, p1,- , is implied by

                                                           j
                                                          X1 p1 ; i + q1 = 0,
                                               j NI ( )


we obtain that her price impact, 1 , must satisfy the following equation

                                                      n  p1,-
                                                -             + 1 = 0,
                                                      + 1 q1
or
                                                                 + 1
                                                          1 =        .
                                                                 n
      Similarly, using that the inverse residual demand function for investor i in market , p1,-i , is implied by

                                                     j
                                                    X1 p1 ; i + xi
                                                                 1 + Q1 p1 ;  = 0,
                                    j NI ( ),j =i

we obtain that his price impact, 1 , must satisfy the following equation

                                               n - 1 p1,-i     Q1
                                           -               +1+    = 0.                                              (A.9)
                                                + 1 x1  i      xi
                                                                1

              Q
To evaluate xi1 we need to determine the indirect effect of a change in xi
                                                                         1 on the expected price in the interdealer
              1
market. For this, we express the expected price in the interdealer market as a function of the price in the local
market p1 . We proceed as follows.

                                                                A5
    As we show in the proof of Proposition 2, the first order condition in Equation (17) for the dealer's
optimization problem implies that

                                                            + 2                         
                           Q1 p1 ;  =                                                       E p2 | , p1 - p1 .                             (A.10)
                                                        2 + 1  + 2                      + 2
Therefore, the market clearing condition in Equation (5) becomes

                      + 2                                                                          1
                                                             E p2 | , p1 - p1                -                    i - p1 = 0,
                  2 + 1  + 2                             + 2                                     1 + 
                                                                                                        iNI ( )

which implies that the price in the local market                         is

                                    1                                                                      n         iNI ( )   i
              p1 =                                                                      E p2 | , p1 -                              .
                       ( +2 )                    n            2 + 1  + 2                                   + 1         n
                     2 +1 ( +2 )
                                 -               +1

Further, the price in the interdealer market is
                                                                                             l
                                                                                      lND   q1
                                                                    p2 = -
                                                                                      nD
and, substituting Equation (A.10), we obtain

                                                             + l
                                                               2                         
                        p2 = -                                                               E p2 | , pl    l
                                                                                                       1 - p1          .
                                                         2 + 1  + 2
                                                         l                               + l
                                    nD                       l    l
                                            lND                                            2

Taking expectations, we have that

                                                    + l2                            
             E [ p2 |  ] = -                                                            E E p2 | , pl         l
                                                                                                    1 |  - E p1 |                      ,
                               nD
                                    lND
                                                l
                                                2 +  l  + l
                                                     1    2                         + l
                                                                                      2

and

                                                1                                                                        nl
               1 | =
            E pl                                                                                 E E p2 | , pl
                                                                                                             1 | -             .
                                (
                               +l           )                nl      l        +   l   +     l                            + 1l
                                 2
                                                        -            2            1         2
                           2 +l
                           l       l
                               1  +2    (           )        +1 l



It follows that


             + l
               2                                                                                          nl
                                         E E p2 | , pl         l
                                                     1 |  - E p1 |                                  =-         E pl
                                                                                                                  1 | - ,                  (A.11)
       l
       2   + l
             1   + l
                   2                 + l
                                       2                                                                  + 1l


which implies that

                                                                                   nl
                                            E [ p2 |  ] =                               E pl
                                                                                           1 | - .
                                                                    nD
                                                                         lND
                                                                                   + 1l


Further, using that E E p2 | , pl
                                1 | , p1 = E E p2 | , p1 |  , we obtain



                                                             + l
                                                               2                         
         E p2 | , p1 = -                                                                     E E p2 | , pl         l
                                                                                                         1 |  - E p1 | 
                                                         2 + 1  + 2
                                                         l                               + l
                               nD                            l    l
                                        lND ,l=                                            2

                                  + 2                                     
                       -                                                      E p2 | , p1 - p1              .
                           nD 2 + 1  + 2                                  + 2

Using Equation (A.11), we have that


                                                                               A6
                                  nl                    + 2                             
     E p2 |, p1 =                    E pl
                                        1 | -  -                                            E p2 |, p1 - p1     .
                     nD
                          lND
                                 l
                                 1+              nD 2 + 1 + 1 2                         + 2
                           l=

That gives us that


                                                                               nD  + 2
                                                                                
                                 nD                         nl
     E p2 |, p1 =                                          l +
                                                               E pl
                                                                  1 |  -  +                                   p1 .
                     1 +  n1        
                                                           1                2 + 1 + 1 2 +               2
                           D    (2 +1 +1 2 ) lND ,l=                                                    nD


Substituting back into Equation (A.10), we obtain that the demand function of a dealer in the local market is


                                 2
                                 nD                         nl                  + 2
     Q1 p1 ;  =                            2               l +
                                                               E pl
                                                                  1 | -  -                               2
                                                                                                              p1 .
                     2 + 1 + 1 2 +         nD lND ,l=
                                                           1               2 + 1 + 1 2 +                 nD

   Thus, we obtain that

                                      Q1         + 2                         p1,-i
                                       i
                                         =-                             2
                                                                                   .
                                      x1    2 + 1 + 1 2 +               nD
                                                                             xi 1

Substituting this in Equation (6) we obtain that

                                n - 1 p1,-i          + 2                          p1,-i
                            -               +1-                                         = 0.
                                 + 1 xi  1      2 + 1 + 1 2 +                2
                                                                             nD
                                                                                  xi 1


   Finally, using Lemmas 6 and 7 and the expressions for 1 and 1 in Equation (A.3) we have that the price
impacts satisfy the following properties
                                                       2
                            1               1                                b
                       a)     =                              + n -1        +              < 0,
                            n         (n - 1)  + b                       n   n
                                           2
                            1          1             
                       b)     =                 +      n        < 0,
                            n         n              n
                                                       2
                            1               1                               b
                       c)      =                            n -1          +            < 0,   and
                            nD        (n - 1)  + b                     nD   nD
                            1       1   
                       d)      =      2 n  < 0.
                            nD   n ( )   D


Proof of Theorem 1
Throughout this proof, we keep nS fixed and set nI = nD nS . We prove the result in three steps. First, we show
in Lemma 8 below that

                                               lim i ( = 1; nD ) < 0,                                           (A.12)
                                               nD 

where i has been defined in Equation (24). Second as we show in Lemma 9 below that

                                               i ( = 1; nD = 3) > 0.                                            (A.13)
Lastly, we show in Lemma 10 that  (; nD ) is monotonically increasing in , i.e.,

                                                   i (; nD )
                                                             > 0.                                               (A.14)
                                                     


                                                           A7
     First note that i (; nD ) is continuous in nD and . Then, using the intermediate value theorem (IVT) it
follows from Equation (A.12) and Equation (A.13) that there exists a threshold nD > 3 such that

                                                    i ( = 1; nD ) = 0                                                   (A.15)

and i ( = 1; nD ) > 0 for all nD < nD . If there are multiple solutions to Equation (A.15), nD is given by the
smallest solution. Moreover, using the IVT there exists a threshold  (nD ) such that

                                               i ( (nD ) ; nD ) = 0.

From Equation (A.14) it follows that for all nD < nD there exists a unique threshold  (nD ) such that

                                  i (; nD ) > 0 if and only if  >  (nD ).

     Next, we present the proofs of the aiding lemmas. For the remainder of the appendix, we denote by  (n, nD )
is the negative root of H ( ; n, nD ) = 0 as defined in Equation (A.7). Similarly, b(n, nD ) satisfies the system in
Equations (A.6).

Lemma 8. If investor valuations are perfectly correlated, an investor has incentives to deviate if the interdealer
market is competitive, i.e.,

                                               lim i ( = 1; nD ) < 0.
                                             nD 

Proof. From the definition of i in Equation (24) we have

                                 sym (1+ 2
                                            sym
                                                )               2           dev (1+ 2
                                                                                      dev
                                                                                          )                   2
          i ( = 1; nD ) = -     (nS  sym +bsym )2
                                                    (bsym + asym ) -   ((nS +1) dev +bdev )2
                                                                                                bdev + adev       2
                                                                                                                    ,

where

                                  sym =  (nS , nD ) and  dev =  (nS + 1, nD ) ,
and asym and adev are as defined in Equations (A.6) and (C.2), respectively. Then,


                         ¯sym (1+  
                                    ¯sym )(nS ¯sym +limn  asym )2           dev (1+   dev
                                                                                          )((nS +1)¯dev +limn  adev )2
                                                                                    2
  lim i (1; nD ) = -              2                     D
                                                                     -                                       D            2
                                                                                                                            .
nD                                       (2nS ¯sym )2                                      (2(nS +1)¯dev )2


Using Lemma 7 and Lemma 18 below we have
                                                                       2
                                                           1                   4nS
                            lim i (1; nD ) = -                                          2 
                                                                                          2
                                                                                               < 0,
                                                           ¯
                                                      2 -   sym nS          (4n2
                                                                               S - 1)
                          nD 

where we used that

             ¯sym  lim  (nS ) = - 2 (nS - 1) , and 
                                                   ¯dev  lim  (nS + 1) = -    2nS
                                                                                      .
                  nD              (2nS - 1)             nD                  (2nS + 1)


Lemma 9. If investor valuations are perfectly correlated, an investor has no incentives to deviate if there are
three active dealers, i.e.

                                              i ( = 1; nD = 3) > 0.




                                                           A8
Proof. Let bsym  b (nS , nD = 3), bdev  b (nS + 1, nD = 3) and b  b (nS - 1, nD = 3). From the definition
of i in Equation (24) we have


    i ( = 1; nD = 3)
                sym 1 + 2
                          sym
                                                          2         dev 1 + 2
                                                                              dev
                                                                                                                     2
  = lim -                             2   (bsym + asym ) -                                      2   bdev + adev            2
                                                                                                                           
    nD 3       (nS    sym   +   bsym )                         ((nS +    1)  dev    +    bdev )
                    3bsym              3bsym
                nS (2bsym +3)
                              1+ 2 nS (2bsym +3)                   sym      2          dev (1+ 2
                                                                                                 dev
                                                                                                     )                           2
  = lim -                 3bsym
                                          2               2bsym b    +3
                                                                bsym +6         -   ((nS +1) dev +bdev )2
                                                                                                                 bdev + adev              2
                                                                                                                                          
    nD 3                (2bsym +3)
                                   +bsym
                                                                                                                                          2
  = lim -       3b
                  sym
                      (2nS (2bsym +3)+3bsym )            3b
                                                            dev
                                                                (2(2bdev +3)(nS +1)+ 3bdev )             (bdev +6)             adev           2
                2       (n )2 (bsym +6)2
                                                     -   2         (nS +1)2 (bdev +6)2                   (2bdev +6)
                                                                                                                         1+    bdev
                                                                                                                                                ,
    nD 3


where we used that
                                                           2
                                                   (bsym )                3bsym
                                     asym =                and n  sym
                                                                      =             .
                                                  bsym + 6              (2bsym + 3)
From Lemma 19 in the Online Appendix we know that

                   4bsym nS + 6nS +  3bsym                     4 (nS + 1) bdev + 6 (nS + 1) +  3bdev
               -                             2       bsym +                                              2               bdev > 0             (A.16)
                        nS (bsym + 6)                                    (nS + 1) (bdev + 6)
and from Lemma 20 in the Online Appendix we have
                                                                                              2
                                          nS + 1          bdev + 6           adev
                                                 >                        1 + dev                 > 0.                                        (A.17)
                                            nS           (2bdev + 6)         b

   Then, from Equation (A.16) we have

             4bsym nS + 6nS +  3bsym                               4 (nS + 1) bdev + 6 (nS + 1) + 3bdev
         -                            2          bsym (nS + 1) +                                             2              bdev > 0
                    S (b
                   n2   sym + 6)                                                    nS (bdev + 6)

and using Equation (A.17) it follows that

                                                    i ( = 1; nD = 3, nS ) > 0.


                                                                     i (;nD )
Lemma 10. i is monotonically increasing in , i.e.,                                  > 0.

Proof. From the definition of i we have

                                             i (; nD , nS )
                                                            = L (nS + 1) - L (nS ) ,
                                                
where
                                                                                     2                                                2
                   1                                 (b (n) + (n - 1)  (n))                                         (n)
           L (n)  -  (n) ( (n) + 2)                                                      + (n - 1)
                   2                                     (b (n) + n (n))                                     (b (n) + n (n))

                   1                           (n)           (n) b (n)
                = -  (n) ( (n) + 2) 1 -                -                                                         > 0.
                   2                    (b (n) + n (n)) (b (n) + n (n))2

Taking the derivative with respect to n we have

                                                               L (n)
                                                                     >0
                                                               n


                                                                  A9
                                                                                   (n)
because from Lemma 21 in the Online Appendix we have that 1 -                 (b(n)+n (n))    is increasing in n, from Lemma
                   (n)b(n)
23 we know   - (b(n )+n (n))2
                                is increasing in n, and

                                  2  (n) ( (n) + 2)
                                 -1                                  (n)
                                                    = - ( (n)  + 1)      > 0,
                                        n                           n
because 0 >  (n) > - 1
                       and        
                                  n   < 0 from Lemma 6. Then, L (nS + 1) - L (nS ) > 0.

Proof of Proposition 3
The proof follows from Lemma 8 which shows that

                                                 lim i ( = 1; nD ) < 0,
                                                nD 

and Lemma 10 which shows that i (; nD ) is monotonically increasing in . This implies that

                                               i (; nD ) < i ( = 1; nD )

for any  < 1. Taking the limit as nD  , we obtain that

                                                   lim i (; nD ) < 0.
                                                  nD 


Proof of Proposition 4
At date 0, when investor i chooses a dealer with whom to trade, her expected payoff in a symmetric market
structure mns with no interdealer market is given by
                                                              i 2
                                        V1i (mns ) = E0 i xi
                                                           1-   x    - p1 xi
                                                                           1 ,
                                                             2 1
where xi 1 is the quantity of the asset the investor purchases at the price p1 when the investor's prior is  and
                                                                                                            i

follows from Equation (18) with 1 = nS -1 . The equilibrium price p1 is given by
                                          



                                                              iNI ( )   i
                                                       p1 =     .
                                                      nS + 1
   Substituting the quantity that the investor trades in equilibrium into her expected payoff we obtain

                                                        1 (nS )2 - 1                  2
                                        V1i (mns ) =                 E0      i - p1       ,
                                                       2 (nS )2
which can be written as

                                         1         2 nS - 1 nS (nS + 1) (1 - ) + 2 - 1
                          V1i (mns ) =        2 +                                       .
                                        2             (nS )2          (nS + 1)
In the case of no interdealer market, a symmetric market structure mnS is stable if the expected payoff of an
investor, V1i (mnS ), is decreasing in nS . In other words, the market structure mnS is stable if

                                  1
               V i (mns ) = - 3                         S + 6nS - 3nS - 4  + nS - 4nS - nS + 2
                                                       n3     2                     2    3
                                                                                                            0
             nS 1            nS (nS + 1)
                                         2

or when

                                                n3S + 4nS - nS - 2
                                                         2
                                                                   ^ (nS ) .
                                                                   
                                                nS + 6nS - 3nS - 4
                                                 3      2

Note that

                                                n3S + 4nS - nS - 2
                                                         2
                                                                   <1
                                                nS + 6nS - 3nS - 4
                                                 3      2

for all nS  2.

                                                              A10
Characterization of equilibrium in a centralized market
The first order condition for an investor i  NI in a centralized market is given by

                                                                      pc,-i
                                                 i - pc -  +                        c = 0,
                                                                                   xi
                                                                      xi c

where pc,-i is the inverse residual demand of investors i implied by

                                                      j
                                                     Xc pc ;  j +          c (pc ;  ) + xc = 0.
                                                                          Ql             i

                                        j NI ,j =i                  lND

The first order condition for a dealer           ND in a centralized market is given by

                                                                    pc,-
                                                     -pc -  +                  qc = 0,
                                                                    qc

where pc,- is the inverse residual demand of dealer                 implied by

                                                j
                                               Xc pc ; j +                 c (pc ;  ) + qc = 0.
                                                                          Ql
                                        j NI                    lND ,l=

The demand functions for investors and dealers implied by these first order conditions are, respectively,

                                                       i - pc                                 pc
                                  i
                                 Xc pc ;  i =                     and Qc (pc ; ) = -              ,
                                                        + i c                                 + c
            p                   p
where i c = xi
              c,-i
                   and c = q   c,-
                                    are the price impacts of investors and dealers in the centralized markets.
                c                c
    In an equilibrium in linear strategies we conjecture and subsequently verify that the demand functions of
investors and dealers are given by
                                     i
                                    Xc pc ; i = c i +  c pc             and Qc (pc ; ) = bc pc .

Matching coefficients we have
                                                            1                           1
                                          c = - c =                   and bc = -            .               (A.18)
                                                            + i
                                                              c                         + c
Market clearing implies that the equilibrium price in the centralized market is given by

                                                                  c     j NI   j
                                                         pc = -
                                                                  nI  c + nD bc
and the price impacts given by
                                                 1                                          1
                           c =
                           i                                      and c =                              .    (A.19)
                                        (nI - 1)  c + nD bc                        nI  c + (nD - 1) bc

   The equilibrium demand coefficients are given by the unique solution to the system in Equations (A.18)
and (A.19)
                                                      1 nI + nD - 2
                                   c = - c = -bc =                   .
                                                       nI + nD - 1
In equilibrium, the price impacts are given by
                                                                         
                                                       c = c =
                                                       i
                                                                    nI + nD - 2
                                j
and the price is pc =    j NI
                        nI +nD      .




                                                                  A11
Proof of Lemma 4
The expected utility of an investor i in local market             in a symmetric market structure is
                                                                          i      2
                                           V1i (mnS ; ) = E i xi
                                                               1-          x         - p 1 xi
                                                                                            1 ,                               (A.20)
                                                                         2 1
where xi1 and p1 are the equilibrium quantity acquired by investor i and the equilibrium price in local market
 , respectively. In this case n = nS   ND .
     The equilibrium price in local market is

                                                       p 1 =   +               i ,
                                                                         iN

where
                                                    n  +a         
                                               -          and         .                                                       (A.21)
                                                    n  +b       n  +b
Using the equilibrium linear strategies, we have

                                                                   a +b     n -1  +b
                             1 = E    +  p1
                       E  i xi                               =-
                                   i i                                  2             2
                                                                          -           
                                                                  n  +b       n  +b


                  2                          2
         E   xi
              1        =E          i +  p1
                                                   2
                                                                                         2                       
                       =                  a +b         2
                                                         +    n -1  +b                       + n -1       2             2
                                                                                                                          ,
                                 b +n                                                                          n  +b
and

                                                1 =   +     +   +    
                                         E p 1 xi          2         2


Then, Equation (A.20) becomes

                                           1                         2                            2                    1-
      V1i (mn ; ) = -               +1                   a +b            +     n -1  +b               + n -1       2          2
                                                                                                                              
                                 2     (n  + b )
                                                2                                                                       
                                                                                                                              (A.22)
Since  and b do not depend on , and                      -1
                                                            ,0    , we have that

                                                                                     2
                           V1i (m; )                         n -1  +b                    + n -1       2
                                                                                                          1
                                     =              +1                                                      < 0.
                                                 2                       (n  + b )
                                                                                             2            2

Proof of Proposition 5
Investor welfare can be rewritten as
                                                                 2                   2                        1-
                      V1i (m; ) = -           +1        (1 -  ) + (1 -  ) + 2
                                                                              n -1                                 2
                                                                                                                              (A.23)
                                           2                                                                   
where  and  are such that
                                                       p1 =   +                j .
                                                                         j N

    Let V = E V
             i
                      - E V be the difference between an investor's welfare in a centralized market withnD
                           i,c        i

dealers and a symmetric fragmented market with nD dealers. The proof follows directly from Lemma 12 and
Lemma 13 below. These lemmas use the following intermediate result.

Lemma 11. (Price function coefficients) The price function loading on the average idiosyncratic priors in
                                                                                s   c
a symmetric market structure is higher than that of a centralized market, i.e.,   > 

                                                              A12
Proof. Using the definition of the price coefficients in Equation (A.21) we have
                                                          s   c
                                                            > 
                                     1 nD - 2 s nS         1
                                                    >
                                    nS 2nD - 2 nS
                                               s      (nS + 1) nD
                                                      nD (nD - 2) nS + n2
                                               s nS <                    D
                                                      2 ((nD - 1) nS + nD )
which always holds since  s < 0 and the right hand side of this expression is positive.

Lemma 12. Investors are better off in a centralized market structure as  approaches 1, i.e., lim1 V i > 0.

Proof. Using the definition of V i and taking limits as   1 we have
                                                                2                                                    2
                                    c               nD                            s                1
               lim V i = - c          +1                            - - s           +1      -                            .
               1                   2             nI + nD                         2                nS - 2
                                                                                                 s


This limit can be rewritten as

                                                                       2                                         2                         2
                   s          c                             1                      c                nD                         1
lim V i =  s         + 1 - c    +1                   -                     - c       +1                              - -                       .
1                 2          2                             ns - 2
                                                          s                       2              nI + nD                      ns - 2
                                                                                                                             s

                                                                                                                               (A.24)
The first term in Equation (A.24) is positive because

                                                     
                                                     2     +1
                                                                    =  + 1 > 0
                                                      
and from Lemma 14 we have  s >  c . Also,
                                                1           1
                                                     >           >0
                                              nS + 1   2 -  s nS
                                                         nS - 1
                                                 s < -
                                                           nS

since H - nS -1
           nS      =    1
                       nS   (nS - 1) (nD - 2) > 0 and the second term is positive, which implies lim1 V i >
0.
                                                                     V i
Lemma 13. V i is monotonically decreasing in , i.e.,                        < 0 for all .

Proof. From the definition of V i we have
  V i      c                           2         2                          s                    2           2                   1 2
      = c    +1                1 - c
                                           + c
                                                     (nI - 1) -  s            +1         1 - s
                                                                                                     + s
                                                                                                                 (nS - 1)           .
          2                                                                2                                                     2 
                                                                                                                                 (A.25)
Since  c ,  s , c
                  and s
                        are independent of , monotonicity follows from Equation (A.25). Note that


         V i            c                             2                              s                       2
 sign        = sign  c    +1                1 - c
                                                          + c2
                                                               (nI - 1) -  s           +1            1 - s
                                                                                                                     + s2
                                                                                                                          (nS - 1)
                       2                                                            2
                                                                                                                                  (A.26)
where

                                    s          1 nD - 2 s nS                                 1
                            s
                                            =                                and c
                                                                                                  .
                                 nS  s + bs   nS 2nD - 2 s nS                             nI + nD
Rewriting the right hand side of Equation (A.26) we have
                                                                                                                              
                                                                         c 2
              V i                    c   2 c + 1 - s    2 s + 1     1 -      +   c2
                                                                                    (nI - 1)
      sign           = sign                           2                           2
                                                                                                                              .
                               - s 2  s + 1
                                    
                                               1 -  s
                                                        +  s2
                                                              (nS - 1) - 1 -   c
                                                                                    -  c2
                                                                                          (nI - 1)


                                                             A13
                                  ( ( 2  +1))
The first term is negative since              > 0 and from Lemma 14 below we have  s >  c .
   From Lemma 11 below we know that  >        s    c
                                                     . Let
                                                                     2
                                                  (x)  (1 - x) + x2 (nS - 1) .

Then
                                          (x) = -2 (1 - x) + 2x (nS - 1) = 2 (xnS - 1) .
Since s
        nS < 1 and nS c
                        < 1 we have that  (x) < 0 for all x in c
                                                                 , s
                                                                     . Since
                                2                                2
                        1 - s
                                    + s2
                                         (nS - 1) - 1 - c
                                                                      - c2
                                                                           (nI - 1)
                                     2                                   2
                    = 1 - s
                                         + s2
                                              (nS - 1) -      1 - c
                                                                              + c2
                                                                                   (nS - 1) - c2
                                                                                                 (nI - nS )
                                     2                                   2
                    = 1 - s
                                         + s2
                                              (nS - 1) -      1 - c
                                                                              + c2
                                                                                   (nS - 1) - c2
                                                                                                 nS (nD - 1)

                    =  s
                         -  c
                              - c2
                                   nS (nD - 1) < 0

           V i
we have          < 0.

Lemma 14. (Price sensitivities in fragmented and centralized markets) Investors are more sensitive
to the price in a centralized market than in a fragmented market structure, i.e.,  c <  .

Proof. Note that
                                                         1 nI + nD - 2    1 nI - 1
                                               c = -                   <-          .
                                                          nI + nD - 1      nI
Since  is given by H                = 0 where
                                                     2
                    H ( ) = -2n (n - 1) ( ) + ((2n - 1) nD - 2n (n - 2))  + 2 (n - 1) nD .

and
                    1 nI - 1                 1
            H -                     =-           2n2
                                                   S nD (nD - 1) + nS nD (nD - 2) + 2 (nS - 1) + nD < 0,
                                                                       2                          2
                     nI                    nS n2
                                               D
               1 (nI -1)
we have  s > -     nI    >  c because  c < 0,H < 0 and H (0) > 0.


Proof of Lemma 5
The expected utility of a dealer           in a symmetric market structure is
                                                                          2
                                             WD = -E         q + q2           + p1 q1 + p2 q2 ,                               (A.27)
                                                           2 1
where q1 and q2 are the equilibrium quantities acquired by the dealer in the local and interdealer markets,
respectively, and p1 and p2 are the equilibrium prices in these markets.
    Using the coefficients for the equilibrium linear strategies in Equations (A.6), we have
                                                                           
                                                                       l 2
                            2            2      ( nD - 2)   lND ,l=  q 1
                E q1 + q2      = E         q +
                                                             nD - 1
                                                                           
                                       nD 1         nD
                                                                               2                                 2
                                                    2            2                         (nD - 2)                   n  2
                                     = a + b            2
                                                          +        b               n 2
                                                                                       +            b 
                                                                nD                           nD                      nD - 1
                                                                  2                               2       2
                                             n                                                         n 
                                     =                   a +b         2
                                                                          +              b                   ,
                                           b +n                                    n  +b              nD - 1




                                                                A14
                                                                                                       

                     E p1 q1 = E   +                         i  a  + b   +                             i  ,
                                                      iN                                     iN
                                                                                                                 2
                                          n                                                    
                                =-                    a +b           n  +a         2
                                                                                     +b                              n 2
                                     (b + n  )
                                                  2                                          n  +b

and
                                                             l                                    l
                                                      lND   q1       (nD - 2)          lND ,l=   q1
                          E p2 q2 = E                                                                 - q1
                                                      nD               nD              nD - 1
                                          (nD - 2)               2     1        1
                                     =             b                     n 2
                                                                             -    n 2
                                                                                                  = 0.
                                            nD                        nD       nD

Then, Equation (A.27) becomes

                                2                           n  +a                                         1                b 1-
      VD (mn , ) =     n 
                                     -     a +b        +                        a +b      - 1+                 b                  2
                                                                                                                                    .
                     b +n                2                    n                                       2 nD - 1             n 
                                                                                                                                  (A.28)
      In a centralized market
                                               11     nI (nI + nD - 2)                           1-
                          VD (mnI , ) =                                                  nI +                2
                                                                                                                                  (A.29)
                                               2  (nI + nD - 1)2 (nI + nD )                       

      In a fragmented symmetric market structure, using the expression for welfare in Equation (A.28) we have
                                                             2
                                    VD           n                            1           b 1
                                       =                             1+            b          < 0,
                                               b +n                       2 nD - 1        n 2

because
                                              1                      1     1     n  nD
                                     1+            b        =1-
                                          2 nD - 1                   2 nD - 1 2n  - nD
                                                                 (2nD (nD -1)+(4-3nD )n  )
                                                            =         2(nD -1)(nD -2n  )
                                                                                                  >0

since nD  3. In a centralized market structure, using the dealer's welfare in Equation (A.29) we have
                                                                      2
                                       VD            nI  c           c c 1 2
                                          =                     1 +         
                                                   c + nI  c        2   nI 2 
                                                  1 1 nI - 1 1 1 2
                                               =-                  < 0.
                                                  2  nI + 1 2 nI 

Proof of Proposition 6
Let V D  E V ,c - E V . Since  s is independent of , V D is a continuous monotone function of .
From Lemma 15 and Lemma 16 below we have

                     lim V D = E V        ,c
                                               -E V         > 0 and lim V D = E V                ,c
                                                                                                      -E V           <0
                     1                                                    0

which gives the result.

Lemma 15. When investors have common priors we have

                                                           lim V D > 0.
                                                           1




                                                                  A15
Proof. When investors have common priors and   1 we have

                                          1            I (nI + nD - 2)
                                                      n2                                       nS  s
                            lim V D =                                                    -                       2
                                                                                                                   >0
                        1                2                            2
                                                  (nI + nD - 1) (nI + nD )                    s nS - 2

because
                                               I (nI + nD - 2)
                                              n2                                        nS  s
                                                                                   >                     .
                                                             2
                                         (nI + nD - 1) (nI + nD )                      s
                                                                                        nS -         2
To see this note that

                                                     nS x
                                                    xnS -2                     nS
                                                                 = -2                    2   <0
                                                    x                     (xnS - 2)
          -1)                1 (nS -1)
and - (nS
        nS    >  s since H -     nS    =              1
                                                     nS   (nS - 1) (nD - 2) > 0. Then,

                                                        1 (nS -1)
                                                    nS      nS                      nS  s
                                              -                                >
                                                  -1 (nS -1)
                                                                      -2
                                                                                   s
                                                                                    nS -         2
                                                       nS nS

and, because
                                                      1 (nS -1)
              I (nI + nD - 2)                                                  nS - 1
             n2                                   nS      nS
                                        >-                                 =          (nD - 1) (nS + nD + nS nD - 1) > 0
                        2
         (nI + nD - 1) (nI + nD )             -1 (nS -1)
                                                                   -2          nS + 1
                                                   nS nS

it follows that lim1 V D > 0.

Lemma 16. Dealers are better off in fragmented markets as the correlation in investor valuations disappears,
i.e.
                                             lim V D < 0.
                                                          0

Proof. Note that

                                     nI (nI + nD - 2)     1                            2 (nD - 1) - 1
                                                                                                    2 nD nS  - nD (nD - 1)
                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                                  nD
sign    lim V D    = sign                                -  s
        0                                    2
                                (nI + nD - 1) (nI + nD )  2                                                  (nD -    s nS )
                                                                                                                            2    nD - 1

   Let
                                          1 s        2 (nD - 1) - 1
                                                                  2 nD nS  - nD (nD - 1)
                                                                          s
                                                                                                                         nD
                   R ( s , nD , nS ) =      
                                          2                               (nD -     s nS )
                                                                                           2                            nD - 1
where
           R                 1         n2
             (x, nD , nS ) =             D
                                                     ((2nD - 3) nS x - nD (nD - 1)) < 0 for all x < 0.
           x                 2 (nD - xnS )3 (nD - 1)

                  -1)
Then, since - (nS
                nS    >  s

                                       (nS - 1)                        1          nD (nD - 1) + (nS - 1) 32 nD - 2
          R ( s , nD , nS ) > R -               , nD , nS         =      (nS - 1)                       2
                                          nS                          nS                  (nS + nD - 1)

Also,
                     R             (nS - 1)                      1 (nS - 1) (nS + 1) 3nS + nD - 3
                               -            , nD , nS     =                                      3 > 0.
                     nD               nS                         2        nS        (nS + nD - 1)
Then,
                             (nS - 1)                             (nS - 1)                       4 nS      3nS + 1
                    R -               , nD , nS      >R -                  , 3, nS           =                       .
                                nS                                   nS                          3 nS + 1 (3nS + 2)2


                                                                   A16
Let
                                                                    nS ((nS + 1) nD - 2)
                                      R (nD , nS ) :=                                  2
                                                              ((nS + 1) nD - 1) (nS + 1)
where
                               L                        nS
                                  (nD , nS ) = -                 3 (nD + nS nD - 3) < 0.
                               nD                (nD + nS nD - 1)
Then,
                                                                             4 nS      3nS + 1
                                     L (nD , nS ) < L (3, nS ) =                                 .
                                                                             3 nS + 1 (3nS + 2)2
Since, as shown in Lemma 17 below
                                                                         (nS - 1)
                                               L (3, nS ) < R -                   , 3, nS
                                                                            nS
we have
                                                (nS - 1)                              (nS - 1)
          L (nD , nS ) < L (3, nS ) < R -                , 3, nS             <R -              , nD , nS          < R  , nD , nS
                                                   nS                                    nS
for all nD  3, which implies
                                                              lim V D < 0.
                                                              0




Lemma 17.
                                                                         (nS - 1)
                                               L (3, nS ) < R -                   , 3, nS
                                                                            nS
Proof. We have
                           (nS - 1)                            S - 317 nS + 265nS - 312 nS + 49nS - 84
                                                         1 111n3         2         3                3
        L (3, nS ) - R -            , 3, nS     =-                                                     < 0,
                              nS                         6                             2
                                                                   nS (nS + 1) (nS + 2) (3nS + 2)
                                                                                                  2


for all nS  3.

Proof of Lemma 2
Volume in the interdealer market in a fragmented symmetric market structure is
                                       nD                          nD                                l
                               1                         1               (nD - 2)          lND      q1
                           VD = E              q2    =     E                                             - q1          ,
                               2                         2               (nD - 1)              nD
                                          =1                        =1

where
                                                              q2  N 0, q
                                                                       2
                                                                                2

with
                                                               2                      2
                                              (nD - 2)                     b                   1- 2
                                     2
                                     q     =                                              nS      ,
                                      2      (nD - 1) nD                nS  + b                 
since
                                                          l
                               (nD - 2)         lND      q1                  (nD - 2)               lND    pl
                                                                                                            1 - p1
                     q2 =                                     - q1       =            b
                               (nD - 1)             nD                       (nD - 1)                     nD
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                            i                      i
                               (nD - 2) b                          lND ,l=          iNI (l)  -           iNI (   )
                           =                                                                                               .
                               (nD - 1) nS  + b
                                                
                                                                                      nD

2
q is decreasing in  with lim1 q
                              2
                                = 0. Since
  2                                        2


                                                                          1
                                                          VD =               nD                                                    (A.30)
                                                                         2 q2
we have    VD
                < 0 and lim1 VD = 0.

                                                                     A17
Proof of Lemma 3
The volume traded in the local markets in a fragmented market structure is nD V where

                                                      1            iNI ( )   x1i + q1
                                             V =        E                                            .
                                                      2                   n +1

We know that
                                         x1  N 0, x
                                                  2
                                                                    and q1  N 0, q
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                             ,
                                                               1                                     1

where
               2
               x 1
                   = Var x1 = Var -                  i - p1
                          2
                   =          Var i + Var p1 - 2Cov i , p1
                              2
                                                     2                                   2                             2   1-
                   =               2     a +b            +         n -1  +b                  + n -1                             2
                                                                                                                                  ,
                       (b + n  )                                                                                            
and
                              2
                              q1
                                 = Var q1 = Var a  + b p1
                                             2                       2
                                   = a           Var () + b              Var p1 + 2a b Cov , p1
                                                     2
                                         n                                     2             2   1-
                                   =                     2     n    a +b           + b                           2
                                                                                                                   .
                                        (b + n  )                                                 

Then, since for x  N 0,  2 , |x| is a folded normal with E [|x|] =                               2
                                                                                                      , we have

                                                     1                n x1 + q1
                                                  V =                                        .                                        (A.31)
                                                     2                     n +1

      In a centralized market, volume is given by
                                                                   nI
                                                         1                 1i | + nD |q1 |
                                                                         |xc           c
                                             Vc =          E       i=1
                                                                                           .
                                                         2               nI + nD
We know that
                                          1i  N 0, xc
                                         xc                          and q1  N 0, q
                                                   2                      c       2
                                                     1
                                                                                    c
                                                                                    1
                                                                                      ,
where

                                    c = Var (x1 ) = Var -
                                              c           c
                                  2
                                  x 1
                                                             i - pc
                                                                  1
                                                 2
                                       = ( c )       Var i + Var p1 - 2Cov i , p1
                                                     (nI +nD )2                1-
                                                                   + nI +                (2nD - nI )
                                             c 2
                                       = ( )                                        2
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                   
                                                                      (nI + nD )
and

                                         c = Var q1 = Var  c p1
                                       2
                                       q 1
                                                                                          1-
                                                     2                         2    I + nI 
                                                                                   n2
                                          = ( c ) Var p1 = ( c )                                         2
                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                               .
                                                                                   (nI + nD )
Then,
                                                      1             n I x c + n D q 1
                                                                                    c
                                                 Vc =                     1
                                                                                                                                      (A.32)
                                                      2                 nI + nD
Because a ,  , and b do not depend on , a) and b) follow directly from Equation (A.31) and Equation (A.30),
respectively since xi
                    1
                      , q1 , and q2 are decreasing in . The third claim c) follows from Equation (A.32) since
x1 and q1 are decreasing in  because  c does not depend on .
  c        c




                                                                    A18
Characterization of Equilibrium when there is learning from prices
The equilibrium in the inter-dealer market remains the same as in the baseline model. Therefore, the equilibrium
price and quantity traded by dealer when the dealers' inventories are q1    l
                                                                              lN
                                                                                  are
                                                                                                  D


                                                     l
                                           lND      q1                      1
                              p2 = -                         and q2 = -         q1 + p2 ,                             (A.33)
                                           nD                               + 2

where 2 is the price impact of dealer in the interdealer market and it is given by 2 = nD
                                                                                          -2 , as in the baseline
model.
    The expected payoff of participating in the inter-dealer market for dealer after observing the price in her
local market is
                                                                            2
                    V2 q1 , p1 , s , m = E -      Q2 p2 ; q1 + q1               - p2 Q2 p2 ; q1       s , p1 , q1 ,
                                                2
where the expectation is taken over p2 . Then, the dealer's problem in her local market                         is

                                            max V2 q1 , p1 , s , m - p1 q1
                                               q1


and her first order condition is
                                               dV2        p1,-
                                                   - p1 -      q = 0.
                                               dq1        q1 1
Note that

                                           dV2   V2   V2 dq2   V2
                                               =    +        =    .
                                           dq1   q1   q2 dq1   q1
                                                                                       V2
since optimality in the dealer's choice in the interdealer market implies              q2
                                                                                            = 0. Therefore,

                                     dV2
                                         = - q1 + E Q2 p2 ; q1 | s , p1
                                     dq1
and the first order condition for dealer    in her local market is
                                                                                   p1,-
                              - q1 + E Q2 p2 ; q1 |s , p1                - p1 -           q1 = 0.
                                                                                    q1

                                                                                              ~ s +~
We conjecture and subsequently verify that in an equilibrium in linear strategies Q1 p1 ; s = a    b p1 and
X1 p1 ;  = 
 i      i
             ~  +
                i  ~ p , for all i  NI ( ) and for all  ND . Then, market clearing in local market implies
                      1

                                                         ~
                                                                    i + a
                                                               iNI ( )  ~s
                                           p1 = -                          .
                                                                  ~ ~
                                                                n  +b
The price contains information about , which is unknown to the dealers. From dealer 's perspective, the
unbiased signal about  that is contained in p1 is

                                    ~ +
                                    
                                           ~
                                           b
                                                               ~s
                                                               a                                   i
                            p  -           n
                                                    p1 +                   = =+
                                                             n  +~
                                                               ~  b                      iNI ( )
                                                                                                   n

which has precision
                                                                      -1      -2
                                             Var p , s                      n    .
    Using the equilibrium in the interdealer market and that ~ = - ~ from the investor's problem we have
                                                                                                 
                                 nD - 2  nD - 1         1            nl ~l
          E Q2 p2 ; q1 p1 = -                     q -                         bl + al E | s , p1  ,
                                 nD - 1      nD 1 nD              n l~l + ~bl
                                                          lN ,l=           D




                                                               A19
where
                                                          -2       -2 n  +b   ~    ~                a
                                                                                                    ~ s
                                   -2
                                      s + n -2
                                                             s - n     n ~                -p1 -   n ~ +~b
                E | s , p1 =   -2   -2     -2        =              -2   -2     -2                          .
                                  +    + n                             +    + n 
Plugging this expression into the first order conditions and matching coefficients, we have that the equilibrium
in linear strategies in the local market is characterized by the following system
                                                                                               
             nD n  ~             n  - 2             n l ~l
                                                                              -2
                                                                                  +   -2 a
                                                                                         ~
                                                               ~l + ~
                                  D                                                      ~
                                                                                         
     ~ =
     a                   -                                     a      bl -2
                ~ - nD       nD nD - 1              ~l + ~
                                                                                               
                                                                                   -2       -2
           2n                           lND ,l=
                                                 n l       bl                 +       + n  
                                                                                                          
             n   n ~
                                 n  - 2                         n l ~l
                                                                         n  ~ + ~b         n   -2
     ~
     b =
               D                  D
                                                  al + bl l l
                                                                                               
                                                                                                    -2 - 1 (A.34)
                         -
                ~ - nD       nD nD - 1                          ~ +~          ~
                                                                                                          
           2n                          lND ,l=
                                                              n        bl n          -2 + 
                                                                                       
                                                                                             -2
                                                                                                + n 

                     n -1    ~ +~b
   ~ = -
        ~ =-
                           ~   ~
                   (n - 1)  + b - 1

for all . Note that when 2
                           = 0, the system in Equations (A.34) is the same as the one in Equations (A.6)in
the baseline model.

Proof of Proposition 7
Throughout this proof, we set nI = nD nS and keep nS fixed. The expected utility of an investor i from
participating in the local market when the market structure is and there is learning from prices is
                                                      2
                       ~1i (m) =  +           1                          2
                       V            ~1                    E     i - p1
                                 2            + ~1
                                                            
                                                                                   j
                                                                                      2 
                                              1
                                                      2
                                                                n~             j
                                                                                 -a~s
                               =      +~1                 E i -                n
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                       
                                    2         + ~1                             ~ ~
                                                                             n  +b

where ~1 is the price impact of an investor in local market in a symmetric equilibrium of the trading game,
which satisfies
                                                 ~ =- 1 .
                                                                                                     (A.35)
                                                       +   ~1
    Let mS be a symmetric market structure. Then, we define ~ i (; nD ) as investor i's payoff from not deviating
from market structure mS , i.e.,
                                    ~ i (; nD ) = V
                                                  ~ i (m) - V
                                                            ~ i (mS - i + i ) .
                                                    1        1

   Note that because ~ i is continuous in the parameters a
                                                         ~, ~
                                                            b , and ~ , and for all  < 1, we have that
lim    ~ = a , lim
   2 0 a               ~                    ~
                   2 0 b = b , and lim 2 0  = 
                                        


                                          lim ~ i ; nD ,  2 = i (; nD ) .
                                        2 0              
                                        

   When  = 1,
                                     lim ~ i  = 1; nD ,  2 = i ( = 1; nD ) ,
                                    2 0                 
                                    

as investors will disregard their signal when the price is fully revealing. Therefore, we will consider the cases
for  2
       > 0 below and refer to Theorem 1 for the case in which      2
                                                                     = 0.
    Theorem 1 implies that when nD = 3 there exists  (nD = 3) < 1 such that

                                   i (; nD = 3) > 0           (nD = 3) .

Since lim2 0 
             ~ i ; nD ,  2 = i (; nD ) for all  < 1, there exists a threshold  such that
                        

                      ~ i ; nD = 3,  2 > 0 if 1 >   ~             nD = 3, 2
                                                                                       2
                                                                                          [0,  ] ,
                                    


                                                         A20
where ~   nD = 3, 2
                    < 1. Note that i ; nD = 3, 2
                                                 , is continuous in .Then

                                  lim ~ i ; nD = 3,  2 > 0  2  (0,  ]
                                                           
                                  1


Moreover, note that lim1 ~ i ; nD = 3,  2 is independent of  2 for all  2 > 0. Therefore, we have that
                                                                       

                                    lim ~ i ; nD = 3,  2 > 0  2 > 0.
                                                             
                                    1


    Since lim1 ~ i ; nD ,  2 is continuous in nD when  2 > 0, it follows that there exists a threshold n
                                                                                                       ~D > 3
                                                      
such that
                             lim ~ i ; nD ,  2 > 0 nD < n ~ D     2
                                                                     ,  2
                                                                          > 0.
                                            
                              1

Using that ~ i ; nD ,  2 is continuous is  for all  2 > 0 we have that there exists a threshold ^ nD , 2
                                                                                                         such
                                                   
that
                        ~ i ; nD ,  2 > 0  > 
                                                  ^ nD ,  2
                                                            , nD < n~ D   2
                                                                             ,   2
                                                                                   > 0,
                                   

which proves the result for 2
                              > 0. Theorem 1 proves the result for the case in which 2
                                                                                       = 0.




                                                    A21
                               .16         .155
             Fraction of Shares Traded in ATS
             .14       .145      .15
                               .135




                                                  .05        .1            .15             .2        .25   .3
                                                                  Dispersion in Analysts' Forecast


Note: Figure A1 shows a bin-scatter plot of the relation between disagreement on the x-axis (measured as the dispersion
in analysts' forecasts) and market fragmentation on the y-axis (measured as the fraction of shares of a given stock traded
in ATS) in 2016.

                                                        Figure A1: Fragmentation and disagreement


B     Disagreement and fragmentation in equity markets
Our model suggests that an important feature in determining whether an asset is traded in a fragmented market
is the disagreement between investors about the value of the asset. More specifically, our results imply that
assets for which there is less disagreement are more likely to be traded in fragmented markets.
     We investigate the relation between disagreement and market fragmentation, using data from equity markets.
Typically, equity trading is not intermediated through interdealer markets. However, as Proposition 4 shows, in
our model fragmentation can be supported in equilibrium even in the absence of an interdealer market provided
there is little disagreement between investors. Thus, our results on market fragmentation can be applied to the
context of equity markets.
     We use three databases to explore the relation between disagreement and market fragmentation. We get
analysts' price forecasts from IBES price target data, the total number of shares traded in exchanges from
CRSP, and the total number of shares traded in ATS from FINRA ATS. After merging the three databases we
are left with $10,534$ stock-month observations. The average number of monthly forecasts is close to 8.27. On
average, disagreement is close to 11% of the average price.
     We construct our measure of fragmentation similarly to O'Hara and Ye (2011). As a proxy for market
fragmentation, we use the fraction of shares of a given stock that is traded in ATS out of the total shares of
the stocks traded in a given month. The FINRA ATS data is reported at a weekly frequency. We aggregate
all shares across all ATS for each week and then across all weeks in a month to get the monthly shares of each
stock traded in ATS which we label #T otalSharesXY AT S for stock XY Z . We obtain the number of shares traded
                                                       Z

in the main exchanges in a month from CRSP by aggregating the daily number of shares sold at the CUSIP




                                                                            A22
level. We label this amount #T otalSharesXY
                                         nonAT S for stock XY Z . Our measure of fragmentation is given by
                                            S


                                                        #T otalSharesXY Z
                        F ragmentation =                             AT S
                                                                                      .
                                             #T otalSharesAT S + #T otalSharesXY
                                                          XY Z                   S
                                                                              nonAT S

    We measure disagreement as the standard deviation in analyst forecasts for a particular stock normalized
by the average of the forecast prices to control for the differences in the scale of stock prices. We label this
measure DISP XY Z for stock XY Z . We use the CUSIP identifier from CRSP to download the corresponding
IBES price target data. The IBES price target data reports analysts' forecasts of each stock price. We focus
on forecasts with 12 month horizons on their announcement dates. Using the IBES foreign exchange data we
convert all forecasts to USD. Then, for each stock XY Z with more than three forecasts within a month, we
compute our measure of disagreement by taking the standard deviation of those forecasts normalized by the
average of the forecast prices, as in Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002), Yu (2011), and Hong and Sraer (2016).
More specifically, we measure disagreement as the standard deviation of the analysts' forecasts normalized by
the average analyst forecast for that stock in a given month. We have included only stocks for which we have
more than three analyst forecasts. As a proxy for market fragmentation, we use the fraction of shares of a
given stock that is traded in alternative trading systems (ATS) out of the total shares of the stocks traded in a
given month. FINRA provides data about how many shares for each stock are traded in ATS, and we get the
number of shares for each stock that is traded in main exchanges (NYSE, Nasdaq, and AMEX) from CRSP.
Our measure of fragmentation is similar to the one used by O'Hara and Ye (2011). A more detailed description
of the data and sample construction can be found in the Appendix.
    Figure A1 shows, in a bin-scatter plot, the relation between our measure of disagreement, on the x-axis,
and our measure of market fragmentation, on the y-axis, in 2016. We find a negative correlation between
disagreement and market fragmentation.13 This finding is consistent with our model's prediction in Section
4. In our model, the degree of market fragmentation is negatively associated with the level of disagreement
between investors. A first look at the data suggests that the mechanism highlighted in our model is plausible
and hints towards the importance of strategic trading in determining fragmented market structures. A more
thorough analysis of the empirical relation between the degree of market fragmentation and disagreement,
though interesting, is left for future work.




  13
    Figure A1 is constructed using data winsorized at 5% and 95%. The negative correlation is robust to winsorizations
at 2.5% and 1% , and to using unwinsorized data.


                                                        A23
C       Online Appendix (not for publication)
This section contains intermediate results used in the main appendix.

Lemma 18. In a symmetric equilibrium
                                                                     nD - 2
                                asym = -n 2  sym2                                                             (C.1)
                                                      n  sym  - 2 nD - 2n  sym 
where
                                              n   ¯ 2
                               lim a sym
                                           =          ,      lim asym = lim -bsym
                             nD                   ¯
                                             2 -  n       n               n 

and
                                                                   2
                                                       1
                                                       3n    (bsym )  sym
                                     lim asym =                               .
                                    nD 3          n    sym   + bsym - 3
                                                                      1 sym
                                                                        b   n
If one investor deviates from a fragmented symmetric market structure then

                                                                        ¯
                                                          o
                                                                           
                                                   - n n o  -2 n - 1 
                                       
                                          a             
                                   lim  ah  = 
                                                          o
                                                         o  -2 n + 1 
                                                                        ¯h 
                                                                           
                                                   - n n
                                       
                                 nD                                        
                                                               o
                                          ao          - n o n  o
                                                               n   -2

and

                                                              5bh+o  +6bh +6bo
                                                                                                           
                  b  5b  + 12 90bh+o  2 +288bh  +288bo  +90
            
            a                                                   bh+  2 +90bo+  2 +25bh+o+  3 +288b  +864
                                                               6b +5bo+  +6bo
       lim  a  =  b  5b  + 12 90bh+o  2 +288bh  +288bo  +90bh+  2 +90bo+  2 +25bh+o+  3 +288b  +864
            h   h                                                                                          
                         h                                                                                 
      nD 3                                                                                                 
            ao                                                6b +5bh+  +6bh
                  bo  (5bo  + 12) 90bh+o  2 +288bh  +288bo  +90 bh+  2 +90bo+  2 +25bh+o+  3 +288b  +864

Proof. In a symmetric equilibrium

                                            nD - 2 sym    asym + bsym
                                  asym =          b    n                sym
                                             nD          n  sym + bsym
or, alternatively,
                                                                   2
                                                  nD -2
                                                   nD n      (bsym )  sym
                                asym =
                                           n  sym + bsym -     nD -2 sym
                                                                nD b     n     sym

where
                                                        n  sym nD
                                            bsym = -
                                                       2n  sym - nD
and  sym =  n . Then,
                                                                          2
                                                          nD -2
                                                           nD n    (bsym )  sym
                            lim asym = lim
                           nD              nD    n    sym + bsym   -   nD -2 sym
                                                                        nD b     n    sym
                                            n   ¯ 2       2n2 n - 1
                                                                              2
                                       =            =
                                                ¯
                                           2 -  n      (2n - 1) (n + n2 - 1)

                                                                         nD
                                           lim asym = lim -bsym =
                                       n                n                2
                                                           sym 2
                                                       3 (b    ) n  sym
                                                       1
                                     lim asym =
                                    n 3           n    sym  +bsym  1 sym
                                                                  -3 b   n



                                                        A24
Using that
                                                                 3bsym
                                                   n  sym =
                                                                2bsym + 3
                                                        2                                           2
                                               (bsym )                (bsym ) 
                       lim asym =                              =
                     n 3               3 + 1 - 3 n (2bsym + 3)
                                               1
                                                                 6+ 1- 1
                                                                       3 n 2b
                                                                               sym - n


   If the investor chooses to deviate, the market structure is as follows: market                         has n - 1 investors, market
h has n + 1 and the rest of the nD - 2 markets have n investors. Then,

                                              (nD - 2)   1                           al  l - bl l
                                  a =b                                          nl
                                                nD     nD - 1                         nl  l + bl
                                                                     lND ,l=



           (nD - 2)   1                       ao + bo o           ah + bh
a =b                         (nD - 2) n                 + n +1                 h
             nD     nD - 1                   n  +b
                                                 o   o         (n + 1)  h + bh
           (nD - 2)   1                        ao + bo o           a +b
ah = bh                       (nD - 2) n                 + n -1              
             nD     nD - 1                    n  o + bo         (n - 1)  + b
           (nD - 2)   1                       ao + bo o            a +b                  ah + bh
ao = bo                      (nD - 3) n                 + n - 1               + n + 1                 h
             nD     nD - 1                   n  o + bo          (n - 1)  + b          (n + 1)  h + bh

One can rewrite this system as
                                                                             -1     
                                  a          11                      12   13     c1
                                  a  = I3 -  21                      22   23   c2                                                  (C.2)
                                  h                                                 
                                  ao         31                      32   33     c3

where
                                                                                    (n +1) h
                                                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                        -2)                                          -2) (nD -2) n 
                                             0                   b  (nD       1
                                                                                                              b  (nD
                    
 11     12      13                                                    nD    nD -1 (n +1) h +bh                     nD     nD -1 n  o +bo
                                           (n -1)
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                      -2) (nD -2) n  o
        22      23  =  bh  (nD -2)   1
                                                                                     0                        bh  (nD
                                                                                                                                         
 21                          nD    nD -1 (n -1) +b                                                                  nD             o
                                                                                                                           nD -1 n  +b o 
 31     32      33                         (n -1)                                    (n +1) h
                      
                                                                                                                                     o
                               -2)                                       -2)                                   o (nD -2) (nD -3) n 
                       bo  (nD
                             nD
                                     1
                                   nD -1 (n -1) +b               bo  (nD
                                                                       nD
                                                                               1
                                                                             nD -1 (n +1) h +bh               b  nD nD -1 n  o +bo

and
                                                                                           (n +1)bh
                                                                                                                          
                                            -2)                          n bo
                                   b    (nD
                                          nD
                                                  1
                                                nD -1       (nD - 2)   n  o +bo
                                                                                o     +   (n +1) h +bh
                                                                                                       h                  
              c1
                                                                                            (n -1)b
                                                                                                                          
                                            -2)                             o
              c2  =                 bh  (nD                 (nD - 2) n n      o +
                                                  1                      b
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                          .
             
                                          nD    nD -1                   o +bo             (n -1) +b                       
              c3    
                                                                 o           (n -1)b                      (n +1)bh h
                                                                                                                          
                                  -2)
                          bo  (nD       1
                                                 (nD - 3) n n b
                                                                   o +                       +
                                                                                                                          
                                nD    nD -1                  o +bo         (n -1) +b                    (n +1) h +bh
                                                                                                                     

Then,
                                                                 -1                            -1
                                                                                 -n  o+  n n
                                                                                                   
              a               11                     12       13          c1                 o  -2
         lim  ah  = I3 - lim  21                     22       23     lim  c2  =  -n  h+o  n n  +1
                                                                                                   
        nD              nD                                          nD                       o  -2 
              ao              31                     32       33          c3                 
                                                                                  -n2  2o n  o  -2



                                                                                                          2 (n -1) (n -2)
                                                                                                                    2           
                                                                     -1                     
              a              11                      12      13                 c1                         (2n -3)(n 2 +n -1)
                                                                                                          2 n (n -1)(n +1)
                                                                                                                                
         lim  a  = I3 - lim  21                      22      23            lim  c2  = 
              h                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                           (2n +1)(n 2 +n -1)
                                                                                                                                
        nD             nD                                                 nD 
              ao             31                      32      33                                                n (n -1)
                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                c3                        2
                                                                                                           (2n -1)(n 2 +n -1)




                                                               A25
When nD  3, we have
                                                   -1                   
            a                   11 12 13                            c1
       lim  ah  = I3 - lim  21 22 23                       lim  c2 
                                                                        
      nD 3             nD 3                               nD 3
            ao
                                31 32 33                            c3
                                                                   h+o
                                                                                                                               
                                                                        +6bh +6bo
                   b  5b  + 12 90bh+o  2 +288bh  +288bo  +90    5b
                                                                  bh+  2 +90bo+  2 +25bh+o+  3 +288b  +864
                                                                 6b +5bo+  +6bo
                =  b  5b  + 12 90bh+o  2 +288bh  +288bo  +90bh+  2 +90bo+  2 +25bh+o+  3 +288b  +864
                                                                                                                               
                     h     h                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                               
                                                                6b +5bh+  +6bh
                    bo  (5bo  + 12) 90bh+o  2 +288bh  +288bo  +90 bh+  2 +90bo+  2 +25bh+o+  3 +288b  +864

where we used that
                                                                   3b (n)
                                                     n (n) =                 .
                                                                  2b (n) + 3


Lemma 19. Let
                                                     (4b (n) n + 6n + 3b (n))
                                         F (n)  -                              2          b (n) .
                                                               n (b (n) + 6)
Then, F (n) > 0 for all n  0 and F (n) < 0.

Proof. First, note that
                                                    (4n + 3) b (n) + 6n > 0                                                         (C.3)
                             3n (n)
since using that b (n) =   3-2n (n)      Equation (C.3) becomes

                            (4n + 3)  3n (n) + 6n (3 - 2n (n)) = 9n ( (n) + 2) > 0

since  (n)  - 1
                . The derivative of F (·) with respect to n is

                                                       2
                                3                 b (n)         2                                 b (n)
              F (n) =                                   -              (6n + 6b (n)  + 7b (n) n )
                         n (b (n)  + 6)
                                           2         n    (b (n)  + 6)                            n

                              3n (n)
Then, using that b (n) =    3-2n (n)      we have

                                    b (n)        9                                         (n)
                                          =             2                 (n) + 9n
                                    n       (2n (n) - 3)                                  n

and
                           n                                                                                          (n)
       F (n) =                       3     ( (n)  + 2) (n (n)  + 2)  (n) + 18n ((n + 2)  (n) + 2)                               .
                 3n2   (n (n) - 2)                                                                                   n

From Lemma 6 we know  (n)  - 1
                               and thus ( (n)  + 2) > 0. Moreover, n (n)  + 2 < 0 since

                                          2                    2
                                H -         ; nD = 3       =     5n2 - 17n + 7 > 0 for n  3.
                                         n                     n

Then, (n + 2)  (n) + 2 < 0 and F (n) < 0.

Lemma 20. We show that
                                                                                            2
                                           n +1             bdev + 6               adev
                                                >                         1+                    .                                   (C.4)
                                            n              2bdev + 6               bdev
Proof. Using Lemma 18 we have

     bdev + 6            adev                                      (bdev +6)(5bsym +12)(5b       +12)
                   1+           =                                                                                                   .
   (2bdev + 6)           bdev       288bsym +288bdev +288b         +90 2 bsym bdev +90 2 bsym b +90 2 bdev b +25 3 bsym bdev b +864



                                                                 A26
Then, showing Equation (C.4) holds is the same as showing that
                                                                                                        2        n
            288bsym +288bdev +288b +90 2 bsym bdev +90 2 bsym b +90 2 bdev b +25 3 bsym bdev b +864
                                                                                                            >
                                    (bdev +6)(5bsym +12)(5b +12)                                                n +1
                                                                                                        2
                                    b - bdev                   bsym - bdev                                       n
                           -6                      - 6                           +1                         >
                              (bdev + 6) (5b + 12)      (5bsym  + 12) (bdev + 6)                                n +1
                                                                                                        2        n
                                                              -G b ; bdev - G bsym ; bdev + 1               >        ,    (C.5)
                                                                                                                n +1
where
                                                                x - bdev
                                         G x; bdev = 6                         .
                                                          (bdev + 6) (5x + 12)
Because
                                                              3n (n)
                                                b (n) =                ,                                                  (C.6)
                                                          (3 - 2n (n))
we have
                                         5b (n) + 12    (n)  (n + 1) - 4
                                                     =                   > 0,
                                          b (n) + 6     (n)  (n + 1) - 2
which implies
                                                          5bdev + 12
                                          G (x) =                             2    >0
                                                    (bdev + 6) (5x + 12)
and G x, bdev > 0 for x > bdev since G bdev ; bdev = 0. Then, since G b ; bdev > G bsym ; bdev , if

                                                        b - bdev                            n
                             2G b ; bdev = 12                           <1-                     ,                         (C.7)
                                                  (5b  + 12) (bdev + 6)                    n +1

Equation (C.5) holds. Using that  dev  (-1, 0) and Equation (C.6) we have
                                                              1   3n
                                                  b (n) > -             .
                                                               (3 + 2n)

Because the left hand side of Equation (C.7) is decreasing in bdev we can rewrite Equation (C.7) as

                          (2n + 5) b + 3 (n + 1)                n
                      4                          <1-
                            3 (5b  + 12) (n + 3)               n +1

                                                          12 n + 1 + 3             n
                                                                                  n +1
                                                                                         -1      n +3
                                               b < -
                                                          4 (2n + 5) + 15           n
                                                                                   n +1
                                                                                          - 1 (n + 3)

since 4 2n + 5 + 15           n
                             n +1
                                    -1    n + 3 > 0. Using Equation (C.6) this becomes


                         3 n - 1           12 n + 1 + 3                  n
                                                                        n +1
                                                                                  -1     n +3
                                        <-
                      (3 - 2 (n - 1)  )    4 (2n + 5) + 15                   n
                                                                                   - 1 (n + 3)
                                                                            n +1

                                                    4 -2 n + 4 + 3 3 + n                   n
                                                                                          n +1
                                          <                                                          Z
                                                (n - 1) -3n - 13 + 3 (3 + n )                  n
                                                                                              n +1

which holds because


    Z
H     ; n = n - 1, nD = 3      = -2 n - 1        n - 2 Z 2 + 3 2n - 3 + 2 n - 1 - 2 n - 1                        n -2    Z +6 n - 2 > 0
    

                                                           A27
for all n > 2. Indeed, it is simple to check that

                                                                              2         3
                                    n +3        n +1       -56n - 8 n             + n       - 19 > 0,

for n  3. This implies that

     n                                                 2          3                n                                                2             3
6        n +3         n +1          -56n - 8 n             + n        - 19 > 6         n +3            n +1    -56n - 8 n               + n           - 19 ,
    n +1                                                                          n +1

and further

                  2                 3             4          5                     n                                            2             3
949n + 1313 n         + 489 n           + 33 n        -6 n       - 58 + 6              n +3        n +1       -56n - 8 n            + n           - 19
                                                                                  n +1
                                                                                                       4          3             2
                                                                                                >3 n       +9 n       + 191 n       + 607n - 58,

for n  13.
    This shows that H         ;n
                             Z
                                        = n - 1, nD = 3          > 0 for n          13.         For 3  n       12 we show that

     ;n   = n - 1, nD = 3 > 0 point by point.
    Z
H

Lemma 21. We show that
                               1
                            d -2  (n) ( (n) + 2)     2  (n) ( (n) + 2) 
                                                    -1
                                                 =                       > 0.
                                     dn                                n
Proof.
                                               2  (n) ( (n) + 2)
                                              -1
                                                                 = - (n)  - 1 < 0
                                                    (n)
since
                                1
                          H -           = -2 (n - 1) n - ((2n - 1) nD - (n - 2) 2n) + 2 (n - 1) nD
                                
                                        = -2n - nD < 0,

                                                                          1
                                                              (n) > -
                                                                          


Lemma 22. We show that
                                                                       (n)
                                                       nD + 2n2            > 0.
                                                                      n
                                         (n)
Proof. Using the definition of          n

                                                                                            2
nD (-4 (n - 1) n (n) + ((2nI - 1) nD - (n - 2) 2n))-2n2 2 - 2  (n) (2n - 1) -  (n) (2 (n - 1) - nD ) + nD                                               <0

                      2
4n2 (2n - 1)  2  (n) + -4n2 (nD - 2n + 2) - 4nnD (n - 1)  (n)+ nD (nD (2n - 1) - 2n (n - 2)) - 4n2 nD < 0
                                         2
    Using the definition of  (n)

                                                                 (n - 1) nD + 2 (n) nI
                                         2n2 + (2n - 1) nD                             >0
                                                                          n-1
since we show below in Lemma 24 that

                                                   ((n - 1) nD + 2 (n) n) > 0.




                                                                  A28
                                       (n)b(n)
Lemma 23. We show that             (b(n)+n (n))2
                                                   is decreasing in n.

Proof.
                                         (n) b (n)                    (n)            b (n)
                                                           =
                                     (b (n) + n (n))
                                                       2       (b (n) + n (n)) (b (n) + n (n))
Then,

                            d           (n) b (n)                   d         (n)                b (n)
                                                           =
                           dn      (b (n) + n (n))
                                                      2            dn   b (n) + n (n)       b (n) + n (n)
                                                                         (n)      d           b (n)
                                                           +
                                                                   b (n) + n (n) dn     (b (n) + n (n))

   From Lemma 25 and Lemma 24 we know that
                                 d           (n)                          d          b (n)
                                                           < 0 and                                       <0
                                dn     b (n) + n (n)                     dn    (b (n) + n (n))

Since b (n) < 0 and  (n) < 0 the result follows.

Lemma 24. We show that
                                                     d           (n)
                                                                                 < 0.
                                                    dn     b (n) + n (n)
Proof. We have that

                  d         (n)                       (n)                     (n)                             db (n)
                                              =                +
                 dn   b (n) + n (n)           n b (n) + n (n)     b (n) b (n) + n (n)                          dn
                                                          (n)       
                                            +                          ,
                                               (n) (b (n) + n (n)) n

where
                                                                                        2
                                                        (n)                         (n)
                                                                        =-                            <0
                                         n        b (n) + n (n)               (b (n) + n (n))
                                                                                                  2

                                                        (n)                           (n)
                                                                        =-                            >0
                                      b (n)       b (n) + n (n)               (b (n) + n (n))
                                                                                                  2

                                                     (n)                           b (n)
                                                                        =                         < 0.
                                    (n)       (b (n) + n (n))               (b (n) + n (n))
                                                                                              2


   Then,

     d           (n)                           (n)2                                    (n)                 2
                               =                                        -2n2 nD            - (nD - 2 (n) n) + n2            ,
    dn     b (n) + n (n)           (b(n)+n (n))2 (nD -2 (n)n)2                        n                        D


where
                                                (n)                 2
                                      2n2 nD        + (nD - 2 (n) n) + n2
                                                                        D > 0.                                              (C.8)
                                               n
To see this note that using
                                                       2
                            (n)    2 - (n)  2 (2n - 1) -  (2 (n - 1) - nD ) + nD
                                =-
                           n         -4 (n - 1) n 2  + ((2n - 1) nD - (n - 2) 2n) 

Equation (C.8) becomes
                                                               2
                                                                                                                 
                                            2 - 2  (n) (2n - 1) -  (n) (2 (n - 1) - nD ) + nD
                           2
         (nD - 2 (n) n) + n2 nD -                                                                                 + n2
                                                                                                                     D >0
                                                   -4 (n - 1) n (n) + ((2n - 1) nD - (n - 2) 2n)


                                                                     A29
    The first term is positive. The last two terms can be written as nD J ( (n)) where
                                               2
                                                                                               
                                  2 - 2  (n) (2n - 1) -  (n) (2 (n - 1) - nD ) + nD
           J ( (n)) := 2n2 -                                                                    + nD > 0
                                      -4 (n - 1) n (n) + ((2n - 1) nD - (n - 2) 2n)

Rearranging terms

                                                                                    D +(6n -4n)nD )
                            ((4 2 n2 -8 2 n3 ) 2 +(8n2 -8n3 +8n2 nD -4nnD ) +(1-2n)n2     2
               J ( (n)) =                      -(-4(n-1)n +((2n-1)nD -(n-2)2n))

                                                        2
    The denominator is negative. Substituting ( (n)) , the numerator can be written as
                                 1
                            -       ((n - 1) nD + 2 (n) n) 2n2 + (2n - 1) nD < 0
                                n-1
since

                                      ((n - 1) nD + 2 (n) n) > 0
                                                                       (n - 1) nD
                                                         (n) > -
                                                                           2n
because
                                      (n - 1) nD      1
                                H -                = - nI nD (nI - 1) (nD - 2) < 0.
                                          2n          2
Then, nD J ( (n)) > 0 and Equation (C.8) holds.

Lemma 25. We show that
                                              d         b (n)
                                                                       < 0.
                                             dn    b (n) + n (n)

Proof. Using the definition of b (n) we have
                                                    nnD  (n)
                              b (n)               (nD -2n (n))                       nD
                                       =                                 =
                         b (n) + n (n)         nnD  (n)                       2 (nD - n (n))
                                             (nD -2n (n)) + n      (n)

Then,

              d        b (n)             d          nD                 1       nD              d (n (n))
                                    =                              =     
             dn   b (n) + n (n)         dn   2 (nD - n (n))            2 (nD - n (n))2             dn
                                        1       nD                 (n)
                                    =                         n        +  (n)        < 0.
                                        2 (nD - n (n))2           n




                                                        A30
