                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               DISABILITY INSURANCE IN THE GREAT RECESSION:
       EASE OF ACCESS, PROGRAM ENROLLMENT, AND LOCAL HYSTERESIS

                                      Melissa S. Kearney
                                      Brendan M. Price
                                        Riley Wilson

                                      Working Paper 28725
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28725


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Hans Ringger for excellent research assistance and Hilary Hoynes for serving as a
discussant of this paper at the ASSA 2021 meetings. The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views or policies of the Social Security
Administration, nor those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, nor its staff,
nor the National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are ours.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Melissa S. Kearney, Brendan M. Price, and Riley Wilson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Disability Insurance in the Great Recession: Ease of Access, Program Enrollment, and Local
Hysteresis
Melissa S. Kearney, Brendan M. Price, and Riley Wilson
NBER Working Paper No. 28725
April 2021
JEL No. H53,I38,J08

                                           ABSTRACT

Previous research has documented that Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) applications
and awards increase during economic downturns and that expanded access to SSDI leads to a
reduction in employment. We build on these insights and investigate to what extent differential
access to SSDI during economic downturns leads to differential changes in SSDI enrollment and
employment during the subsequent recovery. We exploit plausibly exogenous variation in SSDI
appeals processing time (a measure of hassle or access) facing individuals living in ZIP codes that
straddle Social Security Administration hearing office catchment borders. During the Great
Recession, ZIP codes assigned to hearing offices with faster appellate processes saw a larger
increase in SSDI enrollment than their cross-border neighbors. These enrollment effects are
concentrated among ZIP code pairs that experienced more severe labor market downturns, and
they persist as late as 2015. In the full sample, there is no clear effect of longer processing times
on subsequent employment rates. However, we find some limited evidence that faster appellate
processes may have weighed on the employment recovery in hard-hit ZIP codes that had high
pre-recession rates of SSDI enrollment. Our findings highlight the importance of considering
interaction effects between economic shocks and ease of access to the safety net.

Melissa S. Kearney                                Riley Wilson
Department of Economics                           435 CTB
University of Maryland                            Department of Economics
3105 Tydings Hall                                 Brigham Young University
College Park, MD 20742                            Provo, Utah 84602
and NBER                                          riley_wilson@byu.edu
kearney@econ.umd.edu

Brendan M. Price
Federal Reserve Board
20th Street and Constitution Ave NW
Washington, DC 20551
brendan.m.price@frb.gov




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28725
1    Introduction

The Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) program run by the US Social Security Adminis-

tration (SSA) provides roughly $125 billion annually in benefits to 8.4 million disabled workers, or

4.4 percent of the adult population under 65 (Social Security Administration, 2020). The program

provides insurance benefits to individuals who meet work requirements and demonstrate a medical

disability that is determined to preclude substantial work activity. Prior research has documented

that enrollment in the program increases in response to economic downturns (e.g., Autor and Dug-

gan, 2003; Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2015). This is consistent with the notion of disability

being somewhat fluid for a set of marginal beneficiaries who apply to the program if and when

their labor market opportunities are sufficiently weak, so that enrolling in SSDI is relatively more

attractive. Research has also documented that a sizable subset of SSDI beneficiaries would have

worked in the years immediately following their initial SSDI application had they not been awarded

benefits (e.g. Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2013; French and Song, 2014). We build on these two

insights by investigating whether an interaction effect between easier access to SSDI and an unem-

ployment shock leads to increased program enrollment after an economic downturn and to reduced

employment growth during the subsequent recovery.

      We examine the context of the Great Recession in the United States. As shown in Figure 1,

SSDI applications rose sharply in 2009, in line with the surge in unemployment. Maestas, Mullen,

and Strand (2018) estimate that the Great Recession induced nearly 1 million additional applicants

to apply to the program, of whom 42 percent were awarded benefits (half of which were awarded

on appeal). They further show that the increase was driven by applicants who were on average

healthier and more equipped for the labor force. This shift in composition is consistent with the

relative opportunity cost of applying to SSDI falling for less severely disabled workers when the

labor market is weak. Given that SSDI is generally an absorbing state, with almost all those who

enter the program staying permanently out of the workforce, the question emerges as to whether

relatively easier access to the program for marginal applicants during a downturn imparts a drag

to employment recovery thereafter.

      This paper identifies the extent to which SSDI accessibility--as experienced through appeal

wait times--amplifies or dampens the increase in SSDI enrollment in the aftermath of the Great


                                                 2
Figure 1: National trends in unemployment and in SSDI applications

                                                10.0                                                       3.0


                                                 9.0                                                       2.8




                       Percent of labor force




                                                                                                                 Millions of workers
                                                 8.0                                                       2.6


                                                 7.0                                                       2.4


                                                 6.0                                                       2.2


                                                 5.0                                                       2.0


                                                 4.0                                                       1.8
                                                       2003   2005    2007   2009   2011   2013     2015

                                                              Unemployment rate     SSDI applications


Notes: National unemployment rate as reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (series LNU04000000, annual
averages). SSDI applications by workers as reported by the Social Security Administration (2020).


Recession, as well as the extent to which it speeds or slows the subsequent recovery in employment.

The general question of how SSDI accessibility affects employment rates and cyclical recovery is

difficult to answer because local variation in SSDI application and enrollment rates is partly driven

by factors related to local labor market conditions, some of them unobserved by the econometri-

cian. We attempt to overcome this identification challenge by exploiting plausibly exogenous local

variation in a particular element of application hassle: the length of the appellate process. Our em-

pirical strategy takes advantage of an institutional feature of the way SSA processes SSDI appeals.

Denied SSDI applicants have the option of appealing their denials to an administrative law judge

(ALJ), and many do so: during the Great Recession, 28 percent of all SSDI applicants appealed an

initial rejection to an ALJ (Zayatz, 2015). These judges hear appeals from SSA hearing offices with

geographic catchment areas, to which applicants are assigned based on their ZIP code of residence.

We leverage differences in average appeal processing time at the borders between hearing office

jurisdictions to identify the effects of easier access to SSDI on program enrollment and employment

rates in local labor markets hit more or less severely by the Great Recession.

      To illustrate our empirical approach, consider two workers who live in neighboring ZIP codes

that are located within the same county but in different hearing office catchment areas. Since

these ZIP codes belong to the same commuting zone (by virtue of their shared county), we assume



                                                                              3
that both workers face the same labor market conditions. But if they decide to apply for SSDI,

perhaps in response to the same contraction in labor demand, they will have their appeals assigned

to different hearing offices and thus, in expectation, they will face different wait times. This

difference in wait times amounts to differential hassle costs or ease of access and, as such, might

affect a potential beneficiary's inclination to apply, appeal, stick with the process, and ultimately

be enrolled in SSDI.1 Our strategy is to compare the evolution of SSDI enrollment and employment

rates between 2003 and 2015 in neighboring ZIP codes that straddle hearing office boundaries. Our

identifying assumption is that, absent cross-border differences in the ease of accessing SSDI, and

conditional on fixed effects, SSDI enrollment and employment rates in these bordering ZIP codes

would have responded to the Great Recession in the same way.

        Key to our identification strategy, there is large variation across hearing offices in the average

time elapsed from the date an SSDI appeal is filed until the date it is resolved. As shown in

Figure 2, some offices take an average of over 600 days to process an appeal, while others take fewer

than 300. Some of this variation is driven by the composition of applications and how difficult

they are to process, and some of it presumably reflects differences in administrative efficiency

across offices. Our research design rests on the assumption that the variation in processing time

between neighboring ZIP codes assigned to different hearing offices reflects procedural idiosyncracies

uncorrelated with changes in employment outcomes except for any indirect effect coming through

SSDI enrollment. Because each hearing office services many ZIP codes--150 regional hearing offices

were active in 2010, compared with over 37,000 ZIP codes--any individual ZIP code will have a

negligible mechanical influence on average processing time at the hearing-office level. Moreover, any

difference in hearing office processing time that stems from differences in the composition of that

office's applicant pool (which might be related to latent employment outcomes) should approach

zero when we look only at bordering ZIP codes.

        In our first set of results, we document that one additional month of hearing office processing

time--as measured in 2010, when many recession-induced appeals were being adjudicated--results

in a reduction in SSDI enrollment rates following the Great Recession. In the years 2003­2008, be-

    1
     This notion of hassle costs affecting SSDI enrollment rates finds support in a recent paper by Deshpande and
Li (2019), which shows that the closings of SSA field offices (where applicants receive assistance with filing disability
applications) led to a persistent decline in the number of disability recipients in surrounding areas, with the decline
driven primarily by increased congestion at remaining offices.


                                                           4
Figure 2: Average processing times for disposition of SSDI appeals at SSA hearing offices




Notes: Average processing time by hearing office as of 2010, as reported by the Social Security Administration.
Processing time equals the number of days elapsed between the date a hearing is requested and the date the appeal
is resolved. Colored areas represent ZIP codes linkable to a hearing office as of 2010; grey areas could not be linked.


fore the recession, there is no discernible difference in the evolution of paired ZIP codes' conditional

SSDI enrollment rates as a function of average processing time at each ZIP code's assigned hearing

office. In subsequent years, however, ZIP codes faced with slower appellate processes exhibit rela-

tively slower growth in their SSDI caseloads, though the effect is only marginally significant. Our

point estimates imply that an additional month of processing time leads to an SSDI enrollment rate

(as a share of residents aged 30­64) that is 0.03 percentage points lower by 2015, the last year in our

analysis period. With an average processing time difference of 1.8 months and a mean enrollment

rate of 4.3 percent across all observations in our estimation sample, our estimates suggest that

SSDI enrollment rates were persistently 0.06 percentage points (or 1.3 percent) lower in ZIP codes

with longer processing times than their paired neighbors. Though our wide confidence intervals

warrant caution, the long-lived relationship between processing lags and SSDI enrollment suggests

that hassle costs discourage program participation following a downturn.

       We next investigate how this enrollment effect varies with local labor market conditions. Here

we find that the negative effects of processing time on SSDI enrollment are concentrated among

ZIP code pairs in commuting zones that experienced more severe unemployment shocks during the

Great Recession. In these hard-hit areas, our paired ZIP codes' SSDI enrollment rates move in

parallel across hearing office borders in the lead-up to the Great Recession, then diverge sharply

in its wake. The effect persists deep into the subsequent recovery: from 2008 through 2015, ZIP


                                                          5
codes facing longer processing times exhibit cumulative reductions in SSDI enrollment of about

0.08 percentage points (1.9 percent) relative to their paired neighbors. In other words, easier access

to SSDI (through shorter processing time) leads to relative increases in program enrollment in the

areas most affected by the Great Recession. In less severely hit commuting zones, by contrast, the

speed of appellate review has little bearing on SSDI enrollment rates.

      We then turn to the question of whether easier access to SSDI mediates the effect of the

unemployment shock on subsequent ZIP-level employment. In our main sample of bordering ZIP

codes, we find no clear effect of average processing time on subsequent employment rates. Though

our confidence intervals preclude strong conclusions, a null relationship would be consistent with

the observation that, in theory, delays in the SSDI appeal process should have offsetting effects

on employment: some denied applicants are deterred from filing an appeal (and hence remain

employed), while those who do so experience longer processing times (and hence incur larger scarring

effects that limit their employment potential should their appeal be denied). In subsample analysis,

we find qualified support for the idea that larger hassle costs may boost the employment recovery

in areas that both had high SSDI enrollment rates prior to the Great Recession and experienced a

more severe rise in unemployment during it. This result, though only suggestive, is consistent with

the "deterrent effect" of hassle costs outweighing the "decay effect" in traditional SSDI hotspots.

      This paper contributes to our understanding of how access to the safety net interacts with

economic shocks of greater or less severity. We build on four existing strands of economic evidence.

First, our paper is related to prior research about the link between economic downturns and SSDI

enrollment (Autor and Duggan, 2003; Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2018). Second, our paper is

related to prior research on the labor market disincentives of the SSDI program (Bound, 1989; Chen

and Van der Klaauw, 2008; von Wachter, Song, and Manchester, 2011; Maestas, Mullen, and Strand,

2013; French and Song, 2014; Gelber, Moore, and Strand, 2017). Third, our paper relates to the

literature on the targeting of government transfers (e.g., Nichols and Zeckhauser, 1982), especially

recent work by Deshpande and Li (2019) showing that stifled SSDI access in the wake of SSA

field office closures results in disproportionate screening out of potential claimants with moderately

severe disabilities and low levels of education. We emphasize that, unlike Deshpande and Li (2019),

our paper does not attempt a calculation of our findings' possible welfare implications, which would

depend on the relative social weights placed on encouraging work versus supporting out-of-work

                                                  6
individuals. We return to this point in our concluding discussion.

      Fourth, our paper builds on a line of research documenting hysteresis effects in employment

from local labor market shocks (e.g., Amior and Manning, 2018; Hershbein and Stuart, 2020),

especially recent work by Yagan (2019) that does so in the context of the Great Recession. Yagan

estimates that, conditional on 2006 local area characteristics and fixed effects, a one percentage-

point (p.p.) increase in the local unemployment shock between 2007 and 2009 led to a 0.39 p.p.

reduction in the 2015 employment rate among those ages 30­49 just before the recession, a sizable

persistent effect. Looking cursorily at the role of SSDI, Yagan highlights that SSDI replaced only

2 percent of lost 2015 earnings for these working-age individuals and hence played a minimal role

in driving the hysteresis he finds. Our paper builds on Yagan (2019) in two ways. First, we look at

a plausibly exogenous driver of SSDI enrollment--namely, a measure of procedural hassle. Second,

we draw comparisons within the set of places that experienced large unemployment shocks during

the Great Recession to see whether local differences in the ease of accessing SSDI muted or amplified

the employment effects. Again, our main contribution is to highlight the understudied importance

of potential interaction effects between economic shocks and access to the safety net.



2     Social Security Disability Insurance

We begin with a brief overview of the SSDI program, with an emphasis on the application and appeal

processes as well as the program's ramifications for disabled individuals' incentives to participate in

the labor force. For a more comprehensive overview of the SSDI program, see Autor and Duggan

(2003, 2006); Zayatz (2015); Liebman (2015).


2.1   Program structure

The SSDI program provides earnings replacement for individuals with a medically verified disabling

condition that limits their ability to engage in more than a modest amount of paid labor, referred

to in program terminology as "substantial gainful activity" (SGA). In 2019, benefit outlays to

disabled workers amounted to approximately $125 billion, with an additional $15 billion in benefits

paid to dependents; the average monthly SSDI benefit for a qualifying disabled worker was about

$1,250 (Social Security Administration, 2020). For a beneficiary with median previous earnings, the


                                                  7
replacement rate is about 40­50 percent, with replacement rates closer to 80 percent for low-income

workers (Autor and Duggan, 2003). The beneficiary population skews older, with 77 percent of

recipients over the age of 50 (Social Security Administration, 2020).

        SSDI caseloads have soared in recent decades. Between 1970 and 2019, the number of disabled

workers receiving SSDI increased from 1.5 to 8.4 million (Social Security Administration, 2020).

Growth in program enrollment has been accompanied by a change in the composition of SSDI

recipients: more recipients now qualify for benefits on the basis of hard-to-verify impairments, and

the program has played an increasingly important role in providing income to less-educated workers

adversely affected by changes in labor demand (Liebman, 2015).

        Eligibility is determined through a multi-step process in which SSA assesses whether an

applicant meets both medical and non-medical program criteria. A potential beneficiary begins the

process by submitting an application either online or to the local SSA field office. Applications are

then sent to the field office to which the applicant's ZIP code of residence is assigned. In an initial

triage, applications are screened by field office staff to verify that the applicant is not engaging in

SGA and meets a set of non-medical eligibility criteria, notably a work-history requirement.2

        Applications that meet the non-medical criteria are then tested for medical eligibility. Dis-

ability examiners determine an application's medical eligibility by verifying that the impairment

is permanent or long lasting (expected to last at least 12 months or result in death) and severe

enough to preclude substantial gainful activity. Disabling conditions specified in SSA's standardized

Listing of Impairments are automatically judged to satisfy this latter condition. If an applicant's

impairment does not appear on this list, the examiner must decide if it prevents the applicant from

performing his or her past work-related activities, as well as any other work broadly available in the

national economy to workers with the same qualifications. If an application progressing through

the system does not meet these criteria, the applicant is denied a disability award. Applicants must

show that they have met both the medical and non-medical criteria for a consecutive five-month

waiting period before benefits are disbursed.




    2
     In 2010 the SGA level was $1,000 a month. Applicants must also have been employed in jobs covered by Social
Security for at least five of the preceding 10 years to be eligible for SSDI. Disabled individuals without sufficient work
history can file for Supplemental Security Income (SSI).


                                                            8
2.2    The role of hearing offices and appeals in award determination

A denied applicant can appeal the decision, first for reconsideration by a different disability exam-

iner and then (if still denied) for a hearing through SSA's Office of Disability Adjudication and

Review (ODAR). Most applicants who meet the work history requirement are initially rejected

(around 64 percent). The majority of them (56.5 percent) appeal. In 2010, over 28 percent of all

applicants underwent the appeal process through ODAR and 29 percent of allowances were granted

through that process (Zayatz, 2015).3 Applicants who are awarded SSDI through an appeal have

less straightforward cases for receiving SSDI, and prior research has found that they are more

attached to the labor force in the lead-up to application (Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2013).

       When an individual appeals an SSDI claim denial to ODAR, the case is assigned to a hearing

office based on the appellant's ZIP code of residence. As such, individuals from two neighboring

ZIP codes might have their appeals adjudicated by different hearing offices. In the 2010 fiscal year,

150 geographically demarcated hearing offices were active throughout the United States.4 The

median hearing office served 212 ZIP codes with a median population of 1.8 million.5 Within a

hearing office, each appeal is assigned to an administrative law judge on a rotational basis from a

master docket. Judges do not specialize in types of cases, and claimants cannot choose their judge.

       As seen in Figure 2, appeal processing time varies substantially across hearing offices. (We

describe the underlying data in Section 4.) For appeals adjudicated in 2010, it took 424 days

on average to complete the appeal process. However, some hearing offices--such as Middlesboro,

Kentucky; Huntington, West Virginia; and Kingsport, Tennessee--completed the process much

faster (in 270 days or less on average), while hearing offices in Lansing, Michigan; Dayton, Ohio;

and Columbus, Ohio took much longer, around 600 days on average. In general, processing times

were longer in the upper Midwest and shorter in Appalachia and the South Central states. In some

cases, the average processing time of neighboring hearing offices might differ by as much as 50, 100,

   3
       These numbers are right-censored as of July 2013, at which time there were still 52,245 claims pending through
the appeal system. The share of awards ultimately granted on appeal was, if anything, even larger.
     4
       This tally is taken from the SSA's Hearing Office Workload Data for fiscal year 2010 and omits three hearing
offices with zero dispositions as well as five National Hearing Centers (NHCs), which were opened between 2007
and 2010 to relieve appeal backlogs by hearing cases (often remotely) on behalf of local offices that are particularly
congested. NHCs adjudicated only 3.1 percent of SSDI appeals in 2010, suggesting that compliance with assignment
to applicants' assigned regional hearing office was quite high during the period we analyze.
     5
       Authors' calculations using data from the US Social Security Administration and Census Bureau. These numbers
are based on the subset of 148 hearing offices that we successfully match to ZIP codes with known population from
the 2010 Decennial Census.


                                                          9
or even 200 days.

       Given the frequency with which SSDI status is determined by appeals to ODAR hearing

offices, potential applicants with moderate disabilities--who are more likely to face the appeals

process--might take this processing time into account when deciding whether to apply, whether to

appeal a denial, or whether to see a pending appeal through to its conclusion. For a potentially

eligible applicant who is (by definition) not working, this additional processing time might prove

costly and hence might influence the ultimate decision to apply or to instead try and find another

source of income (either through work or through another transfer program). Although average

processing times are probably not widely known throughout the population, potential applicants can

learn about how long it takes their assigned hearing office to process appeals through consultations

with field office staff, online forums, disability lawyers, or links in their social networks who have

had experience with the process.6


2.3    Disincentives for labor force participation

After an initial trial period, SSDI beneficiaries lose program eligibility if they begin earning over

the SGA level or if a continuing disability review determines that they have recovered.7 SSDI's high

replacement rates and strict work requirements discourage beneficiaries from taking on meaningful

levels of labor force engagement. In 2014, only 9 percent of exits from SSDI were due to medical

recovery or a return to employment above the SGA threshold (as opposed to death or conversion

to Social Security retirement benefits), and less than one percent of SSDI recipients exited due to

recovery (Zayatz, 2015). For this reason, SSDI is sometimes referred to as an "absorbing state"

(Golosov and Tsyvinski, 2006).

       Given the strong disincentives to work once on SSDI, there is a question of how much down-

ward pressure SSDI exerts on employment rates. If SSDI recipients would not have worked anyway,

then enrollment in the program shouldn't have a meaningful effect on employment rates, even if re-

cipients don't return to work. This question has received a great deal of attention from economists.

The evidence is summarized in Abraham and Kearney (2020), which reviews the relevance of a

   6
      Hearing office processing times are published on the SSA website, and many disability attorney offices duplicate
this information on their websites.
    7
      After being awarded benefits, beneficiaries are given a nine-month trial work period during which they are
allowed to work above the SGA level without losing benefits, so that they may attempt a return to the labor force.


                                                         10
variety of potential factors in explaining the decline in prime-age employment between 1999 and

2018.8 Well-identified studies of the causal link between SSDI enrollment and employment out-

comes consistently find that a sizable subset of SSDI beneficiaries would have worked in the years

immediately following their initial SSDI application had they not been awarded benefits.9

       The distortionary incentives presented by SSDI might be particularly relevant during a down-

turn, when SSDI applications spike and less severely impaired applicants are brought into the pro-

gram (Autor and Duggan, 2006; Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2015). For a low-income worker

with a moderate impairment (such as musculoskeletal back pain), the opportunity cost of applying

might fall substantially if they were laid off during a recession and have been unable to find work.

Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2015) refer to these applicants as "conditional" applicants who would

prefer to work, but would apply if they lose their current job.

       If economic downturns induce individuals who are on average healthier and more attached to

the labor force to apply for disability insurance, this could plausibly have meaningful and persistent

effects on employment after the economy has recovered. First, some of these conditional applicants

may ultimately receive SSDI. Since the negative causal effect of SSDI receipt on employment is

plausibly larger for conditional applicants than for severely disabled individuals who would apply

for SSDI even in a tight labor market (Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2013), each conditional appli-

cant who is awarded benefits represents a comparatively large reduction in employment. Second,

even conditional applicants whose applications (and appeals) are denied have effectively removed

themselves from the labor force while their claims are pending. This temporary withdrawal might

result in human capital (or social/network capital) depreciation, making it more difficult for de-
    8
      Based on the point estimates from existing studies, combined with data on age-group-specific growth in SSDI
caseloads, Abraham and Kearney (2020) conclude that SSDI was a modest contributor to the decline in employment
rates between 1999 and 2018, accounting for a roughly 0.09 percentage point decline in the 2018 employment-to-
population ratio, as compared to a 3.8 percentage point total net reduction. This makes SSDI much less important
to the aggregate employment-to-population decline than increased import competition from China and the adoption
of industrial robots, which the authors estimate accounted for 0.93 and 0.43 percentage point declines, respectively.
    9
      Maestas, Mullen, and Strand (2013) use administrative data to match SSDI applications to disability examiners
and exploit variation in examiners' allowance rates as an instrument for benefit receipt. Their IV approach yields
the finding that, among the nearly 23 percent of applicants on the margin of program entry (meaning that their
award determination depends on the leniency of the examiner), employment rates would have been 28 percentage
points higher two years after initial award had they not received benefits. The estimated effect ranges from no
effect for applicants with the most severe conditions to 50 percentage points for applicants with the least severe
conditions. A similar finding emerges from the work of French and Song (2014), who use variation in allowance
rates across administrative law judges in the second stage of the appeals process to estimate the labor supply effect
of SSDI receipt. They find that the employment rate of applicants granted benefits at this stage would have been
26 percentage points higher three years after a decision had they not been granted SSDI benefits. These studies build
on earlier papers by Bound (1989); Chen and Van der Klaauw (2008); von Wachter, Song, and Manchester (2011).


                                                         11
nied appellants to find a job once the labor market improves (Autor et al., 2015). As such, we

might expect easier access to SSDI to slow the recovery in employment in areas that experienced

a relatively deep unemployment shock during the Great Recession.10



3        Empirical Strategy

Because the disability program is federally administered and fairly homogeneous across the country,

it is challenging to evaluate how (or if) SSDI accessibility propagates employment effects of local

labor market downturns. To overcome this challenge, we compare outcomes between neighboring

ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned to different hearing offices and thus subject to

different processing times at the appellate stage. Because appellants must refrain from engaging in

substantial gainful activity while their appeals are pending, prolongation of the appellate process

can impose significant costs on SSDI applicants, especially those with greater work capacity who

may be on the margin of choosing to participate in the labor market. Differences in processing time

should therefore influence application and appeal decisions to the extent that potential applicants

account for the costs of additional delay, which in some cases could result in up to seven additional

months of waiting beyond what their cross-border neighbors experience.


3.1      Identifying variation and sample definition

Variation in processing times across hearing offices likely stems from differences in the prevalence

of disability, economic conditions, and local attitudes towards SSDI--all of which are potentially

correlated with employment opportunities and labor supply decisions--as well as from idiosyncratic

factors like judges' efficiency or office staffing levels. To isolate variation that is plausibly exogenous

to our outcomes of interest, we focus on neighboring ZIP codes that straddle the borders between

adjacent hearing office catchment areas, so as to compare localities home to similar populations

faced with similar labor market conditions but subject to differences in appeal duration.

         Since hearing offices serve large geographic areas containing many ZIP codes, the average

processing time of a given hearing office is unlikely to be driven by any one ZIP code, but instead by

    10
    A couple of notable studies examine what happens to SSDI applications and enrollment when the economy
improves. The general finding is that people are less likely to apply and fewer people enroll in SSDI when the local
economy is doing well (Black, Daniel, and Sanders, 2002; Charles, Li, and Stephens Jr., 2018).


                                                        12
Figure 3: Average processing times in our estimation sample of paired cross-border ZIP codes




Notes: Average processing time is defined as in Figure 2. The colored regions are those included in our estimation
sample of neighboring ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned to different hearing offices.


the characteristics of applicants throughout its catchment area. To the extent that households and

firms do not sort discontinuously across hearing office boundaries, neighboring ZIP codes straddling

such a boundary should be similar in population characteristics, labor market conditions, and

industry composition. Because people and firms might selectively sort across these boundary lines

when they also demarcate other government jurisdictions, we restrict our sample to neighboring

ZIP codes that belong to the same county but are assigned to different hearing offices.11 For brevity,

we refer to such same-county paired ZIP codes simply as "border pairs".

       In addition to these restrictions, we also restrict the sample to a balanced panel with non-

missing values for all key variables, as detailed in Appendix B. This results in a sample of 1,049

distinct ZIP codes forming 907 border pairs located in 159 counties across the country. As shown

in Figure 3, our border pairs are spread throughout the country but concentrated in more densely

populated areas, where counties typically contain larger numbers of ZIP codes and thus more

neighboring pairs that are candidates for our analysis sample.12 As an example of our identifying

variation, Figure 4 shows the ZIP codes that meet our criteria in Los Angeles County, California.13

Even within Los Angeles, there is substantial variation in average processing time, with some ZIP

codes facing 349 days on average, while applicants from a neighboring ZIP code might expect to
   11
      For example, if the hearing office boundary coincides with a state or county border, individuals and firms might
face differences in tax policy or in the quality of publicly provided services.
   12
      Data from the US Department of Agriculture's 2003 Rural-Urban Continuum Codes show that 81.4 percent of
ZIP codes in our border-pair sample are in metro areas, as compared to 56.2 percent of ZIP codes nationwide.
   13
      Appendix Figure A1 presents a similar map for Cook County, Illinois (home to the city of Chicago).


                                                         13
Figure 4: Adjacent ZIP codes in Los Angeles County assigned to different hearing offices




                                                                                                                       454
                                                                                                                       430
                                                                                                                       415
                                                                                                                       410
                                                                                                                       405
                                                                                                                       369
                                                                                                                       349
                                                                                                                       Not in sample




Notes: Average processing times by hearing office as of 2010, as reported by the Social Security Administration and
plotted for ZIP codes in Los Angeles, California, with one or more neighbors assigned to a different hearing office.

Figure 5: Distribution of cross-border differences in average processing time within our sample

                                                            0.20
                                                                         Median        Mean
                        Share of bordering ZIP code pairs




                                                            0.15




                                                            0.10




                                                            0.05




                                                            0.00
                                                                   0       25     50      75     100    125    150     175    200    225
                                                                       Absolute value of difference in average processing time (days)


Notes: Average processing times by hearing office as of 2010, as reported by the Social Security Administration. The
sample consists of our neighboring ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned to different hearing offices.


wait over 100 days longer. Among all border pairs, the difference in average wait times varies from

0 to 219 days with an unweighted median of 46 days and a mean of 57 days (see Figure 5).




                                                                                               14
3.2    Empirical specifications

We investigate how average processing time at the appellate stage affects SSDI enrollment rates

and employment rates after the Great Recession. To do so, we estimate the following equations:

                  2015
        Yzpt =             · Delayo(z ) · 1{t =  } + pt + z + zpt                                               (1)
                  =2003

        Yzpt = SR · 1{2009­11}t · Delayo(z ) + LR · 1{2012­15}t · Delayo(z ) + pt + z + zpt                     (2)


The level of observation is the ZIP code (z ) by border pair (p) by year (t), reflecting the fact that a

given ZIP code may be matched with multiple neighbors.14 The subscript o(z ) denotes the hearing

office to which ZIP code z was assigned as of 2010.

       The outcome variable Y is alternately defined as the SSDI enrollment rate or employment

rate for adults aged 30­64. In Equation (1), the coefficients of interest are the vector  , which trace

out the impact of average appellate processing time (Delayo(z ) )--as measured in 2010 and expressed

in months--over the years preceding and following the Great Recession. The year 2008 is excluded

from these interactions to serve as the reference year. Equation (2) replaces the year-by-year 

coefficients with pooled coefficients SR and LR capturing, respectively, the "short-run" years

2009­2011 and the "long-run" years 2012­2015. While we chose this particular parametrization

simply as a convenient means of summarizing the patterns we observe using our more flexible

year-by-year specification, the designation of 2009­2011 as a transitional phase accords well with

the timing of the surge in aggregate SSDI applications and the delays typically encountered in the

application and appellate processes.

       In both equations, the inclusion of border pair × year fixed effects (pt ) controls for common

time shocks to a ZIP code pair; partialing out these fixed effects means that the estimated 

coefficients capture differences in outcomes between two neighboring paired ZIP codes in the same

year. The inclusion of ZIP code fixed effects (z ) controls for any time-invariant characteristics

of a ZIP code. The identifying assumption for Equations (1) and (2) to yield causal estimates of

the effect of processing time on a given outcome is that ZIP codes assigned to hearing offices with

  14
     Our approach of admitting ZIP codes to the sample in pairs, with some ZIP codes bordering multiple neighbors
assigned to other hearing offices and hence being included multiple times, mirrors the implementation of the border-
county analysis used by Dube, Lester, and Reich (2010) in their study of minimum wage effects.


                                                        15
longer wait times would have responded to the Great Recession in the same way as their paired

neighbors had they faced the same processing times. We adjust standard errors for potential two-

way clustering at the hearing-office level and the border pair × year level, and we weight our

estimates by the ZIP code's 2010 population.

         Central to our investigation is the idea that the effects of SSDI hassle costs on program

enrollment and employment may vary with the local severity of an economic downturn, since the

marginal applicants induced to seek disability benefits in response to a recessionary shock will

be more numerous in harder-hit locations. To test this hypothesis, we follow Yagan (2019) in

computing the 2007­2009 change in the unemployment rate in each ZIP code's commuting zone--

a measure we refer to as the "Great Recession shock".15 Since border pairs are nested within

counties, which are in turn nested within commuting zones, both ZIP codes in each border pair are

necessarily assigned the same shock. We then estimate Equations (1) and (2) separately for border

pairs whose commuting zones experienced recession shocks above or below the sample median.

         Finally, we also report specifications that further partition severely shocked border pairs into

those located in counties with above-median versus below-median SSDI enrollment (as a share

of the population ages 30­64) in 2007, on the eve of the Great Recession. We conjecture that

marginal changes in the ease of accessing SSDI may have larger effects in localities with higher

baseline receipt of SSDI, since whatever local characteristics resulted in high baseline caseloads--

for example, the prevalence and complexity of physical impairment, greater knowledge or awareness

of the SSDI program, or the presence of lawyers specializing in SSDI cases--are likely to amplify the

responsiveness of local program enrollment and employment to a shock like the Great Recession.



4        Data and Sample Characteristics

Estimating how SSDI accessibility affects long-run SSDI enrollment and employment after the Great

Recession requires ZIP code level data on program enrollment and employment rates, hearing office

catchment areas, appellate processing time at each hearing office, and the geographic extent of each

ZIP code. In this section, we briefly describe our data preparation and the resulting estimation

sample. Appendix B provides a detailed account of how we process and combine these datasets.
    15
     We depart slightly from Yagan in using the year-2000 (rather than year-1990) vintage of commuting zones, which
we regard as better delineating local labor markets in the period we analyze.


                                                        16
4.1    Data sources and preparation

Our analysis relies entirely on publicly available data provided by a medley of government agen-

cies.16 We merge these data to construct a panel at the ZIP code × border pair × year level

spanning 2003­2015, the period preceding and following the Great Recession. The initial year of

our sample period is dictated by the availability of ZIP-level data on SSDI enrollment; the final

year is aligned with related work by Yagan (2019).


SSDI enrollment rates.            The SSA website provides annual data on the number of SSDI bene-

ficiaries at the ZIP code and county levels, together with information on the field office to which

each ZIP code is assigned in a given year. These files contain separate tabulations of both disabled

workers and their dependent beneficiaries, but since our interest lies in the linkages between the

safety net and the labor market, we define "SSDI enrollment" as the number of disabled workers

receiving SSDI benefits.17 To construct annual SSDI enrollment rates for the years 2003­2015, we

divide the number of SSDI recipients in a given year by the ZIP code's population aged 30­64 in

the 2010 Decennial Census. We chose this age range because few individuals enroll in the SSDI pro-

gram prior to age 30 and because SSDI beneficiaries are moved into the Social Security retirement

program upon reaching retirement age. We compute ZIP-level population measures by aggregating

population counts from the Census-tract level to the ZIP code level using a crosswalk provided by

the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).18
   16
      In addition to the measures described in this section, we construct population race, ethnicity, and education
shares from the 2010 Decennial Census (for race and ethnicity) and the 2006­2010 pooled American Community
Surveys (for education), ZIP-level industry shares from the Census LODES data, and a ZIP-level housing price index
from the Federal Housing Finance Agency. We report these measures in Table 1, where we assess the comparability
of ZIP codes on either side of hearing office borders, but we do not otherwise use them in our analysis.
   17
      We have also obtained annual counts of SSDI applications and allowances at the ZIP code level. We are grateful
to Manasi Deshpande for facilitating the extraction of these data for us. We intended to use these data to decompose
the enrollment response into applications, appeals, and approvals, but the data unfortunately did not permit a
thorough analysis of these separate margins. SSA censors these data for privacy purposes: any ZIP code with fewer
than 10 SSDI or SSI applications in a given year will have both application measures suppressed, and the same is true
for allowances. This leads to considerable suppression in the extract we obtained from SSA: only 57 percent of our
border pairs can be used to analyze applications and only 42 percent can be used to analyze allowances. Furthermore,
these data are dated to the year of SSA's initial disability determination. Since it can take years for awards to be
made (especially in cases that undergo appeal), we see fewer allowances in later years, so that a larger share of cells
are suppressed. Lastly, given the empirical fact that SSDI applications and allowances increase after local economic
downturns (Maestas, Mullen, and Strand, 2015), the extent of data suppression varies systematically both over time
and with the local severity of the Great Recession; this further complicates attempts at causal estimation. Given the
sizable and systematic suppression in these data, we did not find them informative for our analysis.
   18
      The Census Bureau reports population counts for ZIP Code Tabulation Areas rather than for the US Postal
Service (USPS) ZIP codes used in our SSA data. We can therefore better match the geography of our data on SSDI
recipients by starting from tract-level estimates and mapping them into USPS ZIP codes. Some Census tracts do not


                                                          17
Employment rates. We derive ZIP code level employment counts from the Census Bureau's

Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Origin-Destination Employment Statistics,

or LODES (Census Bureau, 2018). The LODES database provides annual estimates of place-of-work

and place-of-residence employment, measured at the beginning of April. We use place-of-residence

employment, which aligns with SSA hearing office assignment on the basis of an individual's ZIP

code of residence.19 Mirroring our construction of SSDI enrollment rates, we use the HUD crosswalk

to aggregate LODES employment from tracts into ZIP codes, then compute annual employment

rates by dividing year-by-year employment among workers aged 30 or older--the most appropriate

age grouping available in LODES--by the 2010 ZIP code population aged 30­64.


Hearing office boundaries.             We obtain hearing office catchment areas from the SSA website.

Using the Internet Archive's Wayback Machine, we pulled archived copies of the website and created

a crosswalk from each field office to its assigned hearing office for each year from 2007 to 2013; after

2013, the website's Hearing Office Locator tool became interactive and historical data cannot be

retrieved. Because SSA's tabulations of local SSDI enrollment list each ZIP code under its assigned

field office, we can link ZIP codes to field offices and thereby link them to hearing offices. Using

ArcGIS and an accompanying ZIP-level layer, we then identified all pairs of adjacent ZIP codes

that were assigned to different hearing offices in 2010.


Appellate processing time. In 2010, SSA began producing annual reports detailing, for each

hearing office, the average time elapsed from the date a denied SSDI applicant requested an appel-

late hearing until the date the appeal was resolved, along with judge-level tabulations of appeals

granted or denied.20 Since our interest is in SSDI appeals filed in the wake of the Great Recession,

perfectly align with ZIP codes, and some SSA awards will be assigned to ZIP codes that correspond to post offices
or PO boxes, where there is no population. Appendix B reports match rates between our various data sources.
   19
      We use LODES counts of "primary jobs" (each individual's highest-earnings job during the year) to ensure that
our employment measure is a count of distinct workers, rather than distinct worker-firm pairings. The Census Bureau
infuses noise into the LODES data to protect worker and business confidentiality. Since we use the LODES data to
construct outcomes but not regressors, this source of measurement error will reduce the precision of our employment
estimates but should not introduce bias.
   20
      One reason SSA compiled these data was to better understand differences in judicial practice across adminis-
trative law judges (ALJs). In 2011, a massive ALJ reform was undertaken to retrain or remove judges who appeared
to be too strict or too lenient and to promote uniformity within the appellate process. Since the composition and
behavior of judges changed in 2011, a potential concern is that hearing offices with slower appellate processes in 2010
may have been more (or less) likely to experience changes in 2011 in ways that could bias our estimates. Reassuringly,
however, we find that changes in hearing office award rates between 2010 and 2012 are uncorrelated with average
processing time in 2010 ( = 0.03).


                                                          18
we rely on average processing times for appeals completed during the 2010 fiscal year (ending in

September 2010), the earliest for which data are available. Given typical time lags at the applica-

tion and appellate stages, most appeals resolved in 2010 would likely have begun the application

process in 2007, 2008, or 2009, so that our measure should capture the administrative conditions

experienced by SSDI applicants displaced in the early phases of the Great Recession.21


Balancing the panel.          After combining these datasets, we restrict our sample to border pairs for

which both ZIP codes are present throughout our sample period and have non-missing values in all

years for all of the variables used in estimation. By doing so, we ensure both that the same sample

is used across all of our analyses and that the effects we estimate reflect trends within ZIP codes

rather than compositional shifts in the set of ZIP codes with available data. Of particular note,

balancing the panel eliminates any border pairs located in Arizona, Massachusetts, Mississippi, or

the District of Columbia, which enter the LODES data during our sample period and consequently

lack employment-to-population rates in certain years. Appendix Table B1 provides a step-by-step

reckoning of the number of border pairs, ZIP codes, and ZIP × pair × year observations remaining

in our sample after each successive sample restriction.


4.2    Sample characteristics

Table 1 reports summary statistics for our estimation sample of adjacent, same-county ZIP codes

assigned to different hearing offices. All statistics are weighted by 2010 ZIP code population, and

all variables are measured in 2010 (with the exception of the Great Recession shock).

       The average difference in 2010 average processing time is 55 days (386 versus 441 days).

For the ZIP codes with longer processing times, SSDI award rates at the appellate stage are

0.7 percentage points (p.p.) higher, though the difference is not statistically significant. If anything,


  21
     While individuals filing SSDI applications or appeals before 2010 could not have known the realized processing
times among appeals resolved in that year, it seems likely that areas we identify as having slow appellate processes
circa 2010 would have had longer wait times in earlier years as well, though we cannot test this directly. Since we
observe average processing time from 2010 onwards and the assignment of field offices to hearing offices through 2013,
we have a reliable ZIP-level measure of processing times for the years 2010­2013. Among paired ZIP codes belonging
to our estimation sample, the population-weighted autocorrelation of average processing time is 0.70 between 2010
and 2011, 0.37 between 2010 and 2012, and 0.23 between 2010 and 2013. We suspect that the fall-off in this
autocorrelation over time reflects the 2011 ALJ reform, which sought to standardize hearing practices across areas. It
is therefore plausible that local processing times were more strongly correlated over time during the years when most
recession-induced applicants and appellants would have been forming their expectations about processing delays.


                                                         19
Table 1: Characteristics of adjacent ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned to
         different hearing offices

                                               Full sample     Shorter delay Longer delay           Difference
                                                    (1)             (2)          (3)                    (4)
   Explanatory variables
    Average processing time (days)                413.51            386.35            441.25             54.90***
    Great Recession shock (p.p.)                    4.93              4.88              4.98              0.10

   SSDI appeals and enrollment
     Percent of appeals approved                    65.37            65.01             65.73             0.72
     Percent of pop. 30­64 on SSDI                   4.60             4.65              4.54            -0.11

   Employment-to-pop. rate (%)
    All, ages 30­64                                 59.81            59.49             60.14              0.65
    Men, ages 15+                                   47.19            46.87             47.50              0.63
    Women, ages 15+                                 44.92            44.50             45.36              0.85*

   Population                                  21,839.81         22,106.90         21,717.80          -389.10

   Population shares (%)
    Ages 30­64                                      46.05            45.71             46.39              0.67**

     White                                          56.53            56.88             56.12            -0.75
     Black or African American                      18.35            18.12             18.62             0.50
     Asian or Asian American                         7.10             6.54              7.68             1.14
     Other race + two or more races                 18.02            18.46             17.58            -0.89

     Hispanic or Latino ethnicity                   31.91            32.76             31.11            -1.64

     Less than a high school degree                 21.88            22.46             21.31            -1.15
     High school graduate                           26.83            27.29             26.32            -0.97**
     Some college education                         25.46            25.26             25.66             0.40
     Bachelors degree or more                       25.83            24.99             26.71             1.72

   Sector employment shares (%)
     Agriculture, mining, utilities                  1.58             1.52              1.62             0.10
     Construction                                    3.89             4.01              3.76            -0.25**
     Manufacturing                                   9.79             9.81              9.76            -0.05
     Trade, transport., warehousing                 20.04            20.17             19.91            -0.26
     Education and healthcare                       22.89            22.96             22.83            -0.13
     Other services                                 17.99            17.80             18.18             0.39*

   House price index (base: 2000)                 141.31            139.66            143.01              3.35

   p-value of joint F test                                                                                0.03
   Observations                                  1814.00            903.00            903.00

Notes: Statistics are estimated means of the indicated variables; with the exception of the row for population itself,
all statistics are weighted by 2010 ZIP code population. Column (1) reports statistics for our estimation sample of
adjacent ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned to different hearing offices. Column (2) retains the ZIP
code in each pair whose assigned hearing office had shorter average processing times as of 2010. Column (3) retains
ZIP codes with longer processing times. A handful of ties are dropped from these columns. Each ZIP code may
appear in our sample multiple times, once for each valid neighbor. The Great Recession shock is the change in the
unemployment rate between 2007 and 2009, as measured at the commuting zone level. All other measures are 2010
values. The F test compares all listed variables except processing time, the Great Recession shock, and the house
price index (the only variable here with missing values for some observations). * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


                                                         20
this modest difference in award rates would bias us against finding that longer processing delays

discourage SSDI enrollment and promote employment.

      Our paired ZIP codes are otherwise fairly similar. Their total populations, racial and ethnic

composition, sectoral composition, and 2000­2010 changes in house prices are nearly identical. ZIP

codes with longer processing times had slightly more educated populations than their neighbors, as

2.1 percent more adults over the age of 25 have at least some college education, and a slightly larger

share of residents aged 30­64. A joint F test of differences across all of the dimensions shown in

this table--other than appellate processing time, the Great Recession shock, and the housing price

index (which is missing for a significant portion of ZIP codes)--has a p-value of 0.03, suggesting

that these ZIP code pairs are statistically different, even if the differences are small. We note,

however, that any level differences across ZIP codes will be absorbed by our fixed effects.



5     Results

We first compare trends in SSDI enrollment across hearing office boundaries to test whether the

disability caseload adjusts differently in areas that faced longer versus shorter appeal processing

times during the Great Recession. We then turn to employment trends and, lastly, examine the

effect of processing time on both outcomes in traditional SSDI hotspots.


5.1   Impact on SSDI enrollment

Figure 6 plots the estimated coefficients ^ from Equation (1), which estimates the effect of 2010

average processing time on SSDI enrollment rates in each of the years 2003­2015 (with the coefficient

for 2008 normalized to zero). Prior to 2008, these coefficients--which capture the effect of a one-

month increase in average appellate processing time--are close to zero and statistically insignificant,

suggesting that neighboring ZIP codes experienced similar rates of change in SSDI enrollment in

the years leading up to the Great Recession.

      In the immediate wake of the recession (in 2009­2010), an additional month of average pro-

cessing time reduces SSDI enrollment by approximately 0.01 percentage points, though this effect

is statistically insignificant. Consistent with the time lags inherent in the appellate process, as

well as the absorbing nature of SSDI, this effect then widens to 0.03 percentage points by 2012


                                                  21
Figure 6: Effect of appellate processing time on SSDI enrollment rates

                                                                 0.04




                        Coefficient on average processing time
                                                                 0.02


                                                                 0.00


                                                                 -0.02


                                                                 -0.04


                                                                 -0.06


                                                                 -0.08
                                                                         2003   2005   2007        2009   2011   2013   2015

Notes: Estimated coefficients ^ on interactions between average processing time and annual year indicators from
Equation (1). Capped spikes denote 95 percent confidence intervals. The sample consists of pairs of adjacent ZIP
codes located in the same county but assigned to different hearing offices as of 2010. SSDI enrollment is the ratio of
the number of disabled workers receiving SSDI to the resident population ages 30­64.


and remains at that level through 2015, the end of our analysis period. Though the estimates fall

narrowly short of statistical significance, with p-values between 0.1 and 0.2 from 2011 onward, they

suggest that slower appellate processes may curb growth in SSDI caseloads during a downturn.

       Table 2 reports, in column (1), the corresponding estimates ^SR and ^LR from Equation (2),

which parametrizes these dynamics into "short-run" (2009­2011) and "long-run" (2012­2015) ef-

fects. With an average cross-border difference of 1.8 months within our border-pair sample, the

long-run point estimate of -0.03 implies that the ZIP code faced with shorter processing times saw

a persistent relative increase in SSDI enrollment of approximately 0.06 percentage points. This

amounts to 1.3 percent of the dependent variable mean, as SSDI enrollment averages to 4.3 percent

across all observations used in estimation. As with the year-by-year coefficients, we caution that

the difference-in-difference estimate is at best marginally significant, with a p-value of 0.16.

       We next look at how these effects vary with the severity of the local unemployment shock.

To do so, we estimate Equations (1) and (2) separately for ZIP codes in commuting zones with

Great Recession shocks above or below 4.5 percentage points, the median in our estimation sample.

Figure 7 plots the coefficient on appellate processing time year-by-year, separately for more versus

less severely shocked places. The divergent estimates for the two series reveal reductions in relative



                                                                                              22
Table 2: Effect of appellate processing time on post-recession SSDI enrollment rates

                                                                                                                                    Severely shocked and . . .
                                                                             Full sample Less severely More severely High 2007                    Low 2007
                                                                           of border pairs shocked CZs shocked CZs SSDI rate                      SSDI rate
                                                                                    (1)                 (2)            (3)              (4)          (5)

 1{2009­11} × processing time                                                   -0.015               0.001        -0.020            -0.033       -0.010
                                                                                ( 0.012)           ( 0.023)       ( 0.013)          ( 0.025)     ( 0.010)
 1{2012­15} × processing time                                                   -0.032               0.006        -0.045*           -0.093**     -0.009
                                                                                ( 0.023)           ( 0.042)       ( 0.024)          ( 0.036)     ( 0.015)
 p-value for long-run coefficient      0.16                                                      0.89               0.06              0.01         0.56
 Mean of dependent variable            4.34                                                      4.60               4.17              7.90         3.34
 Number of border pairs              907.00                                                    451.00             456.00            177.00       279.00
 Number of ZIP codes               1,049.00                                                    537.00             512.00            228.00       284.00
 Number of observations           23,582.00                                                 11,726.00          11,856.00          4,602.00     7,254.00

Notes: Regression results obtained from a balanced panel of paired ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned
to different hearing offices as of 2010. The level of observation is ZIP code × border pair × year, stacked over the
years 2003­2015. Each observation is weighted by ZIP code population in 2010. The SSDI enrollment rate is defined
as the number of disabled workers receiving SSDI divided by the population ages 30­64. A ZIP code is defined as
experiencing a severe shock if its commuting zone saw an above-median 2007­2009 change in the unemployment rate
and as having a high 2007 SSDI rate if its county had above-median SSDI enrollment in that year. All specifications
include ZIP code fixed effects and border pair × year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for
two-way clustering at the border pair × year and hearing-office levels. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.

Figure 7: Effect of appellate processing time on SSDI enrollment rates, by local severity of the
          Great Recession

                                                                 0.10
                        Coefficient on average processing time




                                                                 0.05



                                                                 0.00



                                                                 -0.05



                                                                 -0.10
                                                                         2003       2005    2007        2009    2011       2013     2015

                                                                                    Less severe shock          More severe shock


Notes: Estimated coefficients  ^ on interactions between average processing time and annual year indicators from
Equation (1), estimated separately for ZIP code pairs in commuting zones with 2007­2009 changes in the unem-
ployment rate below or above the sample median. SSDI enrollment is the ratio of the number of disabled workers
receiving SSDI to the resident population ages 30­64. Capped spikes denote 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                                                                   23
SSDI enrollment in commuting zones hit harder by the Great Recession. Within these hardest-hit

labor markets, ZIP codes assigned to hearing offices with one month shorter processing times expe-

rienced a persistent relative increase in SSDI enrollment just shy of 0.05 percentage points relative

to their neighboring ZIP code. The difference-in-difference specification reported in column (3) of

Table 2 confirms this impression, with a 2012­2015 point estimate of -.045 that just skirts 95 per-

cent significance (p = 0.06). If we again scale this estimate by the typical 1.8 month disparity in

processing times, these estimates suggest that SSDI enrollment rates reach 0.08 percentage points

(1.9 percent) higher in the ZIP code that faced longer processing times. By contrast, ZIP code pairs

in commuting zones where the recession was comparatively less severe exhibit no economically or

statistically significant change in their relative SSDI enrollment trends.

      In sum, then, the results we have presented thus far suggest that marginal increases in SSDI

hassle costs dampen the growth in SSDI enrollment in areas subject to especially severe labor

market shocks, but have no detectable effect on program enrollment in areas hit less hard. A

plausible explanation of this fact pattern is that bigger local shocks result in greater numbers of

dislocated "conditional applicants" for whom moderate shifts in the expected cost of obtaining

SSDI benefits can potentially sway decisions to apply in the first place or to appeal a denied claim.


5.2   Impact on employment rates

As the speed of the appellate process leaves a persistent imprint on SSDI enrollment rates after

a severe labor market contraction, we next explore its effect on local employment rates. All else

equal, we might expect neighboring ZIP codes to experience a similar recovery in employment once

the economy begins to improve. However, as SSDI enrollment appears to have been affected by

processing times, we might instead observe persistent differences in employment.

      Figures 8 and 9 presents coefficients ^ from estimating Equation (1) for the employment-to-

population rate, first in our overall sample and then, as before, splitting the sample into more versus

less severely shocked local labor markets. In both figures, we find no clear indications of differences

in employment trends between ZIP codes faced with longer or shorter appellate processing times.

The point estimates move jaggedly in the middle of our sample period, and the confidence intervals

are wide. The parametrized estimates in columns (1)­(3) of Table 3 are correspondingly noisy.

      While the noisiness of these estimates precludes clear conclusions, a null effect of appellate

                                                  24
Figure 8: Effect of appellate processing time on employment-to-population rates

                                                                 0.80




                        Coefficient on average processing time
                                                                 0.60


                                                                 0.40


                                                                 0.20


                                                                 0.00


                                                                 -0.20


                                                                 -0.40

                                                                         2003   2005    2007        2009   2011     2013       2015

Notes: Estimated coefficients ^ on interactions between average processing time and annual year indicators from
Equation (1). Employment rates are the ratio of total jobs held by ZIP code residents ages 30+ to the ZIP code's
population ages 30­64. Capped spikes denote 95 percent confidence intervals. The sample consists of pairs of adjacent
ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned to different hearing offices as of 2010.

Figure 9: Effect of appellate processing time on employment-to-population rates, by local
          severity of the Great Recession

                                                                 1.50
                        Coefficient on average processing time




                                                                 1.00



                                                                 0.50



                                                                 0.00



                                                                 -0.50

                                                                         2003   2005    2007        2009   2011     2013       2015

                                                                                Less severe shock          More severe shock


Notes: Estimated coefficients ^ on interactions between average processing time and annual year indicators from
Equation (1), estimated separately for ZIP code pairs in commuting zones with 2007­2009 changes in the unemploy-
ment rate below or above the sample median. Employment rates are the ratio of total jobs held by ZIP code residents
ages 30+ to the ZIP code's population ages 30­64. Capped spikes denote 95 percent confidence intervals.


processing time on employment rates would be consistent with the theoretical ambiguity of this

effect. Though an increase in the hassle cost of appealing a denied SSDI application should have an

unambiguously negative impact on SSDI enrollment, the effect on employment could go either way.

                                                                                               25
Table 3: Effect of appellate processing time on post-recession employment-to-population rates

                                                                                       Severely shocked and . . .
                                       Full sample Less severely More severely High 2007              Low 2007
                                     of border pairs shocked CZs shocked CZs SSDI rate                SSDI rate
                                            (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)

 1{2009­11} × processing time             0.187           0.305*          0.148          0.473***     -0.091
                                        ( 0.124)        ( 0.155)        ( 0.161)       ( 0.177)       ( 0.181)
 1{2012­15} × processing time             0.158           0.098           0.178          0.833***     -0.303
                                        ( 0.205)        ( 0.319)        ( 0.248)       ( 0.270)       ( 0.194)
 p-value for long-run coefficient      0.44              0.76            0.48           0.00            0.13
 Mean of dependent variable           60.32             62.33           59.02          56.56           59.57
 Number of border pairs              907.00            451.00          456.00         177.00          279.00
 Number of ZIP codes               1,049.00            537.00          512.00         228.00          284.00
 Number of observations           23,582.00         11,726.00       11,856.00       4,602.00        7,254.00

Notes: Regression results obtained from a balanced panel of paired ZIP codes located in the same county but assigned
to different hearing offices as of 2010. The level of observation is ZIP code × border pair × year, stacked over the
years 2003­2015. Each observation is weighted by ZIP code population in 2010. The employment-to-population
ratio is the number of employed residents ages 30+ divided by the population ages 30­64. A ZIP code is defined as
experiencing a severe shock if its commuting zone saw an above-median 2007­2009 change in the unemployment rate
and as having a high 2007 SSDI rate if its county had above-median SSDI enrollment in that year. All specifications
include ZIP code fixed effects and border pair × year fixed effects. Standard errors in parentheses are corrected for
two-way clustering at the border pair × year and hearing-office levels. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.


Consider a disabled worker who is deciding whether to appeal a denied claim. On the one hand,

an increase in expected processing time will raise the opportunity cost of filing an appeal, since the

worker must keep earnings below the SGA limit while the appeal is pending. To the extent that

workers are attuned to processing times, this should discourage some from filing an appeal. We call

this the deterrence effect.22 On the other hand, if the worker does choose to file an appeal, a slower

appellate process will necessitate a longer period of below-SGA earnings before the case is resolved.

Given the strong empirical evidence that joblessness erodes earnings capacity, whether through skill

depreciation, discouragement, or the scarring of employer beliefs (Kroft, Lange, and Notowidigdo,

2013; Autor et al., 2015; Schmieder, von Wachter, and Bender, 2016), a lengthy period of legal

limbo should depress subsequent employment among those whose claims are ultimately denied.

This is the decay effect. The broadly similar evolution of employment rates in areas with longer

versus shorter processing delays could arise if the deterrence and decay effects roughly offset each


  22
     Longer processing times might also deter some of those who file an appeal from seeing the process through to its
conclusion. Even an appellant who knows nothing about average processing times might withdraw a pending appeal
upon learning of a suitable employment opportunity, and this is more likely to occur the longer an appeal drags on.


                                                         26
Figure 10: Effect of processing time on SSDI enrollment and employment-to-population rates, in
           areas with high pre-recession SSDI enrollment and severe Great Recession shocks
                                                          SSDI enrollment rate                         Employment-to-population rate
                                                                                               1.50
                                                  0.05
         Coefficient on average processing time




                                                  0.00                                         1.00



                                                  -0.05                                        0.50



                                                  -0.10                                        0.00



                                                  -0.15                                        -0.50


                                                  -0.20                                        -1.00
                                                          2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015           2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015

Notes: Estimated coefficients   ^ on interactions between average processing time and annual year indicators from
Equation (1), using ZIP code pairs with above-median 2007­2009 changes in the unemployment rate (measured at the
commuting zone level) and above-median 2007 SSDI enrollment rates (measured at the county level). The outcome
variables are defined as in previous figures. Capped spikes denote 95 percent confidence intervals.


other, though we cannot rule out economically meaningful effects in either direction.23


5.3     Heterogeneous effects by baseline SSDI enrollment rates

As a final exercise, we investigate whether the effects of SSDI hassle costs on program enrollment

and employment rates vary with historical SSDI enrollment rates. Pre-recession SSDI caseloads

span a wide range: among ZIP codes in our border panel, county-level SSDI enrollment rates at

the 75th percentile of the 2007 distribution are nearly twice those at the 25th percentile (6.3 versus

3.1 percent). Among our border pairs, we see baseline SSDI enrollment in excess of 10 percent

for counties in Alabama, Arkansas, California, Kentucky, Missouri, Tennessee, Virginia, and West

Virginia. We categorize ZIP code pairs based on whether their (shared) county had SSDI enrollment

(as a share of the population ages 30­64) in 2007, on the eve of the Great Recession, above or below

the sample median of 4.1 percent. We conjecture that marginal changes in the ease of accessing

SSDI (as captured through appeals processing time) may have larger effects in localities with higher

baseline receipt of SSDI, since such places are likely to have stronger SSDI network and information


   23
      Since the LODES data are noise-infused to protect confidentiality, a more prosaic interpretation of these results
is simply that measurement error is obscuring any true relationship between average processing time and employment.


                                                                                          27
effects that would likely amplify the responsiveness of local SSDI enrollment and employment to a

shock like the Great Recession.

      The data offer qualified support for this conjecture. Figure 10 plots the year-by-year results,

with the analogous difference-in-difference estimates presented in column (4) of Tables 2 and 3.

In severely shocked ZIP code pairs in counties with high 2007 SSDI enrollment rates, we find a

statistically significant negative effect of processing time on SSDI enrollment and a statistically

significant positive effect on subsequent employment rates. In such localities, an additional month

of processing time is associated with a relative decrease in SSDI enrollment of about 0.1 percentage

points--twice the magnitude we found when looking at all of the hardest-hit places. On the

employment side, interpretation of our estimates is complicated by an apparent (if statistically

insignificant) pretrend in the years leading up to the Great Recession. With this caveat noted,

there is some indication of relatively faster employment growth in ZIP codes faced with longer

appellant processing times. If we take this result at face value, it would suggest that in areas with

traditionally high SSDI enrollment rates hit by deep recessionary shocks, less cumbersome access

to SSDI contributed to slower employment recoveries after the Great Recession.



6    Conclusion

During economic downturns, and the Great Recession in particular, the SSDI caseload surges as

labor market dislocation induces marginal, less-impaired applicants to apply for disability benefits.

Since SSDI receipt is in most cases an absorbing state, the program's distortionary labor force par-

ticipation incentives have the potential to prolong the employment effects of recessions by keeping

these marginal recipients--who might otherwise have remained in the labor force--from returning

to work. While a long line of research has established that SSDI enrollment responds to labor

market conditions, the strength of these effects is likely to depend on the ease with which potential

beneficiaries can access the program. In this paper, we exploit differences across SSA hearing offices

in the average processing time of SSDI appeals, coupled with residence-based assignment of poten-

tial beneficiaries to hearing offices, to estimate the effect of SSDI hassle costs on long-run program

enrollment and employment rates in areas subject to labor market shocks of variable severity.

      By comparing neighboring ZIP codes that straddle the borders between hearing office catch-


                                                 28
ment areas, we trace the evolution of SSDI enrollment and employment in areas subject to differ-

ences in the average processing time of SSDI appeals, as measured in 2010, but home to similar

populations and exposed to common economic shocks. We find that neighboring ZIP codes assigned

to different hearing offices (and thus differences in the speed of appellate review) experienced sim-

ilar trends in SSDI enrollment prior to the Great Recession, but divergent trends thereafter. This

divergence is concentrated in commuting zones that experienced particularly severe unemployment

shocks, which presumably push larger numbers of displaced workers to the margin of program entry.

In these hardest-hit labor markets, ZIP codes faced with longer appellate processing times exhibit

persistent reductions in SSDI enrollment rates of about 0.08 percentage points (1.9 percent of the

sample mean) relative to neighboring ZIP codes that face shorter processing times.

      Having established that greater hassle costs lead to relatively lower SSDI enrollment after the

Great Recession, especially in severely hit locations, we turn to the question of how they affected

subsequent employment. In the full sample of ZIP code pairs, we find no evidence of divergent

employment recovery rates after the recession in ZIP codes with longer versus shorter appeals

processing time, though our confidence intervals are wide. However, in severely shocked ZIP code

pairs with larger SSDI caseloads on the eve of the recession, we find that slower appellate review

has large negative effects on SSDI enrollment and large positive effects on employment, consistent

with larger hassle costs spurring faster employment recovery in these particular places. Though

an apparent pretrend in the employment estimates warrants caution about this particular result,

our findings raise the possibility that SSDI network effects--arising, for instance, through word of

mouth or through the local concentration of lawyers specializing in disability cases--might amplify

the importance of hassle costs in traditional SSDI hotspots.

      In presenting these results, we make no statement about the welfare gains or losses associated

with SSDI hassle costs, as these depend on both the social planner's objective function and the

characteristics of the complier population. In a recent paper, Deshpande and Li (2019) find that the

SSDI applicants screened out of the program by the closure of SSA field offices disproportionately

had moderately severe conditions and low education levels. If marginal SSDI applicants during the

Great Recession tended to be those with greater earnings potential and lower levels of disadvantage,

making SSDI more or less cumbersome to access has different welfare implications than if applicants

deterred from entering the program on account of hassle costs were especially disadvantaged. We do

                                                 29
not attempt a welfare calculation, but merely highlight the point made by Deshpande and Li (2019)

that the welfare implications of hassle costs depend on who is screened in or out of a program, along

with the relative social weights placed on encouraging employment versus insuring workers against

the earnings losses associated with disability.


References
Abraham, Katherine G. and Melissa S. Kearney. 2020. "Explaining the Decline in the US
 Employment-to-Population Ratio: A Review of the Evidence." Journal of Economic Literature,
 58(3): 583­643.

Amior, Michael and Alan Manning. 2018. "The Persistence of Local Joblessness." American
 Economic Review, 108(7): 1942­1970.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline
 in Unemployment." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157­205.

Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. "The Growth in the Social Security Disability
 Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3): 71­96.

Autor, David H., Nicole Maestas, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2015.
 "Does Delay Cause Decay? The Effect of Administrative Decision Time on the Labor Force
 Participation and Earnings of Disability Applicants." NBER Working Paper No. 20840.

Black, Dan, Kermit Daniel, and Seth Sanders. 2002. "The Impact of Economic Conditions
  on Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust." American
  Economic Review, 92(1): 27­50.

Bound, John. 1989. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants."
 American Economic Review, 79(3): 482­503.

Census Bureau. 2018. "LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES)." Center for
 Economic Studies, Longitudinal-Employer Household Dynamics Program. Version 7.5.

Charles, Kerwin Kofi, Yiming Li, and Melvin Stephens Jr. 2018. "Disability Benefit Take-
 up and Local Labor Market Conditions." Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(3): 416­423.

Chen, Susan and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. 2008. "The Work Disincentive Effects of the
 Disability Insurance Program in the 1990s." Journal of Econometrics, 142(2): 757­784.

Deshpande, Manasi and Yue Li. 2019. "Who Is Screened Out? Application Costs and the
 Targeting of Disability Programs." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(4): 213­
 248.
                       ~
Dube, Arindrajit, T.William     Lester, and Michael Reich. 2010. "Minimum Wage Effects
 Across State Borders: Estimates Using Contiguous Counties." Review of Economics and Statis-
 tics, 92(4): 945­964.

French, Eric and Jae Song. 2014. "The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply."
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 6(2): 291­337.

                                                  30
Gelber, Alexander, Timothy Moore, and Alexander Strand. 2017. "The Effect of Disability
 Insurance Payments on Beneficiaries' Earnings." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
 9(3): 229­261.

Golosov, Mikhail and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2006. "Designing Optimal Disability Insurance: A Case
 for Asset Testing." Journal of Political Economy, 114(2): 257­279.

Hershbein, Brad and Bryan A. Stuart. 2020. "Recessions and Local Labor Market Hysteresis."
 Upjohn Institute Working Paper No. 20-325.

Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. "Duration Dependence and
 Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 128(3): 1123­1167.

Liebman, Jeffrey B. 2015. "Understanding the Increase in Disability Insurance Benefit Receipt
  in the United States." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(2): 123­150.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2013. "Does Disability In-
 surance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of
 SSDI Receipt." American Economic Review, 103(5): 1797­1829.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2015. "Disability Insurance
 and the Great Recession." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 105(5): 177­182.

Maestas, Nicole, Kathleen J. Mullen, and Alexander Strand. 2018. "The Effect of Eco-
 nomic Conditions on the Disability Insurance Program: Evidence from the Great Recession."
 NBER Working Paper No. 25338.

Nichols, Albert L. and Richard J. Zeckhauser. 1982. "Targeting Transfers through Restric-
 tions on Recipients." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 72(2): 372­377.

Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter, and Stefan Bender. 2016. "The Effect of
  Unemployment Benefits and Nonemployment Durations on Wages." American Economic Review,
  106(3): 739­777.

Social Security Administration. 2020. "Annual Statistical Report on the Social Security Dis-
  ability Insurance Program, 2019." Social Security Administration Office of Retirement and Dis-
  ability Policy, SSA Publication No. 13-11826.

Tolbert, Charles M. and Molly Sizer. 1996. "US Commuting Zones and Labor Market Areas:
  A 1990 Update." Economic Research Service Staff Paper 9614.

von Wachter, Till, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester. 2011. "Trends in Employment and
  Earnings of Allowed and Rejected Applicants to the Social Security Disability Insurance Pro-
  gram." American Economic Review, 101(7): 3308­3329.

Yagan, Danny. 2019. "Employment Hysteresis from the Great Recession." Journal of Political
 Economy, 127(5): 2505­2558.

Zayatz, Tim. 2015. "Social Security Disability Insurance Program Worker Experience." Social
  Security Administration Office of the Chief Actuary, SSA Pub. No. 11-11543.



                                              31
A      Additional Figures

Figure A1: Adjacent ZIP codes in Cook County (Chicago) assigned to different hearing offices




                                                                           518
                                                                           509
                                                                           494
                                                                           430
                                                                           Not in sample




Notes: Average processing times by hearing office as of 2010, as reported by the Social Security Administration and
plotted for all ZIP codes in Cook County, Illinois, with one or more neighbors assigned to a different hearing office.




                                                         32
B     Data preparation
As summarized in Appendix Figure B1, our analysis relies (entirely) on public-use data at six
levels of geographic aggregation. We describe here the main steps in our data preparation. Our
replication code, including detailed information on how and where we accessed the source data
as well as further details about the data preparation and analysis, will be posted alongside the
published version of this paper.

Figure B1: Key variables originating at each level of geographic aggregation

Census tract:               USPS ZIP code:                   Field office:          Hearing office:
 Employment                  SSDI enrollment                 only used for           Processing time
 Population                  Adjacencies                     crosswalking            Award rates


                       County:                                    Commuting zone:
                        Pre-recession SSDI usage                   Great Recession shock

Notes: The bold border around USPS ZIP codes signifies that this is our unit of analysis. Arrows indicate which
geographic units are typically subsumed within each other--for instance, most ZIP codes are contained within larger
counties, though some ZIP codes straddle county lines.

Our data preparation proceeds as follows, with each step detailed below:

Step 1.     Assemble ZIP × year data on the number of disabled workers receiving SSDI benefits,
            together with the identity of the field office to which each ZIP code is assigned in a given
            year.

Step 2.     Assemble hearing office × year data on average appellate processing times and the per-
            centage of appeals approved.

Step 3.     Merge the data assembled in steps 1 and 2 by matching each ZIP code's assigned field
            office, as of 2010, with its associated hearing office in that year. This yields a ZIP × year
            dataset of SSDI enrollment augmented with hearing office characteristics as of 2010.

Step 4.     Assemble ZIP-level data on population and employment by aggregating up from data
            reported at the Census-tract level. Merge these data into our ZIP × year panel, and
            compute per capita measures of SSDI enrollment and employment.

Step 5.     Assemble county- and commuting-zone level data, including our measure of the local
            severity of the Great Recession, and merge these into our ZIP × year panel.

Step 6.     Match each ZIP code with each of its ZIP-level neighbors, and reshape the dataset to
            the pair × year level.

Step 7.     Identify and retain paired ZIP codes that are located in the same county, assigned to
            different hearing offices, and not missing any of the main variables used in our analysis.




                                                        33
Step 1:      Assemble ZIP × year data on SSDI caseloads and assigned field office
Beginning with December 2003, the Social Security Administration (SSA) publishes annual data
files reporting the number of individuals receiving Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
(OASDI) benefits at year end in each five-digit US Postal Service (USPS) ZIP code.24 From these
files, we extract ZIP-level counts of the number of SSDI recipients in each year during 2003­2015,
together with the name and state of the field office to which each ZIP code was assigned in that
year. To preserve confidentiality, the SSA files exclude ZIP × year cells containing fewer than 15
OASDI recipients, and the beneficiary counts are rounded to multiples of five. We treat suppressed
ZIP × year cells as missing observations.
       Throughout the paper, we restrict attention to the 50 US states plus the District of Columbia.
After excluding non-state US territories, we observe approximately 37,000 ZIP codes per year in
these SSA files, with the number fluctuating slightly as ZIP codes are created or destroyed and as
OASDI enrollment crosses the threshold for data suppression.

Step 2:      Assemble hearing-office data on processing times and award rates
For each fiscal year from 2009­2010 onwards, SSA reports caseload statistics and performance
metrics for each of the hearing offices that adjudicate appeals of denied applications for SSDI
benefits. We assemble hearing office characteristics from two sets of files:

   · From the Hearing Office Workload Data, we extract the average processing time across all
     appeals concluded during each fiscal year, where processing time is defined as the number of
     days elapsed from the date a hearing was requested to the date the appeal was resolved.

   · From the ALJ Disposition Data, we extract monthly data on the number of appeals decided
     and the number of appellants awarded benefits by each administrative law judge at each
     hearing office (judges may hear cases at multiple offices). We sum these counts to the hearing
     office × fiscal-year level, then compute the award rate as the ratio of total awards to total
     decisions. Our denominator excludes dismissals, which include withdrawals by the applicant.

We refer to the 2009­2010 fiscal year as simply "2010" (and likewise for later years).
      We discard data pertaining to either National Hearing Centers or the anti-fraud Special
Review Cadre, which are not associated with particular geographic areas, as well as data pertaining
to hearing offices located in Puerto Rico. After making these exclusions and harmonizing office
names across files, we observe a total of 153 hearing offices in 2010, of which two are satellites of
other, larger offices. Three hearing offices had zero appeal dispositions in 2010 and thus lack data
on average processing time, and five are missing at least one of the variables described above.
      A handful of hearing offices enter or exit the data over time. Net of our sample restrictions,
the number of hearing offices rises to 162 by 2012 and falls to 161 in 2015, and we observe a total
of 166 distinct hearing offices at some point during 2010­2015.

Step 3:      Merge ZIP-level data with hearing office characteristics
To match ZIP codes with their assigned hearing offices, we must first construct a crosswalk from field
office names to hearing office names. Although our crosswalk is imperfect--owing to inconsistent
naming conventions across SSA files and significant changes in office assignments as offices open,
close, or restructure--we believe we are able to accurately classify ZIP codes accounting for the
  24
    The SSA website notes that archival copies of some pre-2003 data are stored at the HathiTrust Digital Library.
We did not attempt to access these earlier editions.


                                                       34
vast majority of the potential SSDI claimant population. To the extent that any slippage in these
mappings takes the form of classical measurement error, it would bias us against finding effects of
appeals processing time on program enrollment and employment rates.

Constructing a crosswalk from field offices into hearing offices. The SSA's Hearing Office
Locator tool provides information about which field offices are currently assigned to each hearing
office, but not about how these assignments have changed over time. During 2007­2013, however,
the SSA maintained and updated static webpages listing the name and state of each field office,
together with its associated hearing office, in a semi-structured HTML format. We use the Internet
Archive Wayback Machine to fetch one snapshot per year for each of the 10 regional pages on which
this information was provided.
       Next, we parse the HTML source code to construct year-by-year crosswalks from field offices
into hearing offices. We use string manipulations, regular expressions, and hand-coding to stan-
dardize office naming conventions across snapshots and to align the field office names with those
used in the ZIP × year files described in step 1. In most cases, a field office is assigned to a single
hearing office at a given point in time, but we make note of occasional instances in which a field
office is served by multiple hearing offices, so that we can exclude such cases from our analysis.

Mapping ZIP codes to hearing offices. We use our new crosswalk to merge the ZIP × year
data assembled in step 1 with the hearing office × year data assembled in step 2 on the basis of
harmonized field-office names. Since our ultimate interest is in associating each ZIP code with the
hearing office to which it was assigned in 2010, we focus our discussion on the match rate for that
year.
       Upon applying our crosswalk to the ZIP × year panel on a year-by-year basis, we successfully
assign 96.7 percent [respectively, 94.2 percent] of ZIP codes to at least one [exactly one] hearing
office in 2010. We populate hearing office assignments for unmatched observations as follows:

   i. Interpolate office assignments : First, if a ZIP code was assigned to the same hearing office in
      years t - 1 and t + 1 but is unassigned in year t, we assign it to that hearing office in year t as
      well. We repeat this process successively for gaps of two, three, four, or five years in length.
      After this step, 97.4 percent of ZIP codes have an assigned hearing office in 2010.

   ii. Extrapolate office assignments backwards : Next, if a ZIP code is first assigned to a hearing
       office in some year t > 2007, we assign it to that hearing office in all years s  {2007, . . . , t - 1}.
       Doing so brings our 2010 match rate up to 98.8 percent.

  iii. Extrapolate office assignments forwards : We extrapolate hearing office assignments forward
       in a similar fashion. Doing so brings our 2010 match rate above 99.9 percent.

  iv. Handcode remaining cases. We assign the few remaining ZIP codes manually by mimicking
      the hearing-office assignments of other nearby field offices.

At the conclusion of this procedure, we are left with a ZIP × year dataset containing SSDI enroll-
ment counts augmented with the identity of each ZIP code's assigned hearing office--as observed in
the same year, where possible, or in the closest possible year in the few cases we populate through
imputation. By construction, each ZIP code that appears in our data in 2010 has a hearing office
assigned (or imputed) to it in that year. Using these 2010 assignments, we merge in the 2010
values of the hearing office characteristics assembled in step 2. Although the mapping from ZIP
codes to hearing offices changes somewhat over time, we posit that a locality's office assignment


                                                      35
in 2010--when many recession-induced SSDI appeals were being adjudicated--is most relevant for
claimants' decisions about whether to appeal a denied SSDI claim (or whether to apply at all).

Step 4:      Prepare ZIP × year data on SSDI enrollment and employment rates
We augment our ZIP × year panel with data on local population (measured in 2010) and em-
ployment (measured annually). With these measures in hand, we construct our two outcomes of
interest: per capita SSDI enrollment and per capita employment.

Population. We obtain estimates of local population from the 2010 Decennial Census.25 The US
Census Bureau reports population counts not for USPS ZIP codes, but rather for a distinct set of
geographic units called ZIP Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs). To better align the Census data with
our SSA data, which are reported by USPS ZIP code, we start by loading population data at the
more granular Census-tract level. We map tracts into USPS ZIP codes using a fractional, many-to-
many crosswalk provided by the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).26 We
then compute ZIP-level population as the share-weighted sum of population in all corresponding
tracts.27 Our main analysis uses estimates of both overall local population and the local population
aged 30­64; we also draw on population counts by educational attainment, race, and ethnicity to
help assess the comparability of neighboring ZIP codes assigned to different hearing offices.28

Employment. We obtain estimates of local employment from the Census Bureau's Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES), a
public-use dataset derived from the confidential LEHD. The LODES program uses matched worker-
firm microdata to construct noise-infused estimates of employment at the Census-block level, with
jobs grouped either by workers' home addresses, their work addresses, or origin-destination pairs
defined jointly by both addresses. Because our interest is in employment rates among the residents
of each given ZIP code, we use the LODES Residence Area Characteristic (RAC) files to measure
employment by place of residence; we use estimates based on workers' primary jobs to ensure that
each worker is counted only once in a given year. We sum block-level employment estimates to the
Census-tract level, then aggregate to USPS ZIP codes using the same fractional HUD crosswalk
we use to prepare the population data. We rely principally on measures of local employment
among workers ages 30 or older, though we also draw on demographic and sectoral breakdowns of
employment in our examination of sample characteristics in Table 1.29
      The LODES database is derived from underlying state-level data, and states enter the LODES
universe in different years. The employment level ascribed to ZIP code i in year t in the RAC files
   25
       While we would ideally denominate SSDI recipiency by an annual measure of population, the only such measure
we are aware of at the ZIP code level is the number of tax exemptions reported in the Internal Revenue Service's
Statistics of Income. However, this measure does not separate working-age adults from the broader population and
is itself potentially impacted by changes in tax-filing and exemption-claiming rates induced by the Great Recession;
furthermore, starting in 2008, ZIP codes with small populations are suppressed to preserve privacy. For these reasons,
we denominate SSDI recipiency by the static population measure observed in the Decennial Census.
    26
       Both here and in step 5, where we map ZIP codes into counties using another HUD file, we use HUD's crosswalk
file for the first quarter of 2012, the earliest to incorporate the 2010 Census geographies used in our other datasets.
    27
       Some tracts that appear in the 2010 Decennial Census are absent from HUD's tract-to-ZIP crosswalk, but most
such tracts had no residents in 2010. We successfully match tracts accounting for 99.97 percent of the 2010 US
population.
    28
       Population counts by education group are taken from the pooled 2006­2010 American Community Survey. All
other population counts are from the 2010 Decennial Census.
    29
       As with the population data, some tracts in the LODES data are absent from the HUD crosswalk. In every year
in our sample period, we successfully match in excess of 99.9 percent of LODES employment into USPS ZIP codes.


                                                          36
is an estimate of total employment among residents of i at employers located in states belonging to
the LODES universe in that year. As such, employment counts jump discontinuously--from a low
but non-zero level reflecting only out-of-state employment--in the year when a state first enters the
LODES frame. To avoid drawing erroneous inferences from these spurious leaps in employment,
we exclude from our sample any ZIP codes located in Arizona (which entered LODES in 2004),
Massachusetts (2011), Mississippi (2004), or the District of Columbia (2010). All other US states
belong to the LODES universe throughout our sample period.

SSDI enrollment and employment rates. Armed with ZIP-level estimates of population,
SSDI enrollment, and employment, we compute the local SSDI enrollment rate in a given year as
the ratio of all disabled workers receiving SSDI benefits in that year to the 2010 population aged
30­64. As described in the text, we choose this denominator because SSDI recipiency is rare at
younger ages and because disabled workers transition from SSDI into Social Security retirement
benefits upon reaching retirement age. We compute the local employment-to-population rate as the
ratio of LODES employment among workers aged 30 or older to the 2010 population aged 30­64.30

Step 5:       Incorporate data at the county and commuting-zone levels
We assign each ZIP code to a single county, which is in turn nested within a commuting zone (CZ).
As explained in the main text, we use county and CZ codes for three purposes. First, we restrict our
analysis sample to paired ZIP codes located within the same county (and thus also the same CZ),
to eliminate cases in which the border between two hearing-office catchment areas coincides with
county (or state) borders. Second, we assign each border pair a "Great Recession shock" based on
the 2007­2009 change in unemployment in the pair's CZ. Third, we further split our sample based
on the pre-recession SSDI enrollment rate in each border pair's county.

Mapping ZIP codes into counties. Just as we did for our tract-to-ZIP concordance, we assign
USPS ZIP codes to counties using a fractional crosswalk provided by HUD. Because USPS ZIP
codes can straddle county lines, the HUD file records the share of all residential and business
addresses in each ZIP code that are located within each county. Among all ZIP codes nationwide,
over three-quarters are uniquely matched to a county; among those multiply matched, the median
ZIP code has 93.7 percent of its addresses located in its modal county. We assign each ZIP code
to its modal county.
       County definitions and FIPS codes change occasionally over time, as counties are created,
absorbed, or redefined. We draw on myriad internet resources, notably David Dorn's list of county
changes, to standardize FIPS codes across datasets and to bridge changes in county borders.31

Mapping counties into commuting zones. Commuting zones (CZs) are assemblages of coun-
ties characterized both by dense commuting flows across counties within each CZ and by sparse
commuting flows between CZs (Tolbert and Sizer, 1996). We map each county into a unique CZ
using the US Department of Agriculture's year-2000 CZ definitions, which partition the United
States into 709 CZs.


   30
      The LODES data report employment counts among those aged 30­54 and among those aged 55 or older, but it
does not subdivide the latter group into those over or under 65.
   31
      Alaskan borough (county) borders change substantially during our sample period. While these changes would
make it difficult for us to assign Great Recession shocks to Alaskan ZIP codes on a consistent basis, no pairs of
neighboring Alaskan ZIP codes survive our other sample restrictions, so this potential issue does not arise in practice.


                                                          37
Constructing local recession shocks. The Bureau of Labor Statistics' Local Area Unemploy-
ment Statistics (LAUS) database reports county-level unemployment rates at both monthly and
annual frequencies. Following Yagan (2019), we define each CZ's "Great Recession shock" as the
percentage-point change in its unemployment rate between 2007 and 2009. Departing slightly from
Yagan, we begin with the annually averaged data reported directly in the LAUS (rather than aver-
aging across months ourselves), and we use county population weights to aggregate these shocks to
year-2000 CZs (rather than year-1990 CZs). We favor the 2000 vintage of CZ definitions because
these are closer to the start date of our analysis period, which begins in 2003.

Measuring county-level SSDI enrollment rates. To distinguish localities with higher versus
lower pre-recession SSDI enrollment rates, we split ZIP pairs based on whether their (common)
county had above-median or below-median per capita SSDI enrollment in the year 2007. For the
numerator of this measure, we use county-level SSA data on the total number of disabled workers
receiving SSDI benefits in that year. For the denominator, we use each county's 2007 population
ages 30­64, using county × age-bin data provided by the National Cancer Institute's Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Program.

Step 6:      Construct a panel dataset of paired neighboring ZIP codes
The above steps yield a comprehensive ZIP × year panel encompassing all US states plus the
District of Columbia. To identify pairs of adjacent ZIP codes, we apply a canned ArcGIS routine
to a five-digit USPS ZIP code layer provided by ESRI, the maker of ArcGIS.32 We take an expansive
view of adjacency, so that two ZIP codes are deemed adjacent even if they merely touch at their
corners. Among the 30,745 ZIP codes in the ArcGIS layer, we find 88,113 pairs of adjacent codes.
       By merging these adjacencies onto our main panel dataset, we obtain a new dataset at the
pair × year level, with information on the characteristics of each ZIP code belonging to the pair.33
We observe a total of 86,087 distinct pairs of adjacent ZIP codes in our data, with each pair observed
an average of 12.9 times during our 13-year sample period.

Step 7:      Restrict to same-county pairs straddling hearing office borders
From this nationwide set of adjacent ZIP codes, we apply a succession of sample restrictions to
obtain the border-pair sample used throughout our main analysis. We summarize these restrictions
in Appendix Table B1, along with the sample size after each restriction is applied.
      The first set of restrictions are necessitated by missing data. Out of our initial set of adjacent
pairs, we lose about 100 due to missing county codes and about 3,700 due to mid-period entry
into the LODES universe; we lose about 800 additional pairs due to unknown 2010 hearing offices,
unknown 2010 appellate processing time at a known hearing office, unknown population, or null
population aged 30­64 (such that our outcomes of interest would be undefined). Conditional on the

  32
      We use version 10.4 of the ArcGIS layer. ESRI has released subsequent versions since we began this project,
but the version we use is closer to our sample period than those currently available on the ArcGIS website. We use
the same ArcGIS layer to construct the shapefiles underlying all maps shown in the paper.
   33
      At the point of merge, our ZIP × year panel contains 38,146 distinct ZIP codes, considerably more than we
observe in the ArcGIS layer. In addition, 857 ZIP codes in the ArcGIS data are absent from our ZIP × year panel.
These discrepancies arise because ESRI excludes ZIP codes that do not represent polygonal delivery areas (such as
those associated with PO boxes or with individual high-volume addresses) and because the set of ZIP codes active
during our 2003­2015 sample period does not perfectly match those active in 2018, when our ArcGIS layer was
constructed. The mismatched ZIP codes, though numerous, are sparsely populated: fully 98.6 percent of the 2010
US population resided in ZIP codes we match successfully to the GIS layer.


                                                       38
Table B1: Remaining sample sizes after successive sample restrictions

    Sample restriction                                                   Border pairs   ZIP codes   Observations
    All pairs of adjacent ZIP codes                                           86,087       29,957      2,217,844

    Exclusions due to missing data
    Drop if either ZIP code has a missing county code                         85,982       29,926      2,215,876
    Drop if either ZIP code is in a state that entered LODES post-2003        82,254       28,691      2,120,938
    Drop if either ZIP code has an unknown 2010 hearing office                81,781       28,551      2,116,868
    Drop if either ZIP code has unknown appellate processing time             81,472       28,465      2,108,976
    Drop if either ZIP code has unknown population in 2010                    81,454       28,457      2,108,508
    Drop if either ZIP code has zero population ages 30­64 in 2010            81,451       28,456      2,108,430
    Drop if either ZIP code has unknown SSDI enrollment                       81,451       28,456      2,108,430
    Drop if either ZIP code has unknown employment ages 30+                   81,451       28,456      2,108,430
    Drop if either ZIP code has incomplete data in any year                   79,984       28,093      2,079,584

    Exclusions due to our identification strategy
    Drop if ZIP codes are in different counties                               49,725       27,859      1,292,850
    Drop if ZIP codes are assigned to the same hearing office                  1,003        1,146         26,078
    Drop if either code has a non-unique assigned hearing office                 907        1,049         23,582



above restrictions, we observe both SSDI enrollment and employment for all remaining observations.
Finally, to ensure that our estimates are not distorted by compositional shifts in the set of ZIP codes
present in our estimation sample, we then eliminate any border pairs for which any observation
has been excluded in any of the preceding steps. These restrictions leave us with 79,984 surviving
pairs, amounting to 92.9 percent of what we started with.
       The remaining restrictions stem from our identification strategy, which harnesses differences
in appeals processing time between nearby ZIP codes subject to the same state and county govern-
ments. Restricting our sample to neighboring ZIP codes located in the same county (and therefore
the same state) leaves us with 49,728 pairs, and restricting further to those straddling hearing
office boundaries leaves us with 1,003 pairs. Finally, we drop instances in which either member of
a border pair is associated with multiple hearing offices. This leaves us with our analysis sample of
907 border pairs encompassing 1,049 distinct ZIP codes and 23,582 ZIP × pair × year observations.




                                                          39
