                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A POLICY MATRIX FOR INCLUSIVE PROSPERITY

                                           Dani Rodrik
                                       Stefanie Stantcheva

                                      Working Paper 28736
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28736


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




We thank Adrien Foucault for outstanding help with this and related projects and Bluebery
Planterose for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Dani Rodrik and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
A Policy Matrix for Inclusive Prosperity
Dani Rodrik and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 28736
April 2021
JEL No. A1,E61,H2

                                           ABSTRACT

One of the biggest challenges that countries face today is the very unequal distributions of
opportunities, resources, income and wealth across people. Inclusive prosperity ­ whereby many
people from different backgrounds can benefit from economic growth, new technologies, and the
fruits of globalization ­remains elusive. To address these issues, societies face choices among
many different policies and institutional arrangements to try to ensure a proper supply of
productive jobs and activities, as well as access to education, financial means, and other
endowments that prepare individuals for their participation in the economy. In this paper we offer
a simple, organizing framework to think about policies for inclusive prosperity. We provide a
comprehensive taxonomy of policies, distinguishing among the types of inequality they address
and the stages of the economy where the intervention takes place. The taxonomy clarifies the
differences among contending approaches to equity and inclusion and can help analysts assess the
impacts and implications of different policies and identify potential gaps.


Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 J.F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
                              A POLICY MATRIX FOR INCLUSIVE PROSPERITY

                                   DANI RODRIK AND STEFANIE STANTCHEVA1

                                   (with the assistance of Adrien Foucault)2

Introduction

One of the biggest challenges that countries face today is the very unequal distributions of
opportunities, resources, income and wealth across people. Inclusive prosperity ­ whereby many
people from different backgrounds can benefit from economic growth, new technologies, and the
fruits of globalization ­ remains elusive. To address these issues, societies face choices among many
different policies and institutional arrangements to try to ensure a proper supply of productive jobs
and activities, as well as access to education, financial means, and other endowments that prepare
individuals for their participation in the economy.

In this paper we offer a simple, organizing framework to think about policies for inclusive prosperity.
We provide a comprehensive taxonomy of policies, distinguishing among the types of inequality they
address and the stages of the economy where the intervention takes place. The taxonomy clarifies
the differences among contending approaches to equity and inclusion and can help analysts assess
the impacts and implications of different policies and identify potential gaps.

A 3 x 3 matrix

The framework can be summarized by a 3 x 3 matrix, shown in Figure 1.3 We consider that the
discussion of policies can be organized around two questions or dimensions. First, which income
group is the target of the policies intended to counter inequality or economic insecurity? Is it mainly
the low-income households at the very bottom of the income distribution? Or is it rather the middle
classes, who have traditionally had access to good jobs, but are increasingly facing reduced standards
of living and growing economic insecurity in many nations? Is it instead the high-income or high
wealth households at the very top that keep concentrating more economic power ­ as well as
political power, possibly -- individually and through stocks in large corporations? Policy priorities will
naturally differ depending on whether the target is the poor at the bottom, the middle classes, or the
top of the income distribution. This dimension of policy is captured by the rows of the matrix in
Figure 1.

The second question relates to the stage of the economy where the intervention takes place. A
useful and increasingly frequently used distinction, based on Hacker (2011), is between "pre-
distribution" and "redistribution" policies. In this terminology, "redistribution" policies are ex post
policies, that transfer income and wealth once they have been realized (e.g., redistributive transfers,
progressive taxation, and social insurance). They reshape inequalities after the economic decisions
regarding employment, investments, or innovations have been made. We will use the term post-
production policies instead to denote these policies.



1
 Rodrik: The Harvard Kennedy School, dani_rodrik@hks.harvard.edu; Stantcheva: Harvard Department of
Economics, sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu. We thank Bluebery Planterose for research assistance.

2
    Foucault: Harvard Business School afoucault@mba2021.hbs.edu.

3
 The matrix was first used in the introduction of Blanchard and Rodrik (2021), and subsequently in Rodrik and
Stantcheva (2020 ; 2021).

                                                      1
"Pre-distribution" policies are those that directly shape the working of and outcomes generated by
markets. We find it useful to further split pre-distribution policies into two categories: pre-production
and production stage policies. Pre-production policies determine the endowments that people bring
to the market, such as education and skills, financial capital, social networks and social capital.
Production-stage policies are those that directly shape the employment, investment, and innovation
decisions of firms. Overall, the resulting classification entails a three-fold distinction between pre-
production, production, and post-production policies. These are shown as the columns in Figure 1.
Traditional welfare states: pre- and post-production intervention
Traditional welfare states have typically relied on the first (pre-production) and third (post-
production) columns of this matrix, focusing on education and training on the one hand, and on
progressive taxation and social insurance on the other hand. Production stage policies are generally
considered separately, focused on market competition, physical investment, and R&D and
innovation. This separation between the first and third columns on one side and the middle one on
the other reflects the traditional dichotomy between social policies and economic growth or
productivity policies. The former aim to correct inequality and insecurity, the latter to improve
productivity, innovation, and growth.
Such a dichotomy is justifiable when the economy provides good jobs to all those with adequate
education and skills and where most people can have a reasonable shot at a middle-class standard of
living. But it is less justifiable in a world in which middle-class standards of living and good jobs are
eroding, due to the secular trends of globalization and technological change. The disappearance of
good jobs, the proliferation of bad jobs and depressed regional labor markets, as well as growing
economic insecurity, would appear to be structural problems facing contemporary market
economies. To address these, policy intervention in pre-production (column 1) and post-production
(column 3) stages is necessary, but not nearly sufficient. It is also critical to tackle head on and
directly the production stage (column 2). More precisely, it is essential to help the production stage
contribute to reducing inequalities and insecurity rather than augment them.
Indeed, the production stage itself can perpetuate, dampen, or amplify existing inequalities and
insecurity, through the employment, investment, and innovation decisions made by firms.
Why should we care about the middle? the costs of the middle-class squeeze

"Good jobs" are traditionally defined as providing high enough a wage to afford decent living
conditions, social benefits, and opportunities for career progression. A survey of French and U.S.
citizens undertaken in Rodrik and Stantcheva (2021) shows that the most frequent terms which come
to the minds of the respondents when asked to define good jobs are "good salary", "a good
environment/good feeling," "good work conditions," and "family life." In short, good jobs are what
allows citizens to live a typical middle-class life.

The availability of good jobs in adequate numbers is important not only for the workers themselves,
but also for the broader impacts and spillovers it has on society (Rodrik and Sabel, 2019). A lack of
good jobs and the hollowing-out of the middle class can have adverse social consequences: family
breakdowns, crime, drug and opioid abuse. It can also have political costs in the form of a rise in
authoritarian, ethno-nationalist populism and political polarization. Finally, as the productivity
benefits of new technologies (e.g., automation, the knowledge economy, digital advances) remain
bottled up in a few firms and sectors, and among some groups of workers in metropolitan areas, the
concentration of good jobs reduces aggregate productivity growth in the economy as a whole.

This array of potential economic, political, and social costs is not necessarily taken into account when
firms make their production and investment decisions. This opens up scope for public intervention to
internalize these spillovers, for which our 3x3 matrix can be an organizing framework.

                                                    2
Acting on all columns, an integrative approach

While production-stage policies are not a substitute for education, progressive taxation, or social
protection policies, they are critical complements that more directly target the inequality and
insecurity that arise in the course of production. Intervening there has the potential to ease the
burden on overstretched social spending budgets.
Moreover, citizens and governments in many countries generally perceive that they are facing an
undesirable trade-off between the quality and quantity of jobs, i.e., between having more good jobs
and facing higher unemployment. Many countries take the stance of allowing dualistic labor markets
to become entrenched (Temin, 2017): Small enclaves of productive, highly paid activities exist amidst
many low-paying jobs and pockets of unemployment. There is fear that higher standards on overall
working conditions would ineluctably come with higher unemployment and reduced work hours for
those who remain employed. In countries where minimum wages and labor regulations prevent
incomes from falling too low, as is the case in many Western European economies, unemployment
ends up hitting young workers and new jobseekers who want to enter the labor market.
This tension is a real one, but it could be alleviated by increasing the supply of productive good jobs
to include those who would otherwise be excluded. Historically, a growth in good jobs available was
achieved thanks to economy-wide rises in productivity, which narrowed the gap between
opportunities available for insiders and outsiders of the labor market. For instance, the
mechanization of agriculture during the 19th and early 20th centuries created unemployment in rural
areas, but surplus workers found employment in urban centers, in the manufacturing and related
services sectors, with higher productivity and wages. This does not happen mechanically though:
During the second half of the 20th century, de-industrialization from labor productivity growth in
manufacturing and import competition led to declines in production jobs available and to a shift
towards employment in services, where wages and employment conditions were usually worse. The
current technological trends are not automatically leading to more, highly paid good jobs either.
Hence, action on column 2 is needed.
Importantly, good jobs and good firms can be complementary: Good firms produce good jobs ­ and
perhaps vice versa. This provides a further clear argument for also targeting column 2 of the matrix
and for looking at policies across columns in an integrated way. The productivity of low-wage, low-
productivity firms has to be improved in order for them to be able to offer good, sufficiently high-
paying jobs. Similarly, it is not sufficient to simply train or re-train workers, firms must also upgrade
their capabilities. Such an approach ­ if successful ­ can enhance productivity and economic growth
as well. Instead of having large unproductive and lagging sectors and groups of workers, these would
join and contribute to the productive areas of the economy, benefitting from advances and
technologies. To some extent, it can alleviate the tension between higher productivity and growth
and more equal distribution of income and opportunities.
The largely separate tracks of social policies and economic productivity, competitiveness, and growth
policies have thus to merge to some extent. The columns of the matrix have to be addressed in an
integrated way, with employment policies that look more like innovation and industrial policies, and
industrial and innovation policies that look more like labor market policies.

Filling the matrix: policy examples

We now give examples from various countries about the types of policies that fit into each cell of this
matrix, denoted by a letter. Obviously, when we use this matrix to characterize the policy landscape
in different countries, we need to bear in mind that the scope and degree of intervention within each
cell might vary.


                                                    3
Bottom incomes, pre-production stage (top left cell)
      Early childhood interventions:
              Compulsory early childhood education (France)
              Childcare subsidies for low-income families (U.S.)
      Primary education policies
              Compulsory education in primary and lower secondary schools (OECD countries)
              Schools funded and managed by local authorities (Finland)

Bottom incomes, production stage (top center cell)
      Minimum wage regulations
              Minimum wage set in national law (U.S., Most EU countries)
              Minimum wage set under collective bargaining agreements (Austria, Belgium, Norway,
              Switzerland)
      Apprenticeships
              National frameworks to regulate and promote apprenticeships (most UE countries)
              Public funding to support apprenticeships, either to firms or apprentices (most UE
              countries)
              National standards to identify high-quality apprenticeships (U.S.)
      Reduced social contributions for firms on low-income employees
              Very low employer contributions on minimum wage employees (Ireland)
              Tax breaks for recruiting unemployed workers (Hiring Incentives to Restore
              Employment Act, U.S
      In-work subsidies
             Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC, U.S.)
             Prime pour l'emploi (PPE, France)

Bottom incomes, post-production stage (top right cell)
      Social transfers
               Housing, family, child benefits (OECD countries)
      Guaranteed minimum income
               Monthly transfer (Revenu de solidarité active , France)
               Monthly transfer for the elderly and disabled (Supplemental Security Income, U.S.)


Middle incomes, pre-production stage (middle left cell)
       Investments in higher education
              Public spending on tertiary institutions (1.0% of GDP in OECD countries on average)
              Higher education as a legal right (France)
              Pell Grants (U.S.)

       Schemes for adult learning and training
             European Agenda for Adult Learning (EU)
             Tax allowance for higher education expenses (American Opportunity Tax Credit, U.S.)
             Adult education allowance (Finland)

Middle incomes, production-stage (middle center cell)
       Cluster policies to generate and disseminate innovation
               Silicon Valley (USA), Toyota Cluster (Japan), Cambridge Technopole (UK), Sophia
               Antipolis (France)
       SME support entities
               KfW Mittelstandsbank, the SME arm of Germany's public investment bank (17.2Bn
               of funding in 2018)

                                                 4
                Small Business Administration (U.S.)
       Occupational licensing
                Legal norms to determine job categories requiring government licensing (OECD
                countries)
       On- the job training
                Personal activity account (Compte formation, France)
                Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (U.S.)
       Collective bargaining and wage council
               Swedish Jobs Council
               Office of Labor-Management Standards (U.S.)
       Trade policies
               U.S. tariffs in Chinese-made goods
               EU free-trade agreements

Middle incomes, post-production stage (middle right cell)
       Unemployment benefits
              National unemployment insurance (EU countries)
              Unemployment benefits provided by local governments (U.S.)
       Pensions
              Public pension system (France)
              Tax exemptions for pension contributions (U.S.)

Top incomes, pre-production stage (bottom left cell)
       Inheritance taxation
                Taxing any amount inherited or gift received during lifetime (Lifetime Beneficiary-
                based wealth transfer taxation, Ireland))
                Differentiated tax rates based on relationship with the deceased (most EU countries)
                Abolition of inheritance taxation (Norway, Sweden)
       Estate taxation
                Based on estate of the deceased (UK, U.S.)
       Gift taxation
                Gifts taxed using income rates (Lithuania)
                Flat taxation of monetary gifts, progressive taxation of non-monetary ones (Greece)

Top incomes, production-stage (bottom center cell)
       R&D tax credits
               Credit for Increasing Research Activities (U.S.)
               Differentiated tax credit for SMEs and. large firms (Netherlands)
       R&D grants
               European Innovation Fund (EU)
               Grant to encourage SMEs to invest in R&D (Small Business Innovation Research
               Program, U.S)
       Antitrust policies
               Investigation into abuse of market power for digital platforms (U.S., EU)
               Regulation of mergers (e.g., Alstom-Siemens failed merger) (EU)
       Corporate Income taxation
               Reduced Corporate income tax rates for SMEs (France, Belgium, Portugal)
               Taxation of some of domestic firms' foreign profits - (Global intangible low-taxed
               income, U.S.)

Top incomes, post-production stage (bottom right cell)
       Top income tax rates

                                                 5
                Progressive income taxation (U.S., EU)
                Flat tax on incomes (Hungary, Romania)
                Tax treatment of pass-through corporations (U.S.)

        Capital gains taxation
                Differentiated tax rates depending on duration of asset ownership (U.S.)
                No taxes on capital gains (Belgium, Luxembourg, Slovakia)

        Wealth taxes
               Proceeds of the wealth tax flowing to local governments (Norway)
               Wealth tax on specific asset classes (Impôt sur la fortune immobilière, France)

Conclusion

The policy matrix is an organizing framework. It does not per se determine what the right policies
are, but highlights that there are opportunities at each of the three stages of the economic process
and at different segments of the income distribution. It can help streamline policy discussions,
identify areas for intervention, reveal how different parts of an overall policy system fit together, and
allow useful comparisons across policy regimes in different countries.




                                                   6
REFERENCES

Blanchard, Olivier, and Dani Rodrik (2021). "Introduction," in Combatting Inequality: Rethinking
Government's Role. MIT Press.
Hacker, Jacob S. (2011). "The Institutional Foundations of Middle-Class Democracy." Progressive
Governance, 33­37.
Rodrik, Dani, and Charles Sabel (2019). "Building a Good Jobs Economy," in Danielle Allen, Yochai Benkler,
and Rebecca Henderson, eds., Political Economy and Justice, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Rodrik, Dani and Stefanie Stantcheva (2020). "Economic Inequality and insecurity: Policies for an inclusive
economy," Report for the Blanchard-Tirole Commission.
Rodrik, Dani and Stefanie Stantcheva (2021). "Fixing Capitalism's Good Jobs Problem," in Oxford Review of
Economic Policy special issue on Capitalism: What has gone Wrong, What needs to change, and How can it be
Fixed? edited by Paul Collier, Diane Coyle, Colin Mayer, and Martin Wolf, forthcoming.
Temin, Peter (2017). The Vanishing Middle Class: Prejudice and Power in a Dual Economy. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.




                                                  7
                           Figure 1: The policy matrix


                         At what stage of the economy does policy intervene?


                      pre-production           production stage          post-production
                           stage                                              stage

          bottom    primary education and     minimum wage;             social transfers
          incomes   early-childhood           apprenticeships;          (housing, family, child
                    programs; vocational      reduced social security   benefits); guaranteed
                    training                  contributions by firms;   minimum income;
                                              in-work benefits          Earned income tax
                                                                        credit


          middle    public higher             Industrial policies;      unemployment
Which     class     education; adult          occupational licensing;   insurance; pensions
income              retraining programs       on-the-job training;
segment                                       collective bargaining &
do we                                         work councils; trade
                                              policies
care
about?



          top       Inheritance, gift &       R&D tax credits;          top income tax rates;
          incomes   estate taxes              competition and anti-     wealth taxes;
                                              trust policies.           corporate taxes.




                                          8
