                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                HIDDEN SOFTWARE AND VEILED VALUE CREATION:
                 ILLUSTRATIONS FROM SERVER SOFTWARE USAGE

                                  Raviv Murciano-Goroff
                                        Ran Zhuo
                                    Shane Greenstein

                                    Working Paper 28738
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w28738


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We are grateful to Kenji Nagahashi and Mark Graham from The Internet Archive. We also thank
Frank Nagle for providing the data used in Nagle (2019). We thank Audrey Tiew for comments
and Alicia Shems for editorial comments. Funding for this research was provided by Harvard
Business School, Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the B.F. Haley and E.S. Shaw Fellowship
for Economics through a grant to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, NSF
SciSIP Award #1932689, and NSF Education and Human Resources DGE Award #1761008. The
authors are pleased to acknowledge that the computational work reported on in this paper was
performed on the Shared Computing Cluster which is administered by Boston University's
Research Computing Services. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Raviv Murciano-Goroff, Ran Zhuo, and Shane Greenstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hidden Software and Veiled Value Creation: Illustrations from Server Software Usage
Raviv Murciano-Goroff, Ran Zhuo, and Shane Greenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 28738
April 2021
JEL No. D22,L17,L86,O3,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

How do you measure the value of a commodity that transacts at a price of zero from an economic
standpoint? This study examines the potential for and extent of omission and misattribution in
standard approaches to economic accounting with regards to open source software, an unpriced
commodity in the digital economy. The study is the first to follow usage and upgrading of
unpriced software over a long period of time. It finds evidence that software updates mislead
analyses of sources of firm productivity and identifies several mechanisms that create issues for
mismeasurement. To illustrate these mechanisms, this study closely examines one asset that plays
a critical role in the digital economic activity, web server software. We analyze the largest dataset
ever compiled on web server use in the United States and link it to disaggregated information on
over 200,000 medium to large organizations in the United States between 2001 and 2018. In our
sample, we find that the omission of economic value created by web server software is substantial
and that this omission indicates there is over $4.5 billion dollars of mismeasurement of server
software across organizations in the United States. This mismeasurement varies by organization
age, geography, industry and size. We also find that dynamic behavior, such as improvements of
server technology and entry of new products, further exacerbates economic mismeasurement.

Raviv Murciano-Goroff                             Shane Greenstein
Boston University                                 Technology Operation and Management
Questrom School of Business                       Morgan Hall 439
595 Commonwealth Ave                              Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02215                                  Soldiers Field
USA                                               Boston, MA 02163
ravivmg@bu.edu                                    and NBER
                                                  sgreenstein@hbs.edu
Ran Zhuo
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
USA
rzhuo@g.harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28738
1. Introduction

       First deployed in 1991, the World Wide Web became an essential part of digital activity
by the mid-1990s, and it has evolved with the digital economy ever since. Due to the Internet's
origins as academic shareware, a large fraction of the Internet's software usage and upgrade
activities remain unpriced, or, in other words, open source. Standard economic accounting
measures the value of assets at their transactional price, but with software improvements often
priced at zero and additions to software created without licensing fees, the operations and
improvements to the commercial web have remained largely invisible to national economic
analysis and accounting. The lack of visibility into the value created by unpriced software and
software updates poses a troubling question: Does it interfere with understanding the sources of
national productivity from the digital economy?

       Every year the Bureau of Economic Analysis makes estimates based on enormous
surveys, but software has long been a difficult commodity to identify economically. In contrast,
typical capital goods are tangible items with a transaction cost--such as property, plants, and
equipment--and are items that one business uses to produce goods or services for other
businesses to use for creating consumer goods. For producers in most markets, capital goods
deliver a flow of rentable services, and the price of capital goods reflects the anticipation of those
services. The capital stock aggregates across those valuations, as users invest, upgrade, and retire
pieces of capital goods. These notions have served as the foundation for the widely deployed
neo-classical approach to the economic measurement of capital (Jorgenson 1963; Hall and
Jorgenson 1967).

       Yet, processes based on such reasoning make little sense in a setting where the capital
good remains unpriced or its improvements do not generate any indication about the rental value
of the capital. While transactions supporting proprietary products create dollar amounts that enter
into economic accounting, specific functionally equivalent open source software upgrades, or
vintages, do not leave any traceable transaction, and, thus, their value remains hidden, or veiled,
to standard economic accounting. Stated broadly, unpriced software creates the potential for
what we term veiled input. With no input to observe, nor any trace of improvement, if that input
grows or improves, analysts will lack explanation for productivity gains, observing gain as if
"manna from heaven" (Griliches 2000, Ch. 5).

                                                      2
       The contrast between open source software and typical capital services also goes to the
heart of the distinction between measurement and explanation. Economic accounting seeks to
attribute the fraction of value created by an input by observing its changes over time and
associating it with resulting changes in output. Even while major assets due to software grow in
numbers or increase in quality, economic accounting may not recognize that an investment and
maintenance process determines the spread between leaders and laggards, nor can it trace the
improvements to organizations' behavior regarding input usage and adoption of improvements.
Thus, a veiled input generates the potential for a distorted explanation for growth and creates the
potential for misguided policy.

       In this study, we analyze omission and misattribution in web server software. Web
servers are one or more computer or groups of computers that run websites, which enable users
to search and find information on web pages. Web pages are essentially computer documents
consisting of text, images, and style sheets; and web server software are the programs that enable
the servers to function as they do.

       Web server software offers a useful lens for understanding the veiled parts of the digital
economy for several reasons. First, web servers are ubiquitous and critical to the modern web-
based commercial internet because they connect customers with sellers. Every commercial firm
with an internet presence uses web servers and, thus, their software, which means that tens of
millions of firms in the United States and hundreds of millions across the globe use web servers
to support hundreds of millions of web pages. Second, server improvements relate directly to
improvements in the internet user experience. In other words, there are several hundred million
users in the United States alone, and their use of the internet necessarily touches different web
servers on a daily basis. Third, the rate of improvement in web server software also correlates
with, and sometimes directly causes, the rate of improvement in electronic commerce, which
supports hundreds of billions of dollars in transactions a year. This is due to technical
interdependence and complementarities between servers and browsers. Fourth, web servers
serve as a useful proxy for the divide between the observable and the veiled creation of value,
especially as businesses use both proprietary and open source software extensively, and therefore
that creates strong concerns around mismeasurement. Relatedly, progresses in complementary
technologies are also invisible in standard economic accounting, albeit, in ways that vary across
users, a variance which, as we show in the text, was largely undocumented until this study.

                                                      3
       How much do these potential omission and misattribution problems actually appear in
web servers? Our principal goal is to examine evidence about behavior over time--that is with
regards to upgrades and retirements of server software--and analyze whether omission and
misattribution issues are small or large, and if large, characterize the general circumstances that
correspond with realization of the problem. For that purpose, we compile the largest dataset ever
assembled on sustained business web server usage, improvements, and retiring of software in the
United States. We do this through an enormous search of the Internet Archive records of the
Web between 2001 and 2018, in which we extract servers and proxies for their functionality
from archived server headers of U.S. organization websites. We obtain disaggregated
information on the continuing usage of web server software and the installation of software
updates and match that data to information about more than 200,000 medium to large
organizations. Our sample achieves good representation of organizations by geography and
industry.

       Because we develop a standardized approach to measurement--both across time and
across organizations in different industries and locations, we can compare and quantify the issues
of mismeasurement due to omission and misattribution. Our measures cover both the use of open
source web servers, such as Apache and Nginx, and proprietary web servers, such as Microsoft's
Internet Information Services, or IIS. These measures include market shares of different web
servers, aggregate capital stock of servers, and aggregate distance of server software to the
technological frontier. We also analyze the micro-behavior behind changes to these aggregates
by identifying upgrades and replacement of software.

       Our key findings are as follows. First, we show that the omission of open source web
servers, such as Apache and Nginx, produces a large bias in measuring the economic value of
server software, on the order of billions of dollars, in traditional accounting metrics. By using the
price of the most popular proprietary server software as the proxy for the value of open source
servers, we estimate the omitted value for our sample to be approximately $66 million in 2000
with an increase to between $125 and $315 million by 2018. As our sample is just under 3% of




                                                      4
total web server software in the United States, 2 we estimate that the total omitted value of open
source server software in the United was between $4.5 billion and $11.2 billion by 2018.

         We further show that the issues due to mismeasurement vary across organizations by
differences in ages, geographies, industries and sizes. We show that the measurement issues
arose at the turn of the millennium and became larger over time. They are particularly
pronounced among young organizations, small and medium organizations, organizations in the
West, and organizations in healthcare, lodging and food. We find dynamic behaviors--namely,
upgrading and switching brands--further exacerbate mismeasurement, and are particularly
troubling in the most recent decade, where we find that organizations have adopted a new open
source server.

         The study ends with a demonstration for how unpriced server software and software
updates mislead standard analyses of sources of firm productivity. The study's data on server
software usage can statistically and meaningfully explain variations in firm value-added levels.
That finding aligns with other work that shows unmeasured open source contributes to
productivity improvements (Nagle 2019).

         Our study makes several contributions to the literature on the economic measurement of
information technology (IT). First, our analysis shows that the usage of open source software
creates the potential for mismeasurement. This is not widely appreciated even though open
source is routinely used in artificial intelligence, electronic commerce, virtually every
smartphone, and any big data application. Although usage of open source has been documented
within the United States and several developed high-income countries (Lerner and Schankerman
2010; Robbins et al. 2018; Nagle 2019), virtually all research focuses on characterizing a subset
of participants of software, and in only one year, at most. 3 This study is among a small set of
studies (Robbins et al. 2018; Keller et al. 2018) to try to develop a standardized approach to
measuring open source and its impact in anything resembling a census over time. That is an



2
  The total number of servers in the United States comes from estimates in Greenstein and Nagle (2014). In 2014,
Microsoft sold IIS under three different licenses. The first, a basic license, was rarely used by businesses. The
second tier was called a "Standard" license. Finally, the third tier was called a "Datacenter" license. We describe
more in the text.
3
  An exception is Kim (2020). In that manuscript, Kim tracks the availability of open source software and
investigates the open source software's effect on the reviews of router hardware over a twenty-year period.


                                                               5
important step for research to take, because, despite open source software's ubiquity, the its lack
of standard measurement results in open source playing no role in the standard international
indices for designating industries as "IT-intensive" (Calvino et al. 2018). We are the first study
to demonstrate how to track web server usage over time and across industries. 4

         Second, we contribute to the many studies that measure the contribution of IT to
economic growth (Jorgenson, Ho, and Samuels 2005). Many studies that seek to understand the
impact of investments in IT on firms' output (Brynjolfsson 1993; Byrne, Oliner, and Sichel
2013; Tambe and Hitt 2014) have focused on priced IT assets. Productivity estimates for
observable assets tend to have "high" coefficients when IT equipment and other tangible assets
proxy for intangible assets, which are unobserved in microdata. Gordon and Sayed (2020) find
the increase in ICT investment explains most of the US increase in productivity growth during
1995--2005 but the standard growth accounting method was unable to capture that. More
recently, studies link the advance of productivity to advanced functionality enabled by frontier
IT, such as data analytics (Wu et al. 2020). Our estimates align with Byrne and Corrado's (2019)
findings in a study using novel methods for qualitative adjustment as measured through price
indices, which examined improvements in a range of IT services. Our findings suggest standard
accounting measures underestimate the existing stock of IT due to the omission of unpriced IT,
that is, IT acquired at a zero price. This conclusion also aligns with Korkmaz et al. (2019), who
examines the prevalence of frontier statistical software, Python and R, and estimates its
unmeasured value, and Robins et al. (2018), who estimate over a billion dollars of open source
code in the federal government.

         Third, we document previously unrecognized patterns of misattribution correlated with
the use of server software. As with Greenstein and Nagle (2014), this study indicates that the
benefits from federal support for the internet have been underestimated. While Greenstein and



4
  We note the contrast with Netcraft Ltd, which has published a monthly web server survey
(https://news.netcraft.com/archives/category/web-server-survey/) for a long period of time. However, the firm has
been opaque about their methodology and many believe their most recent data is not reliable. The strength of our
approach lies in its transparency. We construct our data based on archived server headers obtained from the Internet
Archive, a non-profit organization supportive of academic research. This makes it possible for us to match with
other data, and it enables future researchers to replicate our study and to use techniques similar to ours for various
future research related to web servers. We elaborate in the body of the paper.




                                                               6
Nagle (2014) suggest that the underestimate could arise from both omission and misattribution,
the findings from their empirical analysis focus on the omission problem alone. That is due to the
strengths and limits of their sample, which consist of a single year's cross-section of 1% of
outward-facing web servers in the United States in 2011.

       In contrast, here we examine a sample that captures almost two decades of outward-
facing server usage, which also enables the analysis of upgrades and replacement behavior.
Moreover, Greenstein and Nagle (2014) do not match their data with any other, while this study
includes a substantial number of organization characteristics, enabling us to study how usage
interacts with a rich set of organization attributes. We also build on Nagle's (2019) study of the
omission problem in the usage of Linux. His data came from the firms covered in Harte Hanks
data, and to our knowledge, is the only other study to directly link open source usage to
productivity. Compared to Nagle's study, our study surveys both a much wider sample of
organizations, and longer time-frame for their usage of proprietary versus open source software;
we also match a subset of the study's data with his, recreate his productivity findings, and then
improve upon them.

       Our analysis also provides new insights into how errors from veiled inputs accumulate
over time, which no previous study could analyze because none had such a long time series. We
observe how both the market goods (proprietary web servers) and near-market goods (open
source web servers) improve over time, and how usage adapts accordingly. We also observe
behaviors that suggest users treat server software like other capital goods. Moreover, we observe
this setting long enough to see the set of options change drastically over time. In our sample
period, Nginx, one of the near-market options, did not exist for years, and then began to improve
and become more widely adopted. To our knowledge, our study is the first study to give attention
to switches and substitution in measuring economic activities related to the use of open source
software.

       The rest of our paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we elaborate on the problems
associated with measuring gains from software, specifically omission and misattribution. In
Section 3, we explain the origins of the major open source web servers, Apache and Nginx, and
the major proprietary web server IIS. Section 4 explains dataset construction. In Section 5, we




                                                     7
propose a few measures of the economic value of web servers. Section 6 presents our empirical
results. In Section 7, we offer conclusions.

2. Theory of Measuring and Mis-measuring Gains from Software

       We study what potential economic measurement issues arise from the deployment of
open source software. The use of open source server software may create mismeasurement due
to omission in the typical accounting measures. Normal economic measurement focuses on
transactions taking place in markets and presumes that those transactions involve a positive
price. Open source software, such as Apache and Nginx, are freely distributed and do not directly
generate revenue, even though they perform functions similar to those performed by proprietary
software, such as IIS. Without explicit attention, normal procedures will treat unpriced activities
as nonmarket activities, which creates two types of issues that we label omission and
misattribution.

2.1 Omission

       Nordhaus (2006) presents a general review of the methods for measuring inputs in many
circumstances, including some guidance for settings that lack prices. Although open source is not
singled out as an example by Nordhaus (2006), this setting partially fits what Nordhaus labels a
"near-market good." In his discussion, omission errors arise when standard procedures presume a
zero price is affiliated with non-market activity, while real economic activity creates valuable
goods with no price. There are also important differences between this setting and the examples
discussed in Nordhaus' study, since some of the activities affiliated with open source software
can be measured. For example, in the setting of web servers, third-party firms perform many
complementary support functions. This activity typically involves consultants, independent
programmers, and providers of bridging software between open source software and commonly
used proprietary software. Complementary activity and participants are key parts of the open
source ecosystem (West 2003; Lerner and Schankerman 2010). Most activity will involve market
transactions and positive prices. Organizations might also purchase hardware for deployment, as
well as additional services in order to accommodate large-scale use. Such expenditure would
appear as an operating expense. In practice, measuring the total value created by open source
software requires approaches that account for multi-factor productivity (Syverson 2011).

                                                     8
       Like Byrne and Corrado (2019), we seek to measure what the standard procedures
overlook with regards to unpriced activity. In this setting the mismeasurement due to omission
arises from dynamic behavior, such as upgrading and replacement. This limits the insights that
cross-sectional analysis can provide for three reasons. First, both the market goods and near-
market goods improve over time. As a result, organizations lagging in one time period may
leapfrog into leading positions by adopting the latest products. Second, the set of alternative
products from which an organization selects its technology stacks changes over time. When
option change, organizations may switch extensively between proprietary and open source web
servers as different products' features improve. In particular, and especially relevant to our
setting, an open source server software, Nginx, did not exist as a viable alternative until at least
2004. Nginx's entry created substitution patterns unseen in cross-sectional data. Third and
important for our setting, many organizations combine software from different sources,
complicating estimations of the omitted value. Those changes over time can produce scenarios
that previous works, such as Nordhaus' (2006), did not examine.

2.2 Misattribution

       Economic growth may also be misattributed to observable assets instead of to the use of
open source software and the installation of unpriced software updates. Specifically, this
misattribution biases the coefficient on observable IT in standard productivity analysis. Prior
estimates of the productivity impact of IT have found estimates "too high," which suggests that
the presence of unobserved inputs correlated with observed inputs (Brynjolfsson 1993; Byrne,
Oliner, and Sichel 2013; Tambe and Hitt 2014), but prior research has suggested a variety of
potential mechanisms. This study investigates whether a specific mechanism -- the presence of
open source software -- could create a bias. In this section we show that it is possible and
plausible.

       To understand the potential for misattribution, consider the standard productivity model.
Begin with this representation:



                                                                    ,




                                                      9
where Y is output for firm i at time t, 5 which results from a production function with arguments
for (L) labor, (K) capital stock, and (IT) information technology capital stock, and A is an
unmeasured contributor to firm efficiency. In the standard Cobb-Douglas production model this
becomes



                                                                                              ,



where Y is revenue, and this equation can be used for regression estimates. In typical analyses,
growth is measured by improvement over time, namely, Yit - Yi,t-1, and productivity is measured
as multifactor productivity (Corrado 2011; Syverson 2011; Byrne, Oliner, and Sichel 2013;
Nagle 2019). Because usage of open source software by an organization does not have a specific
pecuniary measure, there is no mechanism for such usage to enter the equation as an input
variable on the right-hand side. Relatedly, all inputs are measured with error. In particular, only
proxies are available for measuring open source IT usage.

         The intuition for misattribution can be illustrated in a few scenarios. We can illustrate
scenarios that could create an upward or downward bias, and we will hypothesize that the
scenario behind the downward bias is more plausible. Analysis of server data will be consistent
with that hypothesis.

         The true amount of IT is not fully observed. Call the observable asset ITO, and
unobservable asset ITU. All firms have some of both assets, and a fraction of them are observable
ITitO/(ITO+ ITitU) = hi, where that fraction varies across firms. Now consider a cross-sectional
regression in time t. Even though the true level of IT is actually ITitO/hi, the econometrician
typically estimates:



                                                                                                  ,




5
 This type of analysis can be implemented at either the industry level (Stiroh 2002) or at the firm level (Nagle
2019). For simplicity, we carry it through at the firm/organization.


                                                              10
where eit = - ln(hi) + e'it.. While e'it is distributed i.i.d, part of the error is potentially not
independent. Because h is always less than one, - ln(hi) is always positive, and smaller h leads to
larger - ln(hi). That creates the potential for biased estimates, a potential which declines as more
IT becomes observable, that is, as h approaches 1.

         Three scenarios can arise, and create different "directions" for the bias. They depend on
the correlation between hi and ITitO. Consider the following scenarios that arise when there is no
correlation, positive correlations, and negative correlation:

         No interdependence. There is no correlation between hi and ITitO. This scenario occurs
when investment in the observable and unobservable asset have no relationship with one another.
This leads to growth without cause. This can happen when open source code improves or when
users receive software updates at no expense. In this case, some firms produce more output
without appearing to change their inputs. If firms experience growth without hiring more labor
and, seemingly, without paying for more IT capital or L or K or, for that matter, any visible
service. Growth will be attributed to A, because of the appearance of more productivity that
cannot be attributed to growth in inputs. This scenario resembles one discussed by Syverson
(2011):misattribution due to externalities from the local environment, which is analogous to
firms relying on the quasi-public goods created by the open source community. 6 Syverson
argues that the gains could appear to be disembodied technical change, not attributable to any
specific input. 7 By analogy, the greater h is, the larger the disembodied technical change.

         A coincidence of assets. The correlation between hi and ITitO is positive. Theoretically,
this scenario arises when the unobservable asset is used more frequently in larger installations.
That could occur because the observable and unobservable assets are used together, and the
presence of the observable asset makes the unobservable asset more productive in larger
installations of the observable asset. This leads to an overestimate of the contribution of assets in

6
  The mismeasurement is analogous to mismeasuring an improving public good. In her analysis of the various types
of protections used in open source software, for example, O'Mahony (2003) highlights this analogy and finds it is an
important driver of legal efforts of open source software projects to protect their work.
7
  Or, as in Tambe and Hitt 's (2014) study, problems could arise from mismeasurement of labor, which lacks
adjustments for the human capital affiliated with supporting the software, or for the extent to which labor relies on
the community to enhance their productivity. They also point out that measurement error may occur due to the
differences between labor-based and capital-based estimates of IT productivity.


                                                             11
a cross-sectional regression (where t is fixed and only variance across i is observed). More
unobserved IT is present in firms with more observed IT, and these firms produce more Y. That
scenario will bias the estimate for a coefficient upward. The firms with higher IT will seem to get
an even larger gain from their observed IT than plausible. Estimation on Yit - Yi,t-1 in a first
differences estimate does not resolve issues if growth in ITOit and ITuit leaves hi unchanged,
which we expect if the underlying cause behind the level of h remains unchanged. Then
overestimates again arise, and the coefficients are biased upward.

        Substitution of assets. The correlation between hi and ITitO is negative. Theoretically, this
scenario occurs when an observable asset substitutes for the unobservable asset as installations
become larger. This would occur, for example, if the observable asset were more productive than
the unobservable asset in large installations, as well as when the opposite was so in small
installations. The presence of more of one leads to less of the other, and that results in an
underestimate of the contribution of assets. When more unobserved IT is present in firms with
less observed IT, the estimate of the coefficient will be biased downward. That is, the firms with
higher IT will not seem to get much gain from their higher IT. Once again, estimation of growth
does not become resolved issues if hi remains unchanged. Once again, the coefficients are biased
downward.

        There is a fourth possibility, growth attributed to the wrong input. Greenstein and Nagle
(2014) point out that another scenario for misattribution arises if a fraction of firms have a high
hi and another fraction a low hi, and the former invest in labor to support a new release or
upgrade. 8 In that case, the firms using open source software will experience an increase in
output, Y, and an increase in L, while showing no measured change in IT capital. Firms using
proprietary software, do not show any change in Y, L, or IT. Normal productivity analysis will
then attribute output growth to the growth of L, even though it is due to increases in unmeasured
IT capital. Though not the focus of this study, for analytical completeness we note this is also a
possibility.




8
  Higher labor expenditure could arise either from the need to hire more workers or compensate workers more for
their efforts. There is some evidence that contributions to open source projects yield increases in pecuniary
compensation (see e.g., Hann, Roberts, Slaughter, and Fielding, 2002; Hann, Roberts and Slaughter, 2013). The
evidence is consistent with the existence of the premium, but cannot serve as an estimate of its size.


                                                            12
       Finally, an important caveat applies. The scenarios above only consider the spillovers
from direct usage of open source software as an input into production. They do not account for
the spillovers that occur when a competing product adds a feature by imitating a similar feature
developed for the product in use. Nor does this include further gains from enabling the entry of
complementary applications or the enabling of more productivity business processes. We
speculate that such a sequence of imitation and enabling activities would be measured as
improvement in intangible capital. Below we provide direct evidence for the first steps in that
mechanism -- improvement and replacement of server software. We regard the next behaviors as
widespread, albeit, difficult to measure with precision, and the measurement of that behavior as
an exercise for further research.

       The above scenarios frame what can be learned if one could observe what has previously
not been visible. How do the observable and unobservable assets correlate as firms and IT
installations become larger or small, if at all? Where is the potential for mismeasurement, as
evidence about variance in correlations between the observable and previously unobservable
assets--across industries, regions and time?




3. Origins and Pricing of Web Server Software


       While every online business uses web servers, the three most popular web server
software packages--Apache, IIS, and Nginx--had very different development histories, pricing
strategies, and visibility. Most notably, while Apache and Nginx emerged as open and freely
available, Microsoft's IIS is proprietary software. These differences mean that these servers
contribute to traditional economic accounting measures in different ways. In this section, we
recount how these web servers emerged, as well as how their pricing affects the way they enter
aggregate valuation measures.

       Apache descended from the very first web server, which was developed in an academic
setting and was freely distributed as shareware. In 1993, the National Center for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois developed a computer program known as the
NCSA HTTPd server. The HTTPd server software supported the sharing of content on the web


                                                    13
through the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). NCSA made HTTPd available as shareware
within academic and research settings, along with the underlying code. The original developers
did not place any restrictions on the usage or modification of the software. Many webmasters
took advantage by adding improvements as needed or by communicating with the lead
programmer, Robert McCool, who coordinated the addition and releases of new extensions.
When in the spring of 1994, McCool left the University to become one of the first ten employees
of the newly founded Netscape, the development of the web server software fragmented with
eight distinct teams working on eight distinct vintages of the software. In 1995, the eight teams
decided to coordinate and unify their efforts into one server to be known as Apache (ostensibly
because it was "a patchy web server"). The University of Illinois then fully transferred the
development of the server software to the Apache organization without any licensing or
restrictions. After 1995, Apache grew in popularity as the commercial internet grew, becoming
widely used in customer facing and procurement activities of many organizations. It is regarded
as the second most popular open source project used by businesses, after Linux.

       The growth and continued deployment of Apache, therefore, has largely taken place
outside the visibility of standard economic measurements. Traditional economic accounting
measures aggregate the cost of inputs and value outputs at their transaction price. In contrast, the
Apache server has never had a price affiliated with either its inputs or outputs. The Apache
Foundation relies upon donations and a community of technically skilled users who provide new
features at no charge, motivated both by the intrinsic and extrinsic rewards. Further
improvements in Apache code relied on the equivalent of donations for support. These came in
the form of explicit donations from organizations who provide personnel time and firm capital,
or it came from programmers devoting leisure time to open source activity. It also may have
come in the form of in-kind or unacknowledged donations of capital or services, such as
computer time and hosting facilities.

       As with other open source software (Lakhani and von Hippel 2003; Lerner and
Schankerman 2010), Apache eschews standard marketing/sales activities, instead relying on
word-of-mouth and other non-priced communication online. Apache also does not develop large
support and maintenance arms for their software, although users do offer free assistance to each
other via mailing lists and discussion boards. While Apache itself continues to be developed by
volunteers and distributed without a price, and is therefore invisible to traditional economic

                                                     14
accounting, Apache is affiliated with a plethora of revenue-generating economic activity. For
example, there is a large labor market for Apache programmers, administrators, and third-party
consultants.

       Around the same time that Apache emerged as open source web server, Microsoft
developed a proprietary web server and intended it as a substitute for Apache. Beginning in
1995, Microsoft provided their server software, known as the Internet Information Services or
IIS, as part of the Windows NT suite. That software is proprietary and a major revenue
generating product for Microsoft. The Windows server became popular during the dot-com era in
large part because Microsoft put its sale and support behind the product, which fostered the
growth of many supporting documents and tools. Users of IIS say it possesses appealing features,
including its compatibility with other Microsoft products, as well as its certification,
documentation, and ease-of-use in enterprises with routine requirements. Many believe that
Microsoft benefited from suspicion and security concerns among some large organizations about
using open source code they had not vetted. Similar to Apache, a large labor market for IIS
programmers, administrators, and third-party consultants exists.

       The value that organizations get from adopting Microsoft IIS is visible in standard
economic metrics. Because Microsoft charges for the Windows software that IIS is packaged
inside, the transaction price of the software can represent the value that organizations place on
this software and its features. Though Microsoft does not separately charge for IIS software
updates, the additional features and fixes contained in those updates should also be priced in the
software's original transaction price.

       Nginx, the third most popular web server package and the most recent entrant, was
developed through a different path than Apache or IIS, and also is freely shared as open source
software. Compared to Apache and IIS, Nginx is a latecomer. Programmer Igor Sysoev started
the initial work in 2002 when he sought to scale a server for a large online media company,
optimizing it to handle at least 10,000 concurrent connections. In 2004, Sysoev opened Nginx to
the public as an open source project, using a permissive Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD)
license. Steady improvement from many contributors turned the software into a viable web
server around 2007. Soon it was widely believed to become the most popular web server for
streaming and video. Nginx performs well on large volumes of traffic, and that performance


                                                     15
gives it a foothold in media and entertainment enterprises with high peak loads, which comes at
the cost of sacrificing some of the adaptability found in Apache. With a different appeal than the
ease-of-management of IIS, which comes with considerable support, Nginx partially
compensates by being interoperable with other web servers and by facilitating load-balancing 9
between multiple applications. Over time the software community around Nginx added
extensions and modifications in an attempt to grow the capabilities of this niche. In other words,
Nginx began as a niche product that complemented IIS and Apache, and over time became a
substitute for a range of applications.

         Like Apache, Nginx is freely available for anyone to use and modify as they see fit.
Therefore, like Apache, the decision of organizations to adopt Nginx is not captured in
transactional exchanges. As many of the users of Nginx require enterprise-level features, Nginx
has spawned a number of complimentary revenue-generating activities. In July, 2011 in San
Francisco, Sysoev and his business partners founded a company, also named Nginx (see
nginx.org or nginx.com), and. Sysoev serves as the CTO. Over the course of the data set used in
this study, Nginx the company supports "Nginx Plus," which is server software that includes
enterprise-level services and offers a set of paid extensions on top of the open source Nginx.
These commercial extensions target long-time users who desire commercial-grade features that
are not normally available in any existing open source product. They also target enterprises that
require both technical support and license payments. These features help maintain Nginx's use as
an "edge web server" for the cloud, hosting, and content delivery network (CDN) 10 service
providers. This aspect of Nginx-related activities does fall into standard economic accounting.

4. Data

         To study the prevalence of the mismeasurement scenarios discussed in the previous
section, we compiled the largest data set ever on business web server use between 2001 and



9
 A load balancer mediates all the requests coming in to the server and makes sure that no one server is overworked,
all of which maintain speed and reliability. If and when a server crashes, the load balancer redirects web traffic to
other servers.
10
   A CDN is a network of servers that are geographically dispersed so that different servers can be closer and
therefore faster and more reliable to users in different locations.



                                                              16
2018, covering over 200,000 medium to large organizations in the United States. We make use
of multiple data sources for data construction and we summarize these sources in Table 1. In this
section, we discuss in more detail our sample construction.

       We define our sample of organizations as the organizations listed in Bureau van Dyke's
Orbis database with at least 50 employees at some point between 2000 and 2018. The Orbis
database contains 230,611 organization homepages for organizations matching these criteria. We
then extract additional information about these organizations from the Orbis database. For each
organization homepage in each year, we find the Orbis organization records with the associated
website. We use the Orbis record that contains consolidated financial information, or when such
data is not available, we use unconsolidated data for the largest subsidiary. Among the variables
that we capture from the Orbis data are the number of employees that an organization has in that
year, the main industry the organization operates in, the location of organization headquarters,
the organization's year of incorporation (and, if applicable, year of disincorporation), as well as
the organization's capital expenditures. We supplement the organization data with CompuStat
data for public firms. In 0, we describe the overlap in the coverage and provide more details on
the data construction.

       The data on server software vendor and vintage in this paper comes from analyzing the
server headers of U.S. organization websites collected by the Internet Archive (IA). When an
individual visits a website, her computer connects with the web server that hosts that particular
site. Upon connecting, the web server responds with both the content of the webpage as well as
metadata known as the server header. By default, server headers contain the name of the
responding web server's vendor as well as the vintage of web server software being used to host
the requested webpage. The IA is a nonprofit organization that stores snapshots of websites for
archival purposes. IA's computers regularly connect to large numbers of websites and record
both the content as well as the server headers.

       Out of the 230,611 organization homepages we initially identified, the IA holds server
header data for 213,956 of those sites. To get a sense of scale, we compared this data with
Greenstein and Nagle (2014)'s sample of U.S. web servers in 2011. Greenstein and Nagle (2014)
estimated that 4.28 million total servers were running Apache in the United States, and 2.35
million servers were running IIS. Our sample in 2011 examines 102,376 Apache servers and


                                                     17
82,776 IIS servers, which, taking both estimates at face value, is approximately 2.79% of total
servers. In spite of seeing only a fraction, the dataset is able to identify the identity of the
organization, an exercise which Greenstein and Nagle (2014) did not perform. We can take
advantage of matching information about organizations and can look for indications that we
sampled representative U.S organizations. The data in 0 indicate that our sample appears
representative in terms of dimensions we can measure, such as region of headquarters and
industry among medium and large organizations.

         We then transform the server headers into a panel dataset. In the panel, an observation is
an organization website in a month. Each observation in the panel includes the vendor of the
server software used by that organization in that month as well as an indication of the vintage of
server software, which indicates something about when the user updated the software. 11 The
definition of vintage takes advantage of the practice, common among software producers, to
number their software in ordinal sequences. Improved software takes higher numbers. 12 We refer
to improved software as a later vintage of software. We observe three features of servers: The
vintage number, its date of installation at each organization, and the date at which the vintage is
first introduced at any organization. We define a software update as any time that the server
vendor used by a homepage stays the same between two months but the server vintage changes.

         There are some limitations of our server header data. First, the IA does not capture every
website each month. On average, a homepage in the dataset appears in approximately half of the
months between its first observation in the dataset and its last observation. Therefore, the panel is
unbalanced. Second, some savvy server administrators turn off the display of information in
server headers. By modifying a server's configuration files, the server can be made to only
respond with limited information about the server vendor and vintage being run. 13

         To handle missing data due to the intermittent scanning of websites and server
administrators turning off the display of server information, we impute some missing
observations. Specifically, if a website's server header does not contain the server vendor and


11
   The parsing of the raw server headers into this information is described in Appendix A.2.
12
   Major improvements increase the first digit from 1.0 to 2.0 to 3.0, and so on. Minor improvements improve
smaller digits, going from 1.1 to 1.2 to 1.3, and so on.
13
   The Apache server configuration files allow for five different levels of information being sent back to visitors in
the server headers. These are described in more detail in Appendix D.


                                                               18
vintage number in a particular month--either because IA did not scan that website in that month
or because a server administrator had disabled it--and then reappeared in a subsequent month
with the exact same vendor/vintage combination as previously used, then we impute the months
in between as the same vendor/vintage combination. On average, an imputation consists of
adding 2.48 months between observations of the same server vendor and vintage number (with
the median imputation inserting just 1 month).

        We also quantify the measurement error in the timing of vintage updates and vendor
switches. The number of months between when we detect a vintage update and the previous
observation is 1.37 months and the 75th percentile is 1 month. The average number of months
between an observation in which we detect a vendor switch and the previous observation is 2.63
months with a 75th percentile of 2 months. Therefore, we are able to detect the timing of
software updates and vendor switches within a narrow window of time despite some missing
data.

        One other factor shapes what is possible. Apache and IIS server headers show different
levels of details. Apache server headers frequently reveal the precise vintage of software that a
website is using, including the major and all minor vintage numbers (e.g., Apache 1.3.6 improves
upon 1.3.5). This enables us to know the precise release date of those server vintages being used.
In contrast, IIS server headers only reveal the major and first minor vintage number (e.g., IIS 6.5
improves upon IIS 6.4). While IIS has many minor updates and security patches, the server
headers do not show them. Thus, our visibility into the vintage used by IIS users is less granular
than that for Apache.

        We stress that the data examine an important place in virtual space--namely, an
organization's central web page on the Internet--where server software necessarily plays an
important role for an organization. The servers support the publicly displayed online face of an
organization and direct inbound queries: Specifically, the organizations' websites, which are
essential for generating online sales, coordinating employees, and performing many operational
functions, are supported by the servers. Thus, we do not expect the actions for this server to be
"an afterthought," nor an investment decision lightly taken.

        Our focus also comes with limits in that the website is not the only virtual location where
web servers play an important role in a typical organization, and we have little visibility into


                                                     19
those other roles. For example, we do not see the web servers that support procurement, human
resources, some parts of order fulfilment and sales support, or data analysis. Prior work has
hypothesized that investment in IT can play a crucial role across the entire organization (Calvano
2018) and can support frontier processes in data analytics that drive productivity improvements
(Wu et al. 2020). However, developing exhaustive processes for measurement of hidden inputs
across an entire organization remains a large and open research topic.

5. Measurement


         Traditional economic accounting mismeasures the value created by web servers, and the
dataset helps uncover what was previously veiled. To understand whether this measurement
applies systematically, we propose several summary indices.

         Our first measure compares the date of a release of a vintage of frontier server software
with the date associated with the most recent vintage of the installed software, which we call the
distance from the technological frontier (DTF). Inspired by standard approaches to measuring
improvements in capital through the benchmarking of them by "how many years the productive
capital is out of date," DTF measures technological progress by emphasizing the introduction of
new features to sequential vintages of software, which traditional economic accounting does not
capture. Our measure improves over the traditional measures on multiple dimensions of
technological progress in web servers, such as being capable of handling larger numbers of
concurrent requests and being able to respond to requests more quickly. It ignores if an
organization uses a server with more or less intensity over time, and how much, and is computed
as follows:

                                      ,   =(     )    (             )
                                          =                ,

where v denotes the vintage of server software released in time v, t denotes the time of
observation,            is the vintage of the most recently released software.

         To illustrate how this index works, let us suppose that we are interested in computing the
     ,   at = November 2002 for Apache 2.0.11, which was release at         = February 2001. The



                                                     20
most recently released Apache software in November 2002 was Apache 2.0.43, which was
released at              = October 2002. We compute DTF as follows:

                          ,        =(          2002           2001)       (     2002           2002)
                                   =(        2002             2001)
                                   = 20               .

          In order to examine if DTF is increasing or decreasing over time for a large group of
organizations, we construct an aggregate                  in each moment of observation using a weighted
average of         ,   , weighted by the number of users of each vintage:



                                                                                ,

where       is the subset of all vintages used at time t and        ,   is the number of users of vintage    at
time t.

          For example, suppose we are interested in examining the aggregate                   of
organizations using the Apache server software at = November 2002. For simplicity, let us
assume that there were only 100 organizations, among which 45 organizations used Apache
2.0.11 and 55 organizations used Apache 2.0.43. Our aggregate                       for Apache users would
be:

                                               45 20              + 55 1
                                           =
                                                              45 + 55
                                           = 9.55              .

          We also define the quality-adjusted DTF (QADTF). Inspired by quality adjustments
found in the tradition of hedonic price indices, this measure adjusts the baseline DTF by
accounting for the quality that can be purchased for a dollar over time. 14 We propose to use the
inverse of the CPI as our weight, or W(v) = 100/CPI(v), as our measure of quality per dollar,
where CPI(v) is the Consumer Price Index value for software vintage v. We use the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) for "Computer Software and Accessories" from the U.S. Bureau of Labor



14
  For many years the CPI for packaged software has included a hedonic-estimated adjustment for qualitative
change.


                                                             21
Statistics. This CPI is on a December 1997=100 base. 15 The QADTF measure is defined as
follows:



                                                                                       .

        To illustrate how the quality-adjusted index works, we again make use of the above
example. The CPI for computer software and accessories in February 2001 was 80.1 and in
October 2002 was 71.2 for a December 1997=100 base, meaning that our quality per dollar
measure      (      2001) =           = 1.248 and       (      2002) =           = 1.404. We compute the
                                  .                                          .

quality-adjusted DTF for = November 2002 as follows:

                                          1.248 45 20        + 1.404 55 1
                                      =
                                                   1.248 45 + 1.404 55
                                      =9           .

        These weights are appropriate for use if the rate of qualitative change in server software
resembles the rates of change observed broadly across all widely used software. Relatedly, using
such weights introduces the potential for error in short periods, and should deter us from making
inferences that depend too critically on a small number of observations. Hence, in the discussion
below we favor inferences about trends that manifest over the long term.

        Finally, we propose a measure of the quality-adjusted server software capital stock over
time. The measure is defined as follows:




                                                                            .




15
  We were concerned about the robustness of this estimate, so we also compute an adjustment using the quality
adjustments developed by Bryne and Corrado (2019), which they estimate at intervals of one year. The CPI is
estimated at monthly intervals, so we display that. Using the Byrne and Corrado estimates as weights gives
qualitatively similar results over the long term. When we have multiple observations for one website in a year, we
take the average CPI of the servers that they used in that year.


                                                             22
This measure captures the number of server software used by organizations in each moment of
observation, taking into account that more recent server software has higher quality. 16 Note that
the unit of this measure is the quality-adjusted quantity of server software, on a base where
vintages of server software released in December 1997 have a                            of 1. As in standard
capital measurement, this adjustment enables us to make an estimate of the increase or decline in
quality-adjusted server capital stock--an estimate that permits us to see what previously lay
hidden. Major changes over time or major differences across industries create the potential for
large measurement problems.

         To illustrate how this index works, we compute the                         for our above example as
follows:

                                               = 1.248 45 + 1.404 55 = 133.4

6. Results

         In this section, we document the patterns of software usage that mislead traditional
economic accounting. Using the organizations in our sample, we attempt to quantify the amount
of value derived from web server use, which has been omitted from previous economic
measurements. For convenience of the readers, we summarize the questions, methods, and
results in this section in Table 2.

         Figure 1 displays the fraction of organizations in the data set using server software from
the major vendors between 2000 and 2018. In the left-hand figure, we show the unweighted
market shares, and in the right-hand figure we show the quality-adjusted market shares (based on
the vintage of the software). 17 In both plots, Apache and Microsoft IIS had similar market share

16
   Because this measure sums over the inferred quality of the server software and the quality of server software is
based on the server version number, hidden server numbers pose a challenge for this measure. If hidden version
numbers are ignored then QACAP numbers would be underestimated. We therefore provide lower and upper bounds
on the QACAP. The lower bound is developed by interpolating hidden version numbers with the last visible server
version number used by a website. The upper bound is developed by interpolating with the most recently released
server version given the observed server vendor. In the main text, we show the lower bound as that is the most
conservative measure of QACAP. In Appendix I, we show both the lower and upper bound. Our qualitative results
are consistent and robust regardless of which interpolation method is utilized.
17
   Because Apache and Nginx users are more likely to hide their version numbers in recent years (see Figure 15),
computing the QACAP using only the observations in which software vintages are visible would undervalue the
Apache and Nginx servers. For Figure 1(b), we treat servers that turned off their server version number as staying at
the vintage of their last observation. While this attenuates the bias caused by organizations changing the visibility of

                                                               23
during much of the early 2000s. Beginning in 2010 and accelerating after that, Nginx began to
capture market share from both Microsoft and Apache.

         The patterns displayed in Figure 1 indicate that until 2010, calculating the software
capital stock on the basis of just Microsoft IIS, the leading proprietary web server during this
time period, would result in proportionally undervaluing the total stock. For each organization
paying for Microsoft IIS, another organization captured similar value by using open source
Apache software.

         Although the results in Figure 1 suggest a periodic survey of organizations' software
usage might have been sufficient for aggregate estimates, the patterns change after 2010.
Beginning in 2010, Nginx, an open source solution, began to take significant market share both
incumbent proprietary and open source software. Hence, after 2010, a more appropriate approach
would have had to account for changes taking place. A periodic survey would have missed the
extent of change.

         Figure 2 shows the quality-adjusted capital stock based on the vintages of server software
(QACAP). 18 The pattern shown in Figure 2 demonstrates a similar finding about usage prior to
2010 as indicated by Figure 1, and, if anything, suggests Apache and IIS were similarly ranked
in usage prior to 2010. Use of Apache and IIS grew with little interruption until approximately
2013, when their growth flattened and then declined, with IIS declining earlier than shown in
Figure 1. In the dozen years between 2001 and 2013, IIS usage tripled and Apache's quadrupled.
As with Figure 1, Nginx usage grew quickly after 2013, but Figure 2 suggests this growth was
even faster than indicated by Figure 1, in part because Nginx was so young and close to the
frontier. These plots reveal that mismeasurement due to omission may be economically
substantial during the ascendancy of Nginx use.

         How large is the mismeasurement due to omission? Figure 3 provides an estimate of the
value based on the shadow value of the open source servers used by organizations to host their
homepages. Following Nordhaus' (2006) reasoning, for each year that an organization used an


their server software version numbers, given that organizations that hide their server versions are typically closer to
the technological frontier than organizations that leave their version numbers visible (see Figure 16), the quality-
adjusted market share of Apache and Nginx are likely even higher in recent years. See Appendix I for alternative
estimates.
18
   See Appendix I for alternative estimates.


                                                               24
open source server, we find the "nearest market good," in this case, the most popular Windows
IIS vintage used in that same year. The prices of these Windows IIS vintages represent the best
proxy for the shadow value of the open source server used. By adding these up, we get the
omitted value due to open source server software. 19 The omitted value shown in Figure 3 is
large, starting at approximately $66 million in 2000 and increasing to between $125 and $315
million by 2018. 20 The increase is both a reflection of the increasing usage of open source server
software, as well as the expanding number of features and value created by this software. If our
sample represents 2.79% of all open source server software, as we estimated for 2011, and if that
persisted, then the total value in 2018 would be between $4.48 billion and $11.29 billion. 21
While only an approximation, this suggests the scale of mismeasurement for just servers reaches
many billions of dollars.

        In Figure 4, we plot the heterogeneity of omission by organizations' industry, size,
geography, and age. The magnitude of omission is both a reflection of the usage of open source
server software, as well as the size of the relevant subsample. Due to the large proportion of
manufacturing firms in our sample, we find that the manufacturing industry has a particularly
large number of missing dollars. Similarly, we find that the omitted value to be the highest in the
South, partly because the South has more organizations than any other region in our sample. 22 As
our sample achieves good representation of medium to large organizations in the United States
by industry and geography, we believe our finding is representative of heterogeneity in omitted
value due to open source web servers in the U.S. economy. We also find that the omitted value is



19
   In Appendix E, we show the price series of Windows IIS vintages as well as the most popular Windows IIS
vintage by year.
20
   Starting in 2014, Microsoft IIS could be purchased under a "standard" license or under a more expensive
"datacenter" license. Organizations would typically opt for different licenses depending on the size of their
deployment. We provide a range of estimates for the omitted value of open source servers based on where the low
end uses the "standard" license to approximate the shadow value of open source servers and where the high end uses
the "datacenter" license price.
21
   This fraction from 2011 is 2.79%, and assumes a similar fraction in 2018. That is probably an underestimate due
to the increase in the use of Nginx and the increasing fraction of open source software in wide use, which came at
the expense of proprietary software use. Hence, the estimate is conservative.
22
   In our sample, the South region has 61,285 organizations while the West has 38,572, the Northeast has 34,051,
and the Midwest has 37,075. The Census Bureau's South region had a population of approximately 126 million in
2019, while the Northeast had 56 million. https://www.census.gov/newsroom/press-releases/2019/popest-
nation.html In Appendix C, we show that the number of organizations in our sample is highly correlated with the
total number of firms in each of these regions as reported by the Census Bureau Statistics of US Businesses data.


                                                            25
the largest for organizations with fewer than 250 employees and organizations more than ten
years old, due to the fact that the majority of our sample are these organizations.

         Figure 5 supplements Figure 4 by showing how the potential for mismeasurement due to
omission correlates with organization characteristics. For Figure 5, we plot the fraction of
organizations using open source server software by industry, size, geography, and age. The
graphs show that younger organizations, West Coast organizations, organizations operating in
accommodation, and smaller organizations are more inclined toward using open source software,
while organizations in the Midwest, and organizations in finance and (eventually) retail are the
slowest. This finding implies that mismeasurement due to omission may vary. It also suggests
that mismeasurement may be larger for the software capital stock of the former types of
organizations.

         A descriptive logistic regression confirms the previous results and provides more nuance,
while showing that mismeasurement is not driven by coincidental correlations. The marginal
effect estimates at the means of all organization attributes are included in Table 3. The
qualitative inference does not differ from those drawn with the figures, but these estimates do
provide some statistical grounding for describing the heterogeneity. At mean values for all other
variables, a large organization is 14.38% less likely to use open source than a medium sized
organization, a young organization 3.91% more likely than an older organization, and a
organization headquartered in the West is 10.43% more likely than one in the Midwest. 23
Organizations in the accommodation and food and information industries are, respectively, 39.51
% and 21.44% more likely than organizations in finance, which has the lowest probability. 24 The
not-for-profit sector especially eschews open source in the data, as represented by the low
coefficients on education and public administration, which means any organization in these



23
   These numbers are derived by comparing the average predicted probability of an organization with a feature being
on open source software versus those without the feature. For example, 46.35% of large organizations are predicted
to use open source software, while 54.14% of smaller organizations are predicted to use that open source software.
24
   One might wonder if accommodation and restaurant websites are more likely to be hosted on services like
Squarespace and Wix. If so, could the hosting company be making the decision of which server software to use
rather than the organizations themselves. For approximately 8,000 organizations in our sample, we analyze the
server headers, cookies, and scripts on the organizations' websites in 2016 to ascertain if there are indications that
the organization used WordPress, Wix, or Squarespace hosting. We find that 18.2% of the restaurant and
accommodation websites versus 16.02% of information industry organizations use one of these hosted website
services.


                                                              26
industries are 13.82% and 18.75% less likely to adopt open source software than the average
organization. 25

         To illustrate substantial potential for mismeasurement in productivity analysis, consider
the estimates altogether. A healthcare organization headquartered in the West would be 13.58%
more likely to use open source than a finance organization headquartered in the Midwest. Since
the dataset covers the entire range of industries and geographies of medium to large
organizations operating in the United States, these relatively popular categories represent 1.21%
and 2.84% of the organizations in our sample. In other words, the mismeasurement does not arise
solely from one or two subsamples, but correlates with some of the most basic features of an
organization, such as its location, industry, and size. Potential for mismeasurement, therefore, is
prevalent throughout the economy.

         In light of our motivation, the differences in results between the large and medium-sized
organizations in Table 3 and Figure 5 are striking. Almost from the beginning, organizations
with fewer than 250 employees are substantially more frequent users of open source web servers
than large organizations. That is evidence that standard productivity mismeasurement makes its
greatest errors with the smaller and younger organizations.

         As organizations install software updates that advance the capabilities of the software
they are already using, this dynamic factor further exacerbates mismeasurement due to omission.
In Figure 6, we show that the dispersion in technology age of organizations' choices of server
software increases over time. As shown in the figure, the interquartile range in the distance from
the technical frontier grows over time. The panel on the left shows this for Apache, the panel on
the right shows this for IIS, and panel on the bottom shows this for Nginx. A key difference
between the figures arises from updating by Apache and Nginx in contrast with that by
Microsoft. Apache and Nginx users initiate the update, while many IIS users were automatically
updated (within a given vintage of 1.0, 2.0, and so on). Until recently, Microsoft IIS users tended
to utilize the same vintage of IIS. In contrast, Apache and Nginx users rely on a wide range of
different vintages. In the single year of 2010, some organizations used Apache vintage that were


25
   An organization at the mean of all attributes would be predicted to use open source with a probability of 52.75%.
Organizations in the education industry are predicted to use open source at a rate of 45.46% and public
administration organizations use open source with a predicted rate of 42.86%. That finding contrasts with Robins et
al. (2018), which estimates that there is over a billion dollars of open source software in the Federal government.


                                                             27
at the technical frontier, while 50% of organizations used Apache vintages that were more than
four years old.

       Several insights emerge from these plots. Foremost, they demonstrate that simply
assuming that the majority of server software reflects similar functionality is an incorrect
assumption. In fact, updates of software like Apache create different functionality, which creates
different amounts of value for different users, depending on their tendency towards installing
these updates. Second, the variance in vintages, especially for Apache users, can be substantial
because some organizations regularly update to stay close to the frontier while others do not take
much action with much frequency, and some take none after their first installation. If server
software were treated as any other capital model, such behavior would motivate the need for
quality adjustments (linked to vintage), such as those we presented in Figure 2 and Figure 3.
Third, and relatedly, the results in Figure 6 show that simply adding servers to produce a capital
aggregate would lead to enormous errors. In fact, Figure 6 reinforces the need to properly adjust
for quality and capacity during assembly of a capital aggregate. Finally, the Figure 6 also
suggests that a one-size-method does not fit all servers. Different servers require adjustment
procedures to reflect the practices of users.

       In Table 4, we show the heterogeneity in organizations' updating behavior by
organization characteristics. The table displays the estimated coefficients from a regression of
the distance from the technological frontier of the web server software used by organizations on
covariates representing the characteristics of those organizations.

       The estimates show that geography is predictive of distance to the frontier, with many of
the organizations that are closer to the frontier being located in traditional technology hubs.
Organizations headquartered in Massachusetts using open source server are 20.19% and 35.63%
closer to the technological frontier than organization headquartered in Mississippi and Wyoming
respectively. Also, organizations less than five years old use open source server software that is
9.39% closer to the frontier than organizations ten years and older, while medium-sized
organizations with fewer than 250 employees use server software 8.26% closer to the frontier
than their larger counterparts. Productivity analysis is already challenging among startups and
small organizations, so this finding suggests those concerns could be extended to IT-intensive
medium-sized organizations as well.


                                                     28
         There is a substantial heterogeneity across industries in the distance to the technological
frontier of the server software used by organizations, as well as a general persistence in ranking.
Surprisingly, organizations in the information industry tend to use technology far from the
technological frontier. In 2018, the average age of the Apache software an information
organization used was 52 months older than the age of the latest Apache release--in other words,
the organization was using software that had not been updated for over four years. In the same
year, retail merchants used server software 5.1% closer to the frontier, while food and
accommodation organizations used software 13.12% closer. Some of the variation in distance to
the frontier is due to selection of server software vendor: A portion of frontier organizations in
2018 had switched to Nginx or alternative server software vendors. 26 A complete explanation for
the information sector's distance from the technological frontier remains for future research.

         What else produces differences in outcomes? One possible explanation is that
organizations install updates to the Apache server at different rates and use software of different
vintages on average. Moreover, organization churn among vintages also could affect the
technology age of organizations' server choices. We observe such behavior in a few different
ways in the next figures and tables.

         In Figure 7, we see a pattern frequently seen among capital goods, which shows
organizations that (later) exit tend to use older vintages of the server software than organizations
that (later) continue operating. 27 This difference reflects behavior commonly observed in long-
lived capital goods, where organizations cease investing in improving a capital good in advance
of retiring it. Again, we view this as one more piece of compelling evidence that organizations
treat open source software the same way they treat any other capital good. The only difference
between the two is the invisibility of open source.

         As with any situation in which users have options among different suppliers of a capital
good, switching between suppliers and upgrades into new vintages provides additional insight
about the services they receive. To reiterate, this has not been visible until this study. The results


26
   Some organizations utilize alternative servers, such as Lighttpd, Apache Tomcat, and others. In addition, some
leading companies, such as Google and Twitter, utilize customized server software.
27
   Exit is defined for an organization as the year in which either Orbis or Compustat say that the organization was
delisted or became defunct. If such a year is not listed in those databases, we use the last year in which Internet
Archive had collected data for that organization's homepage.


                                                              29
in Figure 8 demonstrate the prevalence of switching among organizations that used Apache and
IIS exclusively during 2005. In the left plot, we see that approximately 20% of organizations that
used an open source server switched to the proprietary software IIS during the next ten years.
This would create new expenses in standard accounting measures. Interestingly, another 20%
switched between open source servers, from Apache to Nginx, an improvement that would have
been unobserved in its entirety.

         In contrast, among the organizations that used IIS in 2005, almost 60% switched to using
open source servers Apache and Nginx by 2015. For these organizations, software capital assets
that had previously appeared on the books would have disappeared when the organization
switched to an open source alternative. That is consistent with the increasing prevalence of
intangible assets due to veiled inputs.

         We use descriptive logistic regressions to study how organizations' decision to switch
between server vendors correlate with organization characteristics. The regression coefficient
estimates are included in Table 5. We find that for organizations using Apache, they were more
likely to switch from Apache to IIS if they are large, in the South or Midwest, and in public
administration, utilities, and finance industries. More precisely, large organizations are 21.01%
more likely to switch to IIS than smaller organizations. 28 Organizations in the South are 2.98%
more likely than Northeastern organizations to make that switch. 29 Finance organizations are
21.98% more likely to switch to IIS than information sector organizations. 30 In contrast, for
organizations using IIS, they are more likely to switch from IIS to Apache if they have fewer
than 250 employees (18.27%), or if they are in the West versus Northeast (7.44%), or in the
accommodation and food industries versus the information sector (15.11%).

         In Figure 9, we show how the adoption of Nginx correlates with organization
characteristics. Remarkably, we see a general tendency across all organizations to switch to
Nginx, with less observable variance correlated with location, size, age, or industry. That does



28
   Organizations with more than 250 employees switch from Apache to IIS at a predicted rate of 43.57%, while
smaller organizations switch at a predicted rate of 52.73%.
29
   Apache using organizations in the South switch to IIS at a rate of 46.89%, while those in the Northeast make the
switch at 45.33% rate.
30
   Information sector organizations are 43.8% to make the switch from Apache to IIS, while Finance organizations
are predicted to make that switch with a probability of 53.47%.


                                                             30
not imply zero variance, however. Organizations in the information industry switched sooner
than others, and organizations in finance were slowest of all. During 2015, 13.82% of
information industry organizations had adopted Nginx; it would take two more years before
Nginx achieve the same adoption rate among finance organizations. That is evidence that this
open source software produced useful advances that virtually every organization in the economy
could appreciate, and notably, none of it would have been measured. That is evidence of a
widespread omission, which, with the benefit of this study's data, can be attributed to the
diffusion of one server, which was the "hot product" of the time.

       Overall, the foregoing suggests unpriced software and software updates might mislead
analyses of the sources of organization productivity. Going back to Figure 1, the patterns reveal
that extrapolation based on observable proprietary software usage would lead to proportional
mismeasurement between 2001 and 2010. That would lead to overestimates of the contribution
of visible software. Since 2010, however, the introduction of new server software makes
estimates of software capital based on proprietary software usage negatively correlated with the
total actual quality-adjusted software. During more recent years, the correlation of value between
that captured by proprietary software usage and that captured by open source usage is negative.
If this is not accounted for, the source of productivity gains could be entirely omitted. It is even
possible that the gains from visible software could be underestimated.

       We bring one final piece of evidence that suggests, again, that a firms' use of web
servers, and other unmeasured technology usage proxies for productive assets, which
meaningfully explain variations in firms' value-added levels. We do it through a replication of
Nagle's (2019) study of the association between open source and firm productivity. Nagle fits
firms' value added to a production function with IT capital, non-IT capital, and labor as inputs,
following a long line of research into the association of productivity with the use of IT (Hitt and
Tambe, 2014). The goal of Nagle's study is to replicate the approach of prior literature, and add
evidence of an association between the use of different measures of open source and firm
productivity.

       Table 6 shows the estimated coefficients of the multifactor productivity analysis for the
1,577 firms that overlap in our sample and Nagle's (2019). We follow Nagle's notation and
variable construction for IT capital, non-IT capital, non-IT labor, and unpriced open source


                                                     31
software. Note in particular that, according to this definition, the variable Non-Pecuniary OSS
includes only firms' use of Linux as open source software. In summary, we replicate Nagle's
specification, and then add new exogenous variables, which is the firm's use of server software.

         In this exercise, we examine the correlation between input factors and value-added output
of firms. If, after conditioning on all other categories of input factors, open source software
inputs are significantly correlated with the value-added of a firm then software inputs are
correlated with productivity increasing inputs and decisions. This analysis is not aimed at
estimating a causal effect of software investments on productivity. Rather, we seek to illustrate
that decisions about software inputs, which are often hidden from traditional accounting methods
used for studying production, are associated with higher productivity. 31

         Column (1) show the results of a regression of the logarithmically transported value
added of a firm on the capital, labor, and open source software (Linux) used by the firm. Column
(2) adds interactions between Non-Pecuniary OSS and ITIntensity, defined as the value of the
computer hardware owned by a firm divided by its sales. Column (3) and (4) interact the usage
of open source software (Linux) with indicator variables for if the firm operates in industries
considered IT producing and finance, insurance, and real estate respectively. Columns (5)
through (7) include two additional variables Server QA Stock (OSS) and Server QA Stock
(Prop.), representing the quality-adjusted server software used by the firm in a year. When a firm
used only open source server software in a year, Server QA Stock (Prop.) is zero, while users of
proprietary server software have a Server QA Stock (OSS) of a non-zero value. Note that the QA
Stock variable not only captures use of server software, but in the regression could also capture
other omitted variables, such as the unobserved complementary technology use that server use
proxies for. Columns (8) through (10) include firm fixed effects in order to absorb firm level
unobserved heterogeneity.

         The estimated coefficients show that the server stock used by firms is a significant
omitted variable from traditional productivity analysis. In our preferred specifications, Columns

31
   Firms' decisions regarding which software inputs to use are endogenous. Firms that are highly productive for
unobservable reasons are likely to also select the software that enables them to be most productive. The choice of
which software to use may be correlated with many other unobservable input and production decisions by firms that
ultimately influence productivity. Proprietary software firms may offer volume discounts for particularly productive
firms. Given these potential confounders, the above regression and exercise should only be seen as highlighting that
software is a factor input that is correlated with productivity and omitted from previous studies of firm productivity.


                                                               32
(8)-(10) including firm fixed effects, the estimated coefficients on the Server QA Stock are small
or even slightly negative. The interaction between the open source server stock and ITIntensity,
however, is large and positive. Similarly, the interaction of server stock and the firm being an IT
producer is positive for both open source and proprietary server software. Producers of IT that
use open source software are associated with a 13.7% higher value added for each quality-
adjusted unit of server capital, while proprietary software IT producers are associated with a
10.7% higher value added on average. This is in contrast with firms operating in the fields of
finance, insurance, and real estate, where using more recent server software is associated with no
change in value-added levels. We speculate that the large and significant estimates likely not
only capture effects due to use of servers but also many complementary technologies that server
use proxies for. Consistent with Nagle's conclusion, these estimates suggest measuring use of
open source software enables researchers to measure an important mechanism related to
productivity that had previously been hidden.




7. Conclusion


       Despite the web's essential role in the digital economy, the operations and infrastructure
that support the commercial web have remained largely veiled to economic analysis and
accounting. In this study, we focus on two problems in standard productivity analysis that are
associated with mismeasurement of value--omission and misattribution. Both mismeasurements
are created by unpriced software and software updates.

       We characterize mismeasurement in economic accounting and productivity estimates by
closely examining web server software, an asset that plays a critical role in the digital economic
activity. To enable our analysis, we compile the largest dataset ever on business web server use
in the United States, with disaggregated information on the usage of web server software and the
installation of software updates by over 200,000 medium to large organizations in the United
States between 2001 and 2018. Our sample achieves good representation of organizations by
geography and industry.




                                                    33
       We find that the omission of open source web servers, such as Apache and Nginx,
produces a large bias in measuring the economic value of server software, approximately $66
million in 2000 with an increase to between $125 and $315 million by 2018 for our sample. This
omission is particularly pronounced among young organizations, smaller organizations,
organizations on the West, and organizations in healthcare, lodging and food. We also analyze
the dynamic aspects of organizations' choices of server software, such as upgrading to new
technologies and switching between different products. We find these dynamic issues further
exacerbate mismeasurement.

       Mismeasurement is particularly fraught in the most recent decade, because a new server
has become widely adopted, and organizations in some industries have substantially converted to
open source. Finally, we study how unpriced server software and software updates mislead
analyses of the sources of firm productivity. We find that including the data on server software
use is a meaningful explanation, both statistically and economically, for variations in firm value-
added levels.

       Our study contributes to the literature on the measurement of the economic value, as well
as to growth attributable to IT, by presenting the most comprehensive analysis of
mismeasurement of open source software use, with a sample that is much broader and extends
for a longer period of time than previous studies of proprietary versus open source software. We
also systematically document a multitude of organization behavior, including choices of open
source versus proprietary, upgrades to new technologies, and switching to different products.
Moreover, we correlate these behaviors to a variety of organization characteristics and show
there is significant heterogeneity in mismeasurement across organization size, age, geography,
and industry and how that measurement changes over time.

       Throughout the study, we have aspired to analyze open source web servers as if they
were one example among many and argue that, as such, web servers illustrate a broad set of
omission and misattribution problems that arise from behavior and aspects common to open
source software usage and unpriced software updates. Nonetheless, web servers possess one
unique feature, namely, their connection to their academic origins. Unlicensed software and
shareware are common practices in universities for diffusing new software into new use. Our




                                                    34
results suggest that the type and scale of underestimates found with web servers could arise for
similar reasons with other open source software with academic origins.

       We were able to demonstrate unobservable IT can mislead productivity analyses, but
nothing in the demonstration of productivity mismeasurement was unique to web servers per se.
Much of the analysis could be extended to a wide range of additional open source software. Our
paper shows unobserved and unmeasured technology such as server software creates an amount
of economic value that cannot be ignored. This begs the questions, what would emerge if all
open source software were analyzed? The literature on growth attributable to IT should further
address issues due to the mismeasurement of the economic value created by open source
software use.

       This study highlights a number of open questions. We described variance in organization
use of servers, but did not fully analyze why organizations made the choices they did, nor why
they chose to upgrade when they did. Future research should examine the decision of
organizations regarding the timing and direction of investment in their software capital. This
includes the choice of when to update software as well as when to switch to a different software
vendor. Such a study requires even more data and modeling of switching costs. Our evidence
suggests such analysis also will yield insight into veiled value creation that standard productivity
analysis mismeasures.




                                                     35
Bibliography


Brynjolfsson, Erik. 1993. "The Productivity Paradox of Information Technology."
       Communications of the ACM 36 (12): 66­77. https://doi.org/10.1145/163298.163309.
Byrne, David, and Carol Corrado. 2019. "Accounting for Innovations in Consumer Digital
       Services: IT Still Matters." In Measuring and Accounting for Innovation in the 21st
       Century. Vol. 2019. NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth.
       http://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2019049pap.pdf.
Byrne, David, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel. 2013. "Is the Information Technology
       Revolution Over?" International Productivity Monitor 25: 20­36.
Calvino, Flavio, Chiara Criscuolo, Luca Marcolin, and Mariagrazia Squicciarini. 2018. "A
       Taxonomy of Digital Intensive Sectors," June. https://doi.org/10.1787/f404736a-en.
Corrado, Carol A. 2011. "Communication Capital, Metcalfe's Law, and US Productivity
      Growth." Metcalfe's Law, and US Productivity Growth (March 1, 2011).
Gordon, Robert J, and Hassan Sayed. 2020. "Transatlantic Technologies: The Role of ICT in the
      Evolution of U.S. and European Productivity Growth." National Bureau of Economic
      Research Working Paper Series No. 27425. https://doi.org/10.3386/w27425.
Greenstein, Shane, and Frank Nagle. 2014. "Digital Dark Matter and the Economic Contribution
       of Apache." Research Policy 43: 623--631.
Griliches, Zvi. 2000. R&D, Education, and Productivity: A Retrospective. Harvard University
       Press.
Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior." The
       American Economic Review 57 (3): 391­414.
Jorgenson, Dale W. 1963. "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior." The American Economic
       Review 53 (2): 247­59.
Jorgenson, Dale W, Mun S Ho, and Jon D Samuels. 2013. "Economic Growth in the Information
       Age: A Prototype Industry-Level Production Account for the United States, 1947-2010."
       Manuscript, Harvard University.
Keller, Sallie, Gizem Korkmaz, Carol Robbins, and Stephanie Shipp. 2018. "Opportunities to
        Observe and Measure Intangible Inputs to Innovation: Definitions, Operationalization,
        and Examples." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (50): 12638­45.
        https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1800467115.
Kim, Do Yoon. 2020. "Product Market Performance and Openness: The Moderating Role of
      Customer Heterogeneity." Draft.
Korkmaz, Gizem, Claire Kelling, Carol Robbins, and Sallie Keller. 2019. "Modeling the Impact
     of Python and R Packages Using Dependency and Contributor Networks." Social
     Network Analysis and Mining 10 (1): 7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13278-019-0619-1.




                                                  36
Lakhani, Karim R, and Eric von Hippel. 2003. "How Open Source Software Works: `Free' User-
      to-User Assistance." Research Policy 32 (6): 923­43. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-
      7333(02)00095-1.
Lerner, Josh, and Mark Schankerman. 2010. "The Comingled Code: Open Source and Economic
       Development." MIT Press Books.
Nagle, Frank. 2019. "Open Source Software and Firm Productivity." Management Science 65
       (3): 1191­1215. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2017.2977.
Nordhaus, William D. 2006. "Principles of National Accounting for Nonmarket Accounts." In A
      New Architecture for the US National Accounts, 143­60. University of Chicago Press.
O'Mahony, Siobhán. 2003. "Guarding the Commons: How Community Managed Software
     Projects Protect Their Work." Research Policy 32 (7): 1179­98.
     https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(03)00048-9.
Robbins, Carol A, Gizem Korkmaz, José Bayoán Santiago Calderón, Daniel Chen, Claire
      Kelling, Stephanie Shipp, and Sallie Keller. 2018. "Open Source Software as Intangible
      Capital: Measuring the Cost and Impact of Free Digital Tools." Draft.
Stiroh, Kevin J. 2002. "Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What Do the
        Industry Data Say?" American Economic Review 92 (5): 1559­76.
        https://doi.org/10.1257/000282802762024638.
Syverson, Chad. 2011. "What Determines Productivity?" Journal of Economic Literature 49 (2):
       326­65. https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.49.2.326.
Tambe, Prasanna, and Lorin M Hitt. 2014. "Job Hopping, Information Technology Spillovers,
      and Productivity Growth." Management Science 60 (2): 338­55.
      https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1764.
Tambe, Prasanna, Lorin Hitt, Daniel Rock and Erik Brynjolfsson. 2020. "Digital Capital and
      Superstar Firms.'' National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No.
      28285. https://dio.org/10.3386/w28285.
West, Joel. 2003. "How Open Is Open Enough?: Melding Proprietary and Open Source Platform
       Strategies." Research Policy 32 (7): 1259­85. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-
       7333(03)00052-0.




                                                 37
Tables and Figures


                                    Figure 1 Market Shares Over Time




        Note: The above plot displays the share of organizations in our sample using a server
        vendor over time. The vertical axis is the share of organizations. The horizontal axis is the
        year. As our panel data is at the monthly level, the year observations above are weighted
        by the number of months within a year that organizations utilized a server vendor.




                                  Figure 2 Quality Adjusted Capital Stock




        Note: The above plot displays the total quality adjusted capital stock (             ) of each
        server for our sample. The vertical axis is the sum of units of quality based on the inverse
        of the CPI for the server vintages and scaled by the number of servers using that vintage in
        that year. The horizontal axis is the year. As our panel data is at the monthly level, the year
        observations above are weighted by the number of months within a year that organizations
        utilized a server vendor.




                                                          38
                     Figure 3 Omitted Value of Open Source Servers




Note: The above plot displays the estimated value of open source servers being used in
each year for our sample. For each observation in the dataset in which a organization
utilizes the Apache or Nginx web server, we find the price of the Windows server 10-user
package containing the most widely used vintage of the proprietary Microsoft IIS server in
that year. The vertical axis displays the total of these shadow values multiplied by ten for
the ten-user license. Prices are deflated to 2012 dollars. Observations are weighted for
representativeness by state and NAICS with data from the Census SUSB.




                                                 39
Figure 4 Omitted Value of Open Source Servers, Breakdowns by Organization Characteristics




  Note: The above plot displays the estimated value of open source servers being used in
  each year, broken down by organization age, geography, industry and size. For each
  observation in the dataset in which a organization utilizes the Apache or Nginx web server,
  we find the price of the Windows server 10-user package containing the most widely used
  vintage of the proprietary Microsoft IIS server in that year. The vertical axis displays the
  total of these shadow values multiplied by ten for the ten-user license. Prices are deflated
  to 2012 dollars. Observations are weighted for representativeness by state and NAICS with
  data from the Census SUSB. The top left plot shows this with organizations binned by the
  age of the organization. Organization ages are computed as the difference between the year
  the observation is made and the year of incorporation of the organization. The vertical axis
  is the OSS value for organizations within an age bin. The horizontal axis is the year of
  observation. The top right plot shows this with organizations binned by their geographic
  region as defined by Census regions. The bottom left shows this with organizations binned
  by industry, defined by two-digit NAICS code. Only six NAICS categories are shown in
  this figure. The bottom right shows this with organizations binned by size. As our panel
  data is at the monthly level, the year observations above are weighted by the number of
  months within a year that organizations utilized a server vendor.




                                                   40
    Figure 5 Open Source Server Usage, Breakdowns by Organization Characteristics




Note: The above plot displays the share of organizations in our sample using an open source
server over time, broken down by organization age, geography, industry and size. The top
left plot shows this with organizations binned by the age of the organization. Organization
ages are computed as the difference between the year the observation is made and the year
of incorporation of the organization. The vertical axis is the share of organizations using
OSS within an age bin. The horizontal axis is the year of observation. The top right plot
shows this with organizations binned by their geographic region as defined by Census
regions. The bottom left shows this with organizations binned by industry, defined by two-
digit NAICS code. The bottom right shows this with organizations binned by size. As our
panel data is at the monthly level, the year observations above are weighted by the number
of months within a year that organizations utilized a server vendor.




                                                41
                 Figure 6 Distance to the Tech Frontier by Server Vendor

              (a) Apache                                              (b) IIS




                                          (c) Nginx




Note: The above plot shows the interquartile range of the distance of servers to the
technological frontier (       ). The definition of       is the number of months since the
server vintage used by a organization was released minus the number of months since the
latest vintage of that server vendor's software was released. We drop situations in which a
organization used a beta server vintage prior to the general release of that vintage. The year
observations are weighted by the number of months of observations within that year. The
top left are Apache servers, the top right are IIS servers, and the bottom are Nginx servers.




                                                  42
      Figure 7 Distance to the Tech Frontier for Active and Delisted Organizations




Note: The above plot displays the average distance to the tech frontier (     ) among active
and delisted organizations using Apache server software. The definition of               is the
number of months since the server vintage used by a organization was released minus the
number of months since the latest vintage of that server vendor's software was released.
We define an organization as delisted in a year if either Orbis or Compustat say that the
organization was delisted or became defunct in that year. If such a year is not listed in those
databases, we use the last year in which IA had collected data for that organization's
homepage.




                            Figure 8 Switching Server Vendors




Note: The above plots show the fraction of organizations using server software from each
vendor over time. On the left we restrict to the subsample of organizations that used Apache
exclusively during 2005. On the right we restrict to the subsample of organizations that
used IIS exclusively during 2005.




                                                  43
                               Figure 9 Adoption of Nginx




Note: The above plot shows the share of organizations using the Nginx server, broken down
by organization age, geography, industry and size. The top left plot shows this with
organizations binned by the age of the organization. Organization ages are computed as the
difference between the year the observation is made and the year of incorporation of the
organization. The vertical axis is the share of organizations using Nginx within an age bin.
The horizontal axis is the year of observation. The top right plot shows this with
organizations binned by their geographic region as defined by Census regions. The bottom
left shows this with organizations binned by industry, defined by two-digit NAICS code.
The bottom right shows this with organizations binned by size. As our panel data is at the
monthly level, the year observations above are weighted by the number of months within
a year that organizations utilized a server vendor.




                                                 44
                                           Table 1 Summary of Sources of Data



 Data                       Description                                  Frequency             Source

 Organization               230,611 organizations in the US              Yearly panel from     For public firms,
 characteristics            with at least 50 employees at some           2000 to 2018          CompuStat database;
                            point between 2000 and 2018;                                       when CompuStat data is
                            organizations are identified by their                              not available, Bureau van
                            homepages; variables include                                       Dyke's Orbis database
                            location, NAICS code, number of
                            employees and year of incorporation

 Organizations'             Vendor and vintage of server                 Monthly panel from    The Internet Archive 32
 server software            software of 213,956 homepages of             2000 to 2018
 usage                      the above US organizations

 CPI deflator               Consumer Price Index for                     Monthly series from   Bureau of Labor Statistics,
                            "Computer Software and                       2000 to 2018          USA
                            Accessories," on a December
                            1997=100 base

 Windows IIS price          Price of the Windows server 10-user          Yearly series from    Authors' compilation (see
 series                     package containing the most widely           2000 to 2018          Appendix E)
                            used vintage of the proprietary
                            Microsoft IIS server in that year

 State and industry         Weights used for weighting                   Yearly from 2000 to   Statistics of U.S.
 weights                    observations by state and NAICS              2018                  Businesses (SUSB)
                            for representativeness

 Note: The sources indicate the sources of raw data. We have extensively cleaned and reshaped the data. Please
 see Section 4 Data, Section 5 Measurement, and the Appendices for details of data construction.




32
     https://archive.org/


                                                                    45
                                         Table 2 Summary of Results


Question              Methods                                      Results                            Figures and
                                                                                                      Tables

How large is the      Descriptive plots contrasting usage          Comparable usage of open           Figures 1, 2, 3
omission of           of open source vs. proprietary server        source vs. proprietary server
economic value        software over time;                          software between 2000 and
created by open                                                    2010, increasing usage after
                      Estimating the omitted value, using
source web server                                                  2010, indicating increasing
                      the prices of Windows IIS vintages
software?                                                          omitted value of open source
                      as the proxy for the shadow value of
                                                                   over time;
                      open source servers
                                                                   Total value of omission in 2018
                                                                   between $4.5 billion and $11.3
                                                                   billion

Does the omitted      Descriptive plots showing                    Younger organizations, West        Figures 4, 5;
value vary by         heterogeneity of open source usage           Coast organizations,               Table 3
organizations' age,   and omitted value by organization            organizations in healthcare and
geography, industry   characteristics;                             accommodations, smaller
and size?                                                          organizations use open source
                      Logistic regression predicting open
                                                                   server software significantly
                      source usage using organization
                                                                   more;
                      characteristics
                                                                   Omission of economic value is
                                                                   heterogeneous across
                                                                   organizations characteristics

How do dynamic        Descriptive plots showing                    Large dispersion in technology     Figures 6, 7, 8,
factors affect        heterogeneity in organizations'              age of organizations' choices of   9; Tables 4, 5
mismeasurement?       behavior 1) updating server vintage,         servers and this dispersion
                      2) switching server vendors, 3)              increases over time, indicating
                      adopting the new server product              heterogeneity in upgrading
                      Nginx;                                       behavior;

                      Logistic regression predicting               Significant switches between
                      decisions to update and switch using         server vendors, software capital
                      organization characteristics                 assets could appear or disappear
                                                                   on the books; heterogeneity in
                                                                   switching behavior;



                                                              46
                                                                  Extensive adoption of Nginx
                                                                  across all organization
                                                                  characteristics, growing
                                                                  mismeasurement due to the
                                                                  entry of the new product

Does unpriced         Estimating multifactor production           Firms' use of server software,    Table 6
server software       function using server software stock        and the unmeasured technology
mislead analyses of   as an additional variable                   usage that proxies for,
sources of firm       (specifications replicate those in          meaningfully explain variations
productivity?         Nagle (2019))                               in firms' value added level




                                                             47
               Table 3 Logit Predicting OSS Usage

                                                     1(OSS)
Employees, >250                                     -0.082***
                                                     (0.002)
Young                                               0.021***
                                                     (0.002)
Geographic Region
-- Midwest                                          -0.023***
                                                     (0.003)
-- South                                            -0.011***
                                                     (0.002)
-- West                                             0.036***
                                                     (0.003)
Industry
-- Mining                                            -0.027*
                                                     (0.015)
-- Utilities                                        -0.134***
                                                     (0.015)
-- Construction                                       0.012
                                                     (0.010)
-- Manufacturing                                    -0.031***
                                                     (0.010)
-- Wholesale                                        -0.065***
                                                     (0.011)
-- Retail                                           -0.083***
                                                     (0.011)
-- Transportation                                   -0.049***
                                                     (0.011)
-- Information                                      -0.035***
                                                     (0.011)
-- Finance                                          -0.144***
                                                     (0.011)
-- Real Estate                                      -0.070***
                                                     (0.011)


                                  48
              -- Profession                                      -0.069***
                                                                   (0.011)
              -- Management                                      -0.139***
                                                                   (0.016)
              -- Admin Support                                   -0.028***
                                                                   (0.011)
              -- Education                                       -0.117***
                                                                   (0.011)
              -- Healthcare                                        -0.015
                                                                   (0.010)
              -- Arts and Entertainment                          -0.090***
                                                                   (0.011)
              -- Accommodation and Food                           0.047***
                                                                   (0.011)
              -- Other                                           -0.047***
                                                                   (0.011)
              -- Public Admin                                    -0.143***
                                                                   (0.012)
              -- Unavailable                                     -0.032***
                                                                   (0.011)
              Year Fixed Effect?                                     Y
              Number of Organization-Year Observations           2,947,067
              Psuedo-R2                                             .027



Note: The above table shows the results of a logistic regression. The dependent variable is
whether or not an organization used open source software as its primary server software in
a year. Marginal effects are shown above. Agriculture is the omitted industry and Northeast
is the omitted region. Standard errors are clustered at the organization level.




                                                49
                  Table 4 Distance to Frontier of Software Used by Organization

                                                                    Distance to Frontier
                                                         Apache             IIS             Nginx
Employees, >250                                         0.666***        -0.883***          9.458***
                                                         (0.177)          (0.110)          (0.577)
Young                                                   -1.963***       -1.588***           -1.910
                                                         (0.142)          (0.100)          (0.601)
Geographic Region
-- Midwest                                               -0.543         -1.341***           0.227
                                                         (0.231)          (0.148)          (0.723)
-- South                                                -0.560***       -1.132***          -1.612**
                                                         (0.210)          (0.134)          (0.640)
-- West                                                   0.269         -1.319***          -1.664**
                                                         (0.225)          (0.153)          (0.684)
Industry
-- Mining                                               -2.881**          0.013             0.545
                                                         (1.352)          (0.906)          (3.668)
-- Utilities                                             -0.657           -0.334       12.489***
                                                         (1.200)          (0.743)          (4.204)
-- Construction                                          -0.702          1.448**            -3.002
                                                         (0.915)          (0.610)          (2.448)
-- Manufacturing                                          0.394          1.328**            5.454*
                                                         (0.894)          (0.595)          (2.419)
-- Wholesale                                              0.237           0.995            5.199 **
                                                         (0.925)          (0.614)          (2.517)
-- Retail                                                 0.685         -2.676***      11.429***
                                                         (0.919)          (0.612)          (2.489)
-- Transportation                                        -0.186          1.598***           -0.323
                                                         (0.964)          (0.640)          (2.604)
-- Information                                            0.534           -0.393           6.838***
                                                         (0.953)          (0.656)          (2.610)
-- Finance                                              3.179***          -0.214       14.772***
                                                         (0.964)          (0.619)          (2.652)
-- Real Estate                                           -1.171           -0.261       10.158***
                                                         (0.983)          (0.651)          (2.687)



                                                   50
-- Profession                                              -1.143         0.012         8.479***
                                                           (0.919)       (0.610)         (2.501)
-- Management                                               2.150         1.253        16.218***
                                                           (1.412)       (0.838)         (4.669)
-- Admin Support                                           -0.225         0.659           1.008
                                                           (0.939)       (0.627)         (2.533)
-- Education                                              -2.982***     -2.246***       9.097***
                                                           (0.920)       (0.609)         (2.555)
-- Healthcare                                             -1.973**        0.349           1.757
                                                           (0.907)       (0.603)         (2.436)
-- Arts and Entertainment                                 -2.672***     -4.540***       8.440***
                                                           (0.961)       (0.628)         (2.709)
-- Accommodation and Food                                 -2.014**      -2.457***         1.595
                                                           (0.918)       (0.618)         (2.479)
-- Other                                                   -1.335       -1.681***       7.359***
                                                           (0.959)       (0.636)         (2.646)
-- Public Admin                                            -0.868         -0.802          3.502
                                                           (1.053)       (0.667)         (3.061)
-- Unavailable                                             -1.107         -0.673          1.901
                                                           (0.932)       (0.617)         (2.540)


Year Fixed Effect?                                           Y              Y              Y
Number of Organization-Year Observations                  1,218,514     1,224,484       109,849
R2                                                          0.252         0.424          0.0525
     Note: The above table displays regression estimates. The dependent variable is the distance
     to the tech frontier (   ). The definition of     is the number of months since the server
     vintage used by an organization was released minus the number of months since the latest
     vintage of that server vendor's software was released. The left column shows this for
     Apache users. The middle column shows this for IIS users. The right column shows this
     for Nginx users. The covariates include the geographic region of the organization, the
     NAICS of the organization, and fixed effects for the year of the observation.




                                                     51
                    Table 5 Logit Predicting Switching Vendor

                                   1(Switched Vendor)     1(Switched      1(Switched IIS
                                                         Apache to IIS)     to Apache)
Employees, >250                         -0.003***           0.095***        -0.092***
                                         (0.001)                (0.003)      (0.003)
Young                                   0.009***            -0.022***       0.024***
                                         (0.001)                (0.002)      (0.002)
Geographic Region
-- Midwest                                0.000             0.029***        -0.027***
                                         (0.001)                (0.003)      (0.003)
-- South                                0.006***            0.014***        -0.012***
                                         (0.001)                (0.003)      (0.003)
-- West                                 0.004***            -0.043***       0.043***
                                         (0.001)                (0.003)      (0.003)
Industry
-- Mining                                 0.004                 0.036*      -0.032**
                                         (0.004)                (0.018)      (0.018)
-- Utilities                            -0.013***           0.150***        -0.149***
                                         (0.003)                (0.017)      (0.017)
-- Construction                         0.007***                -0.018        0.019
                                         (0.003)                (0.012)      (0.012)
-- Manufacturing                          0.002             0.042***        -0.042***
                                         (0.003)                (0.012)      (0.012)
-- Wholesale                              0.003             0.081***        -0.081***
                                         (0.004)                (0.013)      (0.012)
-- Retail                               0.026***            0.069***        -0.075***
                                         (0.003)                (0.013)      (0.012)
-- Transportation                         0.000             0.053***        -0.052***
                                         (0.004)                (0.013)      (0.013)
-- Information                            0.003                 0.035**     -0.042***
                                         (0.003)                (0.014)      (0.013)
-- Finance                                0.005*            0.135***        -0.142***
                                         (0.003)                (0.013)      (0.013)
-- Real Estate                            0.005             0.089***        -0.087***
                                         (0.003)                (0.014)      (0.012)



                                           52
-- Profession                                       0.003             0.086***          -0.087***
                                                   (0.004)             (0.013)           (0.012)
-- Management                                       0.001             0.118***          -0.130***
                                                   (0.004)             (0.019)           (0.019)
-- Admin Support                                   0.005*             0.034***          -0.034***
                                                   (0.003)             (0.013)           (0.013)
-- Education                                       -0.004             0.138***          -0.137***
                                                   (0.003)             (0.013)           (0.013)
-- Healthcare                                      0.007**             0.020*            -0.021
                                                   (0.003)             (0.012)           (0.012)
-- Arts and Entertainment                          0.009**            0.103***          -0.108***
                                                   (0.003)             (0.014)           (0.013)
-- Accommodation and Food                         0.013***            -0.046***         0.047***
                                                   (0.003)             (0.013)           (0.012)
-- Other                                           0.006**            0.067***          -0.069***
                                                   (0.003)             (0.014)           (0.013)
-- Public Admin                                   -0.013***           0.177***          -0.176***
                                                   (0.003)             (0.015)           (0.014)
-- Unavailable                                      0.021               0.050            -0.051
                                                   (0.023)             (0.084)           (0.078)


Year Fixed Effect?                                    Y                   Y                 Y
Number of Organization-Year Observations          1,980,940           1,784,798         1,787,544
Psuedo-R2                                           0.016               0.030             0.025



      Note: Logistic regressions. Marginal effects are shown above. Agriculture is the omitted
      industry and Northeast is the omitted region. Standard errors are clustered at the
      organization level.




                                                     53
                                                      Table 6 Misattribution and Productivity

                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)        (7)         (8)        (9)         (10)
                              VA          VA          VA          VA           VA           VA         VA          VA         VA          VA
                           0.054***    0.059***    0.053***    0.054***     0.071***     0.060***   0.060***    0.031***   0.031***    0.029***
IT Capital (ITit)
                             0.008       0.008       0.008       0.008        0.009        0.009      0.009       0.007      0.007       0.007
                           0.260***    0.258***    0.259***    0.260***     0.258***     0.256***   0.263***     0.059       0.055      0.06
Non-IT Capital (Kit)
                             0.014       0.014       0.014       0.014        0.015        0.015      0.015      0.06        0.058      0.062
                           0.725***    0.720***    0.724***    0.725***     0.709***     0.716***   0.718***    0.810***   0.804***    0.817***
Non-IT Labor (Lit)
                             0.017       0.017       0.017       0.017        0.019        0.019      0.019       0.047      0.046       0.048
                           -0.004***   -0.004***   -0.006***   -0.004***   -0.004***     -0.002**   -0.004***    -0.001      0.001      -0.001
Non-Pecuniary OSS
                             0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001       0.001         0.001      0.001       0.001      0.001       0.001
Non-Pecuniary OSS                      0.343***                               0.086                              0.161
  x ITIntensityit                        0.106                                0.17                               0.135
Non-Pecuniary OSS                                  0.014***                               -0.006*                          -0.006**
  x IT Producer                                      0.002                                 0.003                             0.003
Non-Pecuniary OSS                                                0.004                                0.002                             0.003
  x FIRE                                                         0.003                                0.003                             0.003
                                                                             -0.066       -0.031     -0.053      -0.047    -0.157***    -0.032
Servers QA Stock (OSS)
                                                                              0.05         0.051      0.05        0.038      0.038       0.038
                                                                             -0.029       -0.014      -0.04      -0.038    -0.185***    -0.044
Servers QA Stock (Prop.)
                                                                              0.059        0.058      0.06        0.044      0.043       0.045
Servers QA Stock (OSS)                                                       -0.474                             3.037***
  x ITIntensityit                                                             1.53                                1.172
Servers QA Stock (Prop.)                                                   -9.606***                             -3.056
  x ITIntensityit                                                            3.054                                2.162
Servers QA Stock (OSS)                                                                  -0.282***                          1.111***
  x IT Producer                                                                            0.05                              0.148
Servers QA Stock (Prop.)                                                                -0.315***                          1.240***
  x IT Producer                                                                           0.043                              0.205
Servers QA Stock (OSS)                                                                               -0.236                             0.066
  x FIRE                                                                                              0.161                             0.144



                                                                            54
Servers QA Stock (Prop.)                                                                                            -0.298                                    0.081
  x FIRE                                                                                                             0.204                                    0.183
Year Fixed Effect?                Y             Y             Y               Y            Y               Y             Y            Y             Y           Y
Industry Fixed Effect          NAICS-2      NAICS-2      NAICS-2        NAICS-2        NAICS-2         NAICS-2       NAICS-2          N             N           N
Firm FE                           N             N             N               N            N               N             N            Y             Y           Y
Number of firm-year obs.        10,355       10,354        10,355         10,355         8,371           8,371         8,371        8,281        8,281        8,281
Number of firms                 1,566        1,566          1,566           1,566        1,380           1,380         1,380        1,290        1,290        1,290
R2                               0.93        0.931          0.931           0.931        0.928           0.933         0.928        0.975        0.976        0.975
            Note: We restrict the sample of this exercise to the 1,577 firms that overlap in our study's data and Nagle (2019)'s data. We follow
            Nagle (2019)'s notation and variable construction for value added (            ), IT capital (      ), non-IT capital ( ), non-IT labor ( ),
            unpriced open source software (                            ), IT intensity (                 ) and IT producer (               ). According to
            this definition, the variable     includes both the value of IT hardware at the firm and three times the value of IT labor at the firm. IT
            hardware is computed by multiplying the firm's stock of PCs and physical servers by the average price of a PC or server that year. The
            variable                          includes only firms' use of Linux as unpriced open source software.                        is constructed by
            dividing the deflated value of the IT hardware at the firm in a given year by deflated sales in that year.                      is an indicator
            variable equal to 1 if the firm operates in an industry considered to be IT-producing. We introduce new variables
                    ,                    (    ), and                      (      . ).       is an indicator variable equal to 1 if the firm is in Finance,
            Insurance or Real Estate.                      (     ) and                      (      . ) represent the quality adjusted server software used
            by the firm in a year. When a firm used open source server software in a year, Server QA Stock (Prop.) is zero, while users of proprietary
            server software have a Server QA Stock (OSS) of zero. Note that the QA Stock variable not only captures use of server software, but
            also captures other unobserved complementary technology use that server use is a good proxy for. Standard errors are clustered at the
            firm level. All regressions include controls listed in Nagle (2019), Table 7, except for columns (8)-(10) which include firm fixed effects
            rather than industry fixed effects.




                                                                                       55
