                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHY WORKING FROM HOME WILL STICK

                                      Jose Maria Barrero
                                       Nicholas Bloom
                                        Steven J. Davis

                                      Working Paper 28731
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28731


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




We thank Stanford University, the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Asociacion
Mexicana de Cultura A.C., the Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, the
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, and Toulouse Network for Information
Technology for financial support. We are grateful to comments from presentations at the AEA,
Berkeley, CUNY, HAI, Hoover Institution, ITAM, LSE, Maryland, Munich, Rice, Northwestern,
Ridge, Princeton, Stanford, Wharton, The World Bank, and ZEW-Mannheim. We thank Corinne
Stephenson for help generating our WFH media data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Working from Home Will Stick
Jose Maria Barrero, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 28731
April 2021
JEL No. D13,D23,E24,G18,J22,M54,R3

                                         ABSTRACT

COVID-19 drove a mass social experiment in working from home (WFH). We survey more than
30,000 Americans over multiple waves to investigate whether WFH will stick, and why. Our data
say that 20 percent of full workdays will be supplied from home after the pandemic ends,
compared with just 5 percent before. We develop evidence on five reasons for this large shift:
better-than-expected WFH experiences, new investments in physical and human capital that
enable WFH, greatly diminished stigma associated with WFH, lingering concerns about crowds
and contagion risks, and a pandemic-driven surge in technological innovations that support WFH.
We also use our survey data to project three consequences: First, employees will enjoy large
benefits from greater remote work, especially those with higher earnings. Second, the shift to
WFH will directly reduce spending in major city centers by at least 5-10 percent relative to the
pre-pandemic situation. Third, our data on employer plans and the relative productivity of WFH
imply a 5 percent productivity boost in the post-pandemic economy due to re-optimized working
arrangements. Only one-fifth of this productivity gain will show up in conventional productivity
measures, because they do not capture the time savings from less commuting.

Jose Maria Barrero                             Steven J. Davis
Instituto Tecnologico Autonomo de Mexico       Booth School of Business
Av. Camino a Santa Teresa #930                 The University of Chicago
Col. Heroes de Padierna                        5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
CP. 10700.                                     Chicago, IL 60637
Alc. Magdalena Contreras                       and NBER
CDMX                                           Steven.Davis@ChicagoBooth.edu
Mexico
jose.barrero@itam.mx

Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu
1. Introduction

       COVID-19 triggered a mass social experiment in working from home (WFH). Americans,
   for example, supplied roughly half of paid workhours from home between April and December
   2020, as compared to five percent before the pandemic.1 This seismic shift in working
   arrangements has attracted no shortage of opinions about whether WFH will stick. Netflix CEO
   Reed Hastings offers one view: "I don't see any positives. Not being able to get together in person,
   particularly internationally, is a pure negative." At the other end of the spectrum, Rite Aid CEO
   Heyward Donigan reports, "We have adapted to work-from-home unbelievably well... We've
   learned that we can work remote, and we can now hire and manage a company remotely." Apple
   CEO Tim Cook expresses an intermediate view, "In all candor, it's not like being together
   physically....[But] I don't believe that we'll return to the way we were because we've found that
   there are some things that actually work really well virtually."2
       We develop systematic evidence about whether WFH will stick, why, and some of the
   economic and societal implications. To do so, we exploit multiple waves of data from an original
   cross-sectional survey of our design ­ the Survey of Working Arrangements and Attitudes
   (SWAA). We have fielded the survey about once a month since May 2020, thus far collecting over
   30,000 responses from working-age Americans. We ask about working arrangements during the
   pandemic, personal experiences with WFH, worker preferences and employer plans about the
   extent of WFH after the pandemic ends, attitudes about contagion risks and vaccination, and much
   more.3 Our survey data track the incidence of working from home and provide insights into how a
   persistent shift to WFH will affect worker well-being, productivity, commuting time, spending
   near business premises, and sales tax revenues in large cities. Our data also throw new light on
   desires to work remotely, the stigma associated with WFH, lingering concerns about working or
   commuting in close proximity to others, and more. To supplement our analysis of the survey data,
   we draw on informal conversations with dozens of U.S. business executives.



   1
     Drawing on several independently conducted surveys, Barrero et al. (2020), Bick et al. (2020),
   Brynjolfsson et al. (2020), and Ozimek (2020) find that about half of paid workhours were supplied from
   home in the Spring of 2020. Figure 1 below shows the WFH share from May 2020 to March 2021.
   2
     The quotations are from Cutter (2020).
   3
     Our data are available to other researchers at www.WFHresearch.com. We continue to field the SWAA
   and update the website about once a month.


                                                     1
    Forty percent of SWAA respondents aged 20-64 worked from home in May 2020, while 26
percent worked on business premises and just over a third did not work. Figure 1 shows,
accordingly, the share of full paid working days worked home exceeded 60 percent in May. The
incidence of WFH fell steadily from May to late October, before rebounding in November as the
pandemic worsened and government authorities re-imposed some restrictions on commercial and
social activities. As of March 2021, employees supplied about 45 percent of paid labor services
from home. In comparison, workers supplied only 5 percent of full workdays from home in 2017-
2018 (BLS, 2018). The share WFH three or more days per week rose from 0.75% in 1980 to 2.4%
in 2010 (Mateyka et al., 2012) and 4.0% in 2018 (BLS, 2018).4 Thus, the huge COVID-induced
shift to WFH follows a slow, modest rise over the previous forty years.
    The SWAA puts the following question to employed respondents: "After COVID, in 2022
and later, how often is your employer planning for you to work from home?" According to the
responses, employers plan for workers to supply 21.3 (0.2) percent of full workdays from home
after the pandemic ends. Roughly speaking, WFH is feasible for half of employees, and the typical
plan for that half involves two workdays per week at home. Business leaders often mention
concerns around workplace culture, motivation, and innovation as important reasons to bring
workers onsite three or more days per week. Many business people also tell us they see net benefits
to WFH one or two days per week, consistent with survey evidence in Altig et al. (2020a).
    Most workers welcome the option to work remotely one or more days per week, according to
our data. SWAA respondents are willing to accept pay cuts of 7 percent, on average, for the option
to work from home two or three days per week after the pandemic. While the preferred frequency
of WFH varies greatly among individuals, desires to work from home part of the week are
pervasive across groups defined by age, education, gender, earnings, and family circumstances.
The actual incidence of WFH rises steeply with education and earnings.
    Our projection for the extent of WFH in the post-pandemic economy is four times its pre-
pandemic level, but only two-fifths of its average level during the pandemic. Thus, our data also
imply a partial reversal of the massive COVID-induced surge in WFH. The reversal mostly
involves adjustments on the intensive margin, whereby many persons WFH five days per week

4
 The pre-pandemic wage premium or discount associated with WFH varies greatly with observable
worker characteristics, occupation, and WFH intensity (Pabilonia and Vernon, 2021). Average wages
associated with WFH evolved from a large discount in 1980, conditional on controls, to a modest
premium by 2014 (White, 2019).


                                                  2
during the pandemic will shift to two or three days per week after it ends. Data collected from a
similar survey for the United Kingdom show very similar patterns (Taneja et al., 2021).
       As to why working from home will partly stick after the pandemic, we develop several pieces
of evidence and analysis. First, COVID-19 necessitated costly experimentation with WFH by
millions of individuals and organizations. Basic decision theory predicts that compulsory
experimentation with a new technology has persistent effects after the forcing event ends, as
decision makers re-optimize working arrangements in light of newly gleaned information. In line
with this prediction, many SWAA respondents report better-than-expected WFH experiences and
higher productivity at home. They also report better-than-expected WFH experiences on average,
pointing to excessive pessimism about WFH before the pandemic.5 In addition, the pandemic
created the conditions for coordinated experiments with WFH in networks comprised of firms,
customers and suppliers, yielding lessons and know-how that were hard to acquire beforehand. In
sum, the pandemic swept aside inertial forces related to experimentation costs, biased expectations,
and coordination within networks that had previously inhibited remote work.
       Second, the average worker has invested 15 hours of time and $561 dollars in home equipment
to facilitate WFH, according to our survey data. The dollar value of these investments amounts to
0.7 percent of annual GDP. In addition, the pandemic prompted firms and other organizations to
improve back-end systems and equipment that support working from home. As a result of these
pandemic-driven investments, both workers and firms are now better positioned to work from
home effectively.
       Third, the pandemic has altered attitudes in ways that support a shift to WFH. Two-thirds of
SWAA respondents report improved perceptions about WFH among some, most or all "people
you know" since the start of the pandemic, while less than seven percent report any deterioration.
In addition, when asked for their views on social distancing after a vaccine becomes "widely
available," only 28 percent of respondents say they will fully return to pre-COVID activities. The
rest say they will remain wary of crowded elevators, subway travel, indoor restaurant dining, and
ride sharing. Lingering fears of proximity to others will prop up the demand for WFH.
       Fourth, the share of new U.S. patent applications that advance WFH technologies more than
doubled from January to September 2020, greatly surpassing its previous peak (Bloom, Davis and
Zhestkova, 2021). This development will raise the quality and efficiency of remote work over time,

5
    Ozimek (2020) obtains a similar result in a survey of U.S. hiring managers.


                                                      3
reinforcing a shift to WFH well after the pandemic ends. The surge in patents that advance WFH
technologies fits nicely with theories that stress market size effects on the direction of technical
change (e.g., Acemoglu, 2002). COVID-19 also spurred innovations in the regulatory sphere,
easing the way for a large rise in virtual consultations by doctors, nurse practitioners, clinical
psychologists and social workers (Bajowalla et al., 2020 and Webster, 2020). If regulations remain
supportive of virtual consultations, WFH will be more practical for healthcare professionals.
    Turning to societal consequences, our data imply large worker benefits of a post-pandemic
shift to WFH, mainly due to reduced commuting time. The benefits will accrue disproportionately
to the highly educated and well paid. Indeed, the gap between employer plans regarding WFH and
employee desires is small for highly paid workers, but it becomes wider and wider as we look
down the earnings distribution. WFH is also more valuable to highly paid workers, because they
have longer commutes and a greater opportunity cost per unit time.
    The shift to WFH will also have highly uneven geographic effects, diminishing the fortunes
of cities like San Francisco with high rates of inward commuting. Using our data on working
arrangements, commuting patterns, and worker spending near employer premises, we estimate that
the post-pandemic shift to WFH will lower expenditures on meals, entertainment, personal
services, and shopping in major cities by 5 to 10 percent of pre-pandemic overall spending.
Conversely, the shift to WFH will commercially benefit other communities, as outward
commuting drops. Evidence for these effects during the pandemic in De Fraja et al. (2021) aligns
well with our evidence of projected effects after the pandemic.
    Finally, many persons report higher productivity when WFH during the pandemic than on
business premises before the pandemic. Using our survey data on self-assessed productivity effects
of WFH, employer plans about who will work from home in the post-pandemic economy,
commuting times and more, we estimate that the re-optimization over working arrangements in
the post-pandemic economy will boost productivity by 4.6 percent relative to the pre-pandemic
situation. The main source of this productivity boost is the savings in commuting time afforded by
more WFH. This gain is missed by conventional productivity measures. Indeed, as conventionally
measured, we project a productivity boost of only 1.0 percent in the post-pandemic economy.
    Our study relates to a rapidly growing literature on WFH. First, regarding productivity effects,
Bloom et al. (2015) find that WFH brings a 13% average productivity gain in randomized control
trials of Chinese call-center workers. Nearly a third of the gain reflects more calls per minute, and



                                                 4
the rest is due to fewer breaks. Similarly, Emanuel and Harrington (2021) report that WFH raises
productivity 8% in a natural experiment with call-center workers at a large US firm. However,
they also find negative selection of employees into WFH. The adoption of a work-from-anywhere
approach yielded a 4% productivity gain in a natural experiment involving U.S. Patent Office
workers (Choudhury et al., 2021). Similarly, Angelici and Profeta (2020) find that granting
employees some flexibility over when and where to work raises productivity in a field experiment
at a large Italian firm. Kunn et al. (2020) report lower performance among elite chess players when
competing from home during the pandemic, perhaps because the home environment is less
conducive to peak performance in cognitively demanding tasks.
    A second strand of research considers the impact of WFH on employees. In a field experiment
involving persons seeking call-center jobs, Mas and Pallais (2017) find that applicants will accept
an 8 percent wage cut, on average, for the option to work from home in a full-time job. However,
WFH conditions during the pandemic have been far from ideal due to children at home and shared
working spaces, reducing family satisfaction (Möhring et al., 2020). Examining data for thousands
of firms, DeFilippis et al. (2020) find that WFH involves more (but shorter) meetings per day,
more email, and longer workdays. This second strand is part of a broader literature on alternative
working arrangements and work-life balance (e.g., Bloom et al., 2009 and Mas and Pallais, 2020).
    Finally, much recent research examines the extent and incidence of WFH during the COVID
pandemic and the outcomes associated with WFH. See, for example, Adams-Prassle et al. (2020),
Barrero et al. (2020b), Bartik et al. (2020), Bick et al. (2020), Brynjolfsson et al. (2020), Mongey
et al. (2020) and Ozimek (2020). Davis et al. (2021), Favilukis et al. (2020), Pagano et al. (2020)
and Papanikolaou and Schmidt (2020) study the relationship between firm-level stock returns
during the COVID-19 pandemic and the capacity of their employees to work from home. Behrens
et al. (2021) offer a general equilibrium analysis of WFH and its consequences. Like us, they stress
that the effects of a shift to WFH are highly uneven across people and locations.
    The next section provides more information about our survey. Section 3 quantifies WFH
before, during, and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Section 4 explains why the COVID-induced
shift to WFH will partly stick, and it offers several pieces of evidence on the mechanisms in play.
Section 5 considers broader societal consequences of a persistent shift to WFH. Section 6 offers
concluding remarks.




                                                 5
2.      The Survey of Working Arrangements and Attitudes
     Since May 2020, we have run monthly waves of the Survey of Working Arrangements and
Attitudes (SWAA). We design the survey instrument and pay two commercial survey providers,
QuestionPro and Inc-Query, to recruit respondents and field surveys over the internet. Each survey
includes 40 to 55 questions on demographics, working arrangements, earnings, commuting,
spending near employer premises, expectations and experiences related to WFH, perceptions, and
more.6 Figure A.1 displays two key SWAA questions ­ one about the respondent's WFH
experience during the pandemic, and another about employer plans regarding WFH after the
pandemic. We provide more information about individual questions below.7
     Thus far, the SWAA went to field in ten waves, as follows: 21-25 May 2020, 30 June to 9
July (July wave), 21-28 August, 29 September to 2 October (September), 28 October to 3
November (October), 17-20 November, 12-28 December, 19-27 January 2021, 26-28 February,
and 16-22 March. We ran two parallel surveys in August, collecting 2,500 responses from each
survey provider and obtaining similar results for each August sample. We used a single provider
for all other waves, collecting 5,000 responses apiece in December and January, 3,250 in February,
and 2,500 responses apiece in the other waves. Median survey completion time (after dropping
"speeders") ranges from 3 minutes, 10 seconds in the May wave to 10 minutes, 55 seconds in the
December 2020 wave. We treat our data as repeated cross sections, although we cannot preclude
the possibility that a given respondent appears in multiple waves.
     Our target survey population is U.S. residents, 20-64 years old, who earned at least $20,000
in 2019. Given these parameters, our survey providers recruit respondents from lists of verified
persons supplied by leading market research aggregators, who gather potential respondents from
multiple sources. One reason to draw from multiple sources is that the form of respondent
compensation depends on where and how they are recruited for online surveys. Some respondents
receive airline miles in exchange for survey participation, for instance, while others receive cash
or credits that unlock valuable features of internet games. No respondents sign up specifically for
our survey.




6
  We do not collect personally identifiable information, do not contact respondents directly, and have no
way to re-contact them.
7
  We set forth all SWAA questions in Barrero, Bloom and Davis (2021).


                                                   6
    Prescott et al. (2016), Starr et al. (2020) and Bick and Blandin (2021) provide validation
exercises and useful discussions of these sorts of online surveys. We adopt many of their practices
to enhance data quality. For example, we drop persons who complete the survey in less than 2
minutes in May, less than 3 minutes in the July to November 2020 waves, and less than 5 minutes
in the December 2020 to March 2021 waves. Given the nature and number of our survey questions,
these "speeders" are unlikely to supply carefully considered responses. Dropping speeders cuts the
sample by about 20 percent.
    We seek a sample that is broadly representative of our target population. To that end, we
reweight the raw survey data (again, after dropping speeders) to match the joint distribution of
persons over age-sex-education-earnings categories in Current Population Survey (CPS) data from
2010 to 2019.8 Figure 2 shows marginal distributions of the raw survey responses, the reweighted
responses, and CPS data over age, sex, education, and earnings categories. The raw data over
represent persons with high earnings and high education, but the reweighted distributions match
CPS data in each of these dimensions. Both raw and reweighted SWAA data are distributed
similarly to the CPS data for the other variables in Figure 2, including those that are not part of our
reweighting scheme. Still, our reweighted data may be selected in other respects that correlate with
outcomes of interest. For example, internet survey participants might spend more time online and
differ from non-participants in their WFH experiences and attitudes. We cannot rule out this
possibility. Given near universal penetration of broadband internet, smartphones, and similar
devices in 2020, we see this concern as less worrisome today than 10 or 15 years ago.
    Table A.1 reports summary statistics for the reweighted sample. The modal respondent is a
man, 40 to 50 years old with one to three years of college, who earned $40 to $50 thousand in
2019. Our core sample has 28,597 observations after dropping "speeders" and cleaning up
inconsistent responses. Some variables have fewer observations, because they derive from
questions not posed in all survey waves. Before the July wave, for example, we did not ask about
employer plans regarding WFH after the pandemic. In addition, certain questions go only to
persons WFH as of the survey date or at some point during the pandemic.




8
 We separately reweight the SWAA data for each survey provider, pooling over waves for a given
provider.


                                                  7
3.      Working Arrangements before, during, and after COVID-19
     a. The extent of working from home before and during the Pandemic
     We measure the extent of WFH before the pandemic using American Time Use Survey data
for about 10,000 wage and salary workers in 2017 and 2018, as detailed in Appendix A. To
estimate employment status and working arrangements during the pandemic, we draw on the
SWAA, which includes the following question in the May through October waves:
      Currently (this week) what is your working status?
        -   Working on my business premises
        -   Working from home
        -   Still employed and paid, but not working
        -   Unemployed
        -   Not working and not looking for work
In November, we switched to a three-question structure that yields more granular data on the extent
of WFH. The first question elicits the respondent's current work status:
        Currently (this week) what is your work status?
        -   Working, whether on business premises or working from home
        -   Still employed and paid, but not working
        -   Unemployed, looking for work
        -   Unemployed, awaiting recall to my old job
        -   Not working, and not looking for work
For those who work, we then ask: How many full days are you working this week (whether at home
or on business premises)? Response options are 1, 2, ..., 5+ days. The third question asks where
work happens: You have indicated that you are working this week. How many full paid working
days are you working from home this week? Response options are: None, all my paid working
days were on business premises and separate options for 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5+ full paid days WFH.
Eighty-five percent of responses to these questions imply either full-time work on business
premises or full-time work from home. We classify someone as WFH if full workdays at home
account for at least 66 percent of all paid workdays.
     We draw on responses to these questions to provide information about work status during the
pandemic. In May 2020, when stay-at-home orders covered most of the country (Coibion et al.,
2020), 40 percent of respondents worked from home, while only 26 percent worked on business



                                                 8
premises and 34 percent were not working. In March 2021, however, 31 percent worked mainly
from home and 43 percent worked mainly on business premises.9 Our data also show the partial
recovery in labor market conditions, with the share of responses classified under "not working"
dropping from 34 to 27 percent between May 2020 and March 2021.
        Figure 1 summarizes the extent of WFH before and during the pandemic. 10 WFH during
the pandemic dwarfs the extent in 2017-18. Across ten survey waves from May 2020 to March
2021, an average of 48.6 percent of all paid working days were provided from home, about 10
times the pre-pandemic share. WFH peaked in May at 61 percent of paid working days and fell
back to 43 percent in late October, before climbing back to 51 percent in November. Since August,
the SWAA also asks, "During the COVID-19 pandemic have you at any point worked primarily
from home, for example, due to lockdowns or because it was unsafe or otherwise not possible to
work on business premises?" Nearly 56 percent of respondents answer "yes" to this question.
    b. Who works from home?
        Table 1 considers how the incidence of WFH varies across groups in the SWAA data. As
before, we treat respondents in the November and subsequent waves as mainly WFH if they
supplied at least 66 percent of full workdays from home during the survey week. The share of
persons mainly WFH rises steeply with education during the period from May 2020 to March
2021, consistent with evidence for April and May in Bick, Blandin and Mertens (2020) and
Brynjolfsson et al. (2020). The share of SWAA respondents mainly WFH ranges from 10 percent
for those who did not finish high school to 50 percent of those with a graduate degree. WFH


9
  A natural question is how our figures compare to Current Population Survey (CPS) data, which show
25% of employed persons 20-64 years old WFH in December 2020. See https://www.bls.gov/cps/effects-
of-the-coronavirus-covid-19-pandemic.htm#data. This CPS figure excludes persons "whose telework was
unrelated to the pandemic, such as those who worked entirely from home before the pandemic." Judging
from 2018 ATUS data, this exclusion lowers the reported WFH share in CPS data by 4-5 percentage
points. In addition, the SWAA excludes persons who earned less than $20,000 in 2019. Thus, the SWAA
population excludes low-wage, part-time workers who tend to be concentrated in retail and service sector
jobs that involve face-to-face interactions and little scope for WFH.
10
   We count persons "Still employed and paid, but not working" as Not Working. We count employed
persons as Working from Home, if they worked at least 66% of full workdays from home. In computing
the WFH shares for the May-October waves, we assume persons classify themselves as WFH if they
work at least 66% of full workdays from home, and we impute the share of paid workdays performed at
home in November and December to the earlier months, conditional on classification as Working from
Home or Working on Business Premises. In practice, 85% of employed respondents in November and
December report working zero or all full workdays at home, and the WFH shares are not very sensitive to
alternative thresholds for mainly WFH.


                                                   9
propensity also rises steeply with earnings: It is more than twice as high among those earning at
least $150 thousand in 2019 as among those earning $20-50 thousand. WFH is slightly less
prevalent among men than women. It varies little by age, except for a notable drop among persons
50-64. The incidence of WFH is somewhat higher in service-producing sectors, households with
children, and Democratic-leaning states.11
        Table 2 reports the results of regressing an indicator for mainly WFH in the survey week
on observables. All specifications include survey wave fixed effects and some include age-bin and
industry effects, as indicated. We scale the continuous independent variables (years of education,
log earnings, internet quality, Joe Biden's November 2020 vote share in the respondent's state) to
mean zero and unit standard deviation. 12 Education and earnings are the strongest marginal
predictors of WFH during the pandemic. For example, a unit standard deviation increase in
education involves a 6-9 percentage point increase in the likelihood of mainly WFH during the
survey week, conditional on other observables. The conditional likelihood of mainly WFH is 8-9
percentage points higher for a unit standard deviation increase in earnings. These education and
earnings effects are highly statistically significant. The conditional likelihood of mainly WFH also
shows increases with Joe Biden's vote share, increases with internet quality, and is lower for men
than women, but the coefficients are smaller than for earnings and education. In contrast, the
coefficients on children under 18 in the household and their interaction with gender are statistically
insignificant and often small in the Table 2 regressions. While much of the narrative surrounding
the economic impact of the pandemic has focused on industry differences, controlling for industry
has little impact on the pattern of results reported in Table 2.
     c. How much working from home after the pandemic?
        To what extent will the huge shift to WFH persist after the pandemic ends? To throw
some light on this issue, we pose the following question to SWAA respondents:
      After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often is your employer planning for you to work full
      days at home?

11
   We classify states according to the Cook Political Report's Partisan Voting Index, which uses data from
the 2012 and 2016 presidential elections and is published at https://cookpolitical.com/state-pvis. While
the Cook Index designates New Hampshire, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin as "EVEN," we treat them as
"Blue" based on Joe Biden's wins in these states in the 2020 presidential election.
12
   Our survey elicits data on earnings, education, and internet quality for discrete categories to which we
assign numerical values. For example, we set schooling to 10 for persons who did not finish high school,
12 to those who finished high school education but did not obtain additional schooling, and so on.


                                                    10
       -   Never
       -   About once or twice per month
       -   1, 2, 3, 4, or 5+ days per week [separate options for each]
       -   My employer has not discussed this matter with me or announced a policy about it
       -   I have no employer
Before the August wave, the question specified "After COVID in 2021..." instead of 2022.
       Responses to this question provide a basis for projecting the percent of full workdays to be
provided from home after the pandemic ends. In constructing our projection, we drop persons who
have no employer in the survey week. We assign zeros to "Never" and "About once or twice per
month," 20 percent for 1 full day per week WFH, 40 percent for 2 full days, and so on. We also
assign zeros to "My employer has not discussed this matter with me or announced a policy about
it" on the view that employers are unlikely to discuss the matter with workers in jobs for which
WFH is impractical or infeasible.
       Implementing these calculations using SWAA data for March 2021, employer plans imply
that WFH will account for 22.2 (1.0) of all workdays in the post-pandemic economy. When
averaging over survey waves from July 2020 to March 2021, the figure is 21.3 (0.2) percent, which
is about four times the pre-pandemic WFH share in ATUS data. In the March 2021 wave,
employers plan for 31.7 (1.3) percent of their employees to work from home at least one full day
per week after the pandemic. Comparing plans for the post-pandemic economy to the actual March
2021 outcomes, 43 percent of the anticipated drop in WFH is due to persons who expect to shift
from 5+ to fewer days per week WFH. This large role for intensive-margin adjustments aligns
with what we hear from most business managers. By and large, they want employees on premises
three or more days per week to support innovation, employee motivation, and company culture.
They regard physical interactions on premises as essential but think three or four days per week
onsite is sufficient. Many business leaders also see it as essential to coordinate employee days and
times on premises to ensure overlap on the worksite.
       When asked directly, employers also say they plan much more WFH after the pandemic
ends than before it struck. For example, a Conference Board survey of mostly larger firms
conducted in September 2020 says that 24 percent of employees will be mainly WFH "1 year after




                                                11
the pandemic subsides," as compared to 6 percent "before COVID-19."13 Altig et al. (2020a, 2021)
ask business executives about WFH plans in the Survey of Business Uncertainty (SBU), a broad
sample of American companies fielded by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. 14 The SBU
question design is very similar to the SWAA question, facilitating a comparison. As of May 2020,
firms in the SBU project that 18 percent of full workdays will be performed at home in the post-
pandemic economy. As of February 2021, the SBU-based projection is 15 percent.
       There are several possible reasons why the SWAA yields a larger WFH projection than the
SBU. First, by virtue of its focus on persons 20-64 who earned at least $20,000 in 2019, the SWAA
excludes many low-wage and part-time jobs that are unsuitable for WFH (e.g., staff at fast-food
restaurants). These jobs account for a modest share of aggregate labor compensation but a sizable
share of total employment. Second, as discussed in Section 2, the SWAA data may over represent
persons who are more comfortable with online interactions and more likely to work from home.
Third, the SBU does not cover government jobs, which may offer greater-than-average scope for
WFH. Finally, the SBU sample is broadly representative of private activity across industries and
regions, but it under-represents younger firms. Thus, insofar as WFH is more common at younger
firms (within industries), the SBU is likely to understate the projected extent of WFH. We lack the
data needed to fully reconcile SWAA and SBU projections for the post-pandemic WFH share.
Nevertheless, it is reassuring that multiple surveys of workers and employers support the
hypothesis that WFH will be 3-4 times as common after the pandemic ends than before 2020.
       Returning to the SWAA data, Table 3 tabulates employer plans for the extent of WFH after
the pandemic. WFH plans by age, sex, education, earnings and so on vary similarly to the actual
incidence of WFH during the pandemic. In Table A.10b, we re-estimated the regression
specification in Column (7) of Table 2 using the post-pandemic plans for WFH in place of actual
WFH. Employer plans imply that the post-pandemic share of full workdays provided from home
will rise with worker education and, especially, with earnings ­ both unconditionally and
conditional on the other observables considered in Table 2.




13
   See Chart 1 in Steemers et al. (2020). We obtain 24 percent by assigning a WFH value of 0 to firms
who say less than 10% of their employees will mainly work remotely after the pandemic, a value of 15 to
those who say 10-20 percent, a value of 30 to those who say 20-40 percent, and a value of 40 to those
who say 40 percent or more.
14
   Altig et al. (2020b) describe the Survey of Business Uncertainty in detail.


                                                  12
     d. How much would people like to work from home?
     The SWAA includes the following question: "After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often
would you like to have paid workdays at home?" Response options are "Never," "About once or
twice per month," and separate options for 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5+ days per week. Figure 3 summarizes
the response distribution among all respondents and for the 64 percent that can work from home.
Nearly two-thirds of respondents and nearly 80 percent of those able to work from home want to
do so at least one day per week. About 30 percent want to work from home all week. Roughly half
of employees who can work from home in their current job (and nearly forty percent of all
respondents) want to split the workweek between home and employer premises. Table 3 shows
that preferences for a split workweek are remarkably prevalent: Men and women, old and young,
high and low earners, college graduates and non-college workers, and those in "blue" and "red"
states prefer WFH 40 to 50 percent of working days. Conditional on other observables, men desire
fewer days WFH (Table A.10). Among those with children under 12 and at least some college,
women are much more likely than men to prefer WFH five days a week (Figure A.3).
        We also elicit information about how much workers like or dislike WFH in pay-equivalent
terms.15 First, we ask, "After COVID, in 2022 and later, how would you feel about working from
home 2 or 3 days a week?" Response options are "Positive: I would view it as a benefit or extra
pay," "Neutral," and "Negative: I would view it as a cost or a pay cut." If the response is "Positive"
or "Negative," we follow up with:
      How much of a pay raise [cut] (as a percent of your current pay) would you value as much
      as the option to work from home 2 or 3 days a week?
        -   Less than a 5% pay raise [cut]
        -   A 5 to 10% pay raise [cut]
        -   A 10 to 15% pay raise [cut]
        -   A 15 to 25% pay raise [cut]
        -   A 25 to 35% pay raise [cut]



15
  The discussion in the text and Figure 4 focus on data from the September 2020 to February 2021 waves,
which elicited workers' value of working from home with the question described in the text. In the August
2020 survey wave, the second part of the question involved less granular quantitative options. In the May
and July 2020 waves, we used a one-question approach. Results are similar for these other survey waves.
In March 2021 we began testing a different question design to elicit worker's value of working from home.
See Barrero, Bloom, and Davis (2021) for details.


                                                   13
          -    More than a 35% pay raise.
          As summarized in Figure 4, nearly two-thirds of respondents value the option to work from
home 2 or 3 days per week. More than half see it as worth a pay raise of 5 percent or more, and
nearly one in five see it as worth a pay raise of 15 percent or more. In sum, the vast majority of
SWAA respondents would like to work from home at least one day per week, and more than half
express a willingness to accept a sizable pay cut for the option to work from home part of the week.

4.        The Shift to Working from Home: Mechanisms
          Evidence in the previous section points to a large and persistent shift to WFH, triggered by
the COVID-19 pandemic. This section aims to explain why WFH will be more prevalent after the
pandemic ends than before it struck, and to offer some insight into what drives the future extent of
WFH. We start with a theoretical framework that identifies potential mechanisms at work in a
persistent shift to WFH. We then present evidence on the mechanisms.
      a. A theoretical framework
      Firms have two available production technologies: a traditional technology (T) that involves
little or no remote work by staff, and an alternative technology (R) with heavy reliance on remote
work. Since high levels of WFH were uncommon before COVID-19, we focus on firms that use
technology T before the pandemic. Firms know their payoff distributions under T, but we allow
for imperfect, possibly biased, knowledge of payoff distributions under R. Each period, firm i
chooses an action  in {, , } to maximize the discounted sum of current plus expected future
payoffs, where M stands for mothballing operations at a per-period payoff of zero.
      When operating technology T in period t, the firm's current payoff  is distributed  (;  ),
where  = {normal, pandemic} and  (; normal)   (; pandemic) for all x.16 That is, a
pandemic worsens the payoff distribution   in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance.
Here,  captures the negative effects of social distancing and government orders on the viability
of the traditional technology. The first time a firm uses technology R, it incurs incur a one-time
cost  for upfront investments to enable remote work. Aside from  , the firm's current payoff is
distributed  (;  ) under R, where  is the activity share of firms operating R in t, and higher
values of  improve  in the first-order stochastic dominance sense. Thus,    (;  ) -


16
     If  is stochastic, we assume that it obeys a first-order Markov process.


                                                      14
   (;  ) rises with  for given p, and there is a strategic complementarity across firms in
the choice of production technology. As a real-world example, WFH becomes more viable for law
firms when more of their clients work remotely.
     Consider the implications of a pandemic that arrives at  = 1 when firms know  (;  ). Let
   ,  , )   denote the value function associated with action  under the optimal
 (         

continuation policy, where  is an indicator variable that equals 1 if the firm previously operated
R. Among firms that choose  =  for   0, a sufficient condition for switching to R at  = 1
is    (; 0 ) -  + 1
                  
                    >    (; pandemic) + 1
                                        
                                          . The equilibrium share of switchers
is governed by the weaker requirements that switchers satisfy    (; 1 ) -  + 1
                                                                             
                                                                               >
   (; pandemic) + 1
                  
                    . That is, by raising the activity share of the R technology to 1 > 0 ,
the pandemic makes R more attractive for each firm. Thus, the pandemic's negative impact on
payoffs under T and the pandemic-induced increase in remote work both drive the adoption of
technology R when the pandemic hits.
     Some firms that switch when the pandemic strikes will stick to R after the pandemic ends in
period  =  .17 Here as well, there are two effects: Having incurred the switching costs, some firms
find it optimal to continue with R even if all other firms switch back to T; for these firms,
   (; 0 ) + 
             >    (; normal) + 
                                . Other firms stick to R after the pandemic ends
because    (;  ) + 
                    >    (; normal) + 
                                       , although    (; 0 ) + 
                                                               <
   (; normal) + 
                 . Thus, the strategic complementarity in choice of production
technologies amplifies the pandemic-induced switching response at  = 1 and raises the activity
share of firms that operate R after the pandemic ends.18
     Now consider the situation where firms have imperfect knowledge of their payoff distributions
when operating R. Let   (;
                            ,  ) denote the perceived payoff distribution at t under technology
R, where  is a vector that summarizes information and beliefs about the payoff distribution at .




17
   This claim requires that some firms be close to the switching margin before the pandemic hits.
18
   This conclusion does not rest on coordination failures of the sort that can arise with strategic
complementarities. However, a pandemic could drive a persistent rise in  even with no switching costs, if
strategic complementarities are strong enough to generate multiple equilibria. See Cooper and John (1988)
for an analysis of shock amplification and coordination failures in the presence of strategic
complementarities in payoff functions.


                                                   15
When a firm operates R, its realized payoffs may lead it to update  and revise  . As before,
                                                                                 19


the arrival of a pandemic at  = 1 causes some firms to switch from  =  for   0 to 1 = .
Firms with sufficiently favorable payoffs under R from  = 1, 2, ...  will stick with R after the
pandemic ends. Here, stickiness in technology switching does not require  > 0 or other explicit
switching costs. Instead, payoff observations under R lead to revisions in  
                                                                             that, for some firms,
are favorable enough for them to prefer R to T after the pandemic ends. That is, some firms discover
that remote work is so productive they decide to stick with the practice post-pandemic.
     While not necessary for stickiness, overly pessimistic priors about the viability of remote work
leads to more stickiness. To see this point, start with the case of unbiased priors. Suppose, for
example, that firms know the   distributions up to a mean parameter  that differs among firms.
They also believe, correctly, that the  are distributed (, ), where  is the mean of the  and
 is the standard deviation. Pandemic-induced experimentation and learning leads some firms to
discover they have high values of  , so they stick with R after the pandemic ends. We refer to this
outcome as a tail effect of experimentation. Now consider the case with overly pessimistic priors.
In particular, suppose firms believe the  are distributed (, ), where  <  and the true
distribution remains (, ). In this case, pandemic-induced experimentation and learning yields
even more stickiness through a bias elimination effect.
     As we remarked in the introduction, the pandemic created conditions for coordinated
experiments with WFH in networks comprised of firms, customers and suppliers, yielding lessons
and know-how that were hard to acquire beforehand. Specifically, firms may find it much easier
to learn about  (;  = high) when other firms also seek to learn about technology R ­ a strategic
complementarity in experimentation. Conversely, firms may find it infeasible to learn much about
 (;  = high) when operating in an economy where the traditional technology dominates. This
observation helps understand why many firms may have had highly imperfect, possibly biased,
views about the viability of WFH before the pandemic.
     b. COVID-driven experimentation altered views and plans about working from home
     What has pandemic-driven experimentation revealed about WFH? To help address this
question, we put the following to SWAA respondents who worked from home during COVID:


19
  See Rothschild (1974) on how to formulate  in the case of a Bayesian agent with a prior over support
points on a multinomial distribution.


                                                  16
    Compared to your expectations before COVID (in 2019) how has working from home turned
    out for you?
       -   Hugely better -- I am 20+% more productive than expected
       -   Substantially better -- I am to 10% to 19% more productive than I expected
       -   Better -- I am 1% to 9% more productive than I expected
       -   About the same
       -   Worse -- I am 1% to 9% less productive than I expected
       -   Substantially worse -- I am to 10% to 19% less productive than I expected
       -   Hugely worse -- I am 20%+ less productive than I expected
Figure 5 shows the distribution of responses, and Table A.2 tabulates mean responses by group.
Nearly six in ten respondents say they are more productive than expected when WFH; only 14
percent say they are less productive than expected. On average, productivity when WFH during
the pandemic is 7.1 (0.1) percent higher than expected. These results are consistent with evidence
from a survey of hiring managers in Ozimek (2020).
       Recall that WFH productivity surprises can contribute to a persistent increase in remote
work in two ways. First, there is a tail effect: some employees (and their employers) learn that
WFH works especially well for them ­ enough so to stick with it after the pandemic. In terms of
our theoretical framework, they learn that their  values are in the upper part of (, ). This
effect arises even with unbiased priors. Second, there is a bias elimination effect: Figure 5 says
priors about WFH productivity were negatively biased before the pandemic.
       Do workers and employers adjust their future plans in light of what they learn by
experimenting with WFH during the pandemic? Yes, according to our survey data. Figure 6 shows
that employer plans for the extent of WFH after the pandemic rise with WFH productivity surprises
during the pandemic. Among persons who report that WFH turned out "Hugely better" than
expected, their employers plan an extra 1.5 days per week of WFH in the post-pandemic economy
compared with those who report "Hugely worse," and an extra 0.8 days per week of WFH
compared with those who report "About the same." Worker desires for WFH after the pandemic
also rise with their WFH productivity surprises during the pandemic. Respondents who report that
WFH turned out "Hugely better" than expected desire, on average, 1.6 more days WFH per week
after the pandemic than those who report "Hugely worse." Thus, the information revealed by




                                               17
forced experimentation alters plans and desires for the extent of WFH after the forcing event ends,
in line with the prediction of our theoretical framework.20
     c. Pandemic-induced investments improve WFH capabilities
         The sudden shift to WFH in reaction to COVID-19 spurred workers and firms to invest in
physical, human, and organizational capital that, in turn, improves WFH capabilities. Millions
learned to use teleconferencing software and remote collaboration tools or acquired desks, chairs,
microphones, better computers, etc., to improve WFH capabilities. Because they are durable, these
investments contribute to the persistence of the pandemic-induced shift to WFH.
         To quantify some of these physical and human capital investments, we use responses to
two questions put to SWAA respondents who worked from home during the pandemic:
     ·   How many hours have you invested in learning how to work from home effectively (e.g.,
         learning how to use video-conferencing software) and creating a suitable space to work?
     ·   How much money have you and your employer invested in equipment or infrastructure to
         help you work from home effectively -- computers, internet connection, furniture, etc.? 21
The average respondent in the July 2020 to January 2021 survey waves reported 15.0 (0.2) hours
and $561 (9) in expenditures devoted to at-home investments that enable WFH. Valuing time at
the respondent's wage, the mean dollar-equivalent investment is $1,444 (30) among those with
WFH experience. Summing over respondents (assigning zero to those who did not work from
home), dollar-equivalent investments to enable WFH amount to 1.2 percent of their aggregate
2019 labor income. Multiplying this figure by 0.59, the ratio of aggregate employee compensation
to GDP in 2019Q4, we estimate that aggregate pandemic-induced investments to enable WFH
equal 0.7% of annual GDP.
     We believe this figure substantially understates pandemic-induced investments to enable and
support WFH, because our survey data do not capture investments on business premises and in the
cloud. These include the acquisition and installation of new software and security systems for a


20
   People also exhibit persistent behavioral responses to temporary forcing events in other settings. For
example, Larcom, Rauch, and Willems (2017) find that many commuters permanently altered their travel
routes after a London Underground strike forced them to experiment with alternatives. The permanent
route-altering response is stronger among commuters who live in areas where the Undergound map is more
distorted. This pattern suggests that the behavioral response is at least partly due to information revealed
by forced experimentation.
21
   For those who report positive investments, we also ask, What percentage of this expenditure has been
reimbursed or paid by your employer? The average response to this question is 61 percent.


                                                    18
remote-work environment, new servers and other hardware, and new systems to manage remote
workers. While we cannot quantify these sorts of investments, data from the National Income and
Product Accounts suggest they are sizable. As in nearly all recessions, business investment fell in
2020, but purchases of IT equipment, computers, and peripherals actually rose (Eberly, 2020). By
our calculations, U.S. Private Fixed Investment in Information Processing Equipment and
Software rose more than 10 percent as a share of GDP from 3.8 percent in 2019 to 4.2 percent in
2020 Q2 and Q3. Over the same period, all other components of U.S. Gross Private Domestic
Business Investment fell 16 percent as a share of GDP from 9.6 to 8.1 percent. 22
     d. Stigma associated with WFH diminished during COVID
     Before COVID-19, working from home was often seen as a form of shirking. In line with this
view, a pre-COVID analysis by Emanuel and Harrington (2021) found productivity to be 12%
lower among persons who selected into WFH.23 Because the pandemic compelled tens of millions
to work from home for months on end, it seems plausible that COVID-19 precipitated a favorable
shift in attitudes regarding WFH. In turn, that type of attitude shift could prompt employers to
offer greater opportunities for remote work and leave employees more inclined to work remotely.
To get at this potential attitude shift, the SWAA includes the following question:24
        Since the COVID pandemic began, how have perceptions about working from home
        (WFH) changed among people you know?
        -   Hugely improved -- the perception of WFH has improved among almost all (90-100%)
            the people I know
        -   Substantially improved -- the perception of WFH has improved among most but not all
            of the people I know


22
   Calculations using data series A679RC1Q027SBEA, W987RC1Q027SBEA and GDP downloaded
from FRED on 28 February 2021. A portion of home equipment expenditures reimbursed by employers
and captured in SWAA data may also show up in NIPA data on business investment. However, unless the
reimbursement is for equipment that enters into the employer's asset register and appears on its balance
sheet, it is recorded as a business expense rather than business investment.
23
   To be clear, they find an 8% positive treatment effect of WFH ­ i.e., the same employee is more
productive when WFH. However, those who selected into WFH were 12% less productive than others,
conditional on work location.
24
   Early SWAA waves inserted the following sentence at the start of the question: "Before COVID-19,
`working from home' was sometimes seen as `shirking from home.'" We randomized between question
versions with and without this priming language in the December 2020 wave, obtaining nearly identical
response patterns in each case. We opted for the version without priming language in later waves. Figure
5 and Table A.7 use responses from both versions and pool across all survey waves.


                                                  19
       -   Slightly improved -- the perception of WFH has improved among some people I know
           but not most
       -   No change
       -   Slightly worsened -- the perception of WFH has worsened among some, but not most,
           people I know
       -   Substantially worsened -- the perception of WFH has worsened among most, but not
           all, people I know
       -   Hugely worsened -- the perception of WFH has worsened among almost all (90-100%)
           the people I know
       Two-thirds of SWAA respondents report improved perceptions of WFH among people
they know. Less than 7 percent say perceptions have worsened. Figure 7 shows the full distribution
of responses. Appendix Table A.4 additionally shows that perceptions of WFH improved more
among persons with higher pay and more education. These persons were also more highly exposed
to WFH during the pandemic (Tables 1 and 2), so it is perhaps unsurprising that WFH stigma fell
away more sharply for them. Altogether, these results leave little doubt that the stigma associated
with WFH diminished during the pandemic.
       Our survey evidence also suggests that these attitude shifts will alter post-pandemic
behavior. Specifically, Appendix Table A.7 shows that employer plans and employee desires for
WFH after the pandemic are greater among persons who report larger improvements in perceptions
about WFH among people they know. These results support the view that a COVID-induced shift
in attitudes about WFH will contribute to the stickiness of WFH after the pandemic ends.
   e. Fears of mingling and proximity to others will linger
   Since the pandemic's early stages, the hope has been that a widespread deployment of COVID-
19 vaccines will lead to herd immunity and a safe return to a full range of social and commercial
activities. The United States appears to have good prospects for eventual herd immunity as of April
2021, given the approval of three high-efficacy vaccines and a mass vaccination campaign that is
well underway. However, a successful vaccination campaign does not ensure that attitudes, habits
and norms related to social mingling and proximity to others will revert to their pre-COVID states.
The extent to which they do has profound implications for working arrangements, how and where
people spend their incomes, and the types of businesses and communities that will thrive in the
post-pandemic economy.


                                                20
     To cast some light on how the pandemic affected attitudes about proximity to others, we begain
posing the following question in the SWAA waves in July 2020:
        If a COVID vaccine is discovered and made widely available, which of the following would
        best fit your views on social distancing?
        -   Complete return to pre-COVID activities
        -   Substantial return to pre-COVID activities, but I would still be wary of things like
            riding the subway or getting into a crowded elevator
        -   Partial return to pre-COVID activities, but I would be wary of many activities like
            eating out or using ride-share taxis
        -   No return to pre-COVID activities, as I will continue to social distance
Starting in the December 2020 wave, we made small modifications to this question to reflect
developments in the discovery, approval, and availability of vaccines. 25
        Table 4 shows the response distribution. Only 28 percent of respondents anticipate a
"complete return" to their pre-COVID activities. Another 34 percent anticipate a "substantial
return" but will remain wary of riding the subway or a crowded elevator, and 24 percent say they
will remain wary of eating out or using ride-share taxis. Yet another 14 percent say they will
continue to social distance even after a vaccine is discovered and made widely available.26 Future
actions may not fully align with survey responses, but these results caution against the view that a
successful vaccine campaign will fully restore pre-pandemic behavioral and spending patterns.
This conclusion also finds support in anecdotal reports of pandemic-induced changes in spending
patterns (e.g., Mims 2020, Naughton 2020, Torry 2020, and Putzier 2021) and systematic evidence
that COVID-19 is driving a large increase in the reallocation of jobs across firms (Barrero, Bloom,
and Davis 2020b, and Barrero, Bloom, Davis, and Meyer 2021).
        In the September, October, and November waves, we also asked why of respondents who
do not foresee a full return to pre-COVID activities. Table A.6 reports the results. Eighty-five


25
   In December 2020, the question read "If a COVID vaccine is approved and made widely available"
(emphasis added). In January and February 2021 we removed the reference to approval asking only about
respondent attitudes "If a COVID vaccine becomes widely available..." In March 2021 as vaccine
eligibility became imminently widespread we asked about attitudes "Once most of the population has
been vaccinated against COVID" (emphasis in the original question). See Barrero, Bloom and Davis
(2021) for the full questions.
26
   Table A.5 reports the share of persons who would return completely once a vaccine arrives by group.
The share is notably higher among men, the highly educated, and those with earnings over $150,000.


                                                    21
percent express concerns about the efficacy, safety, or take-up of vaccines, which is consistent
with other survey evidence (e.g., Hopkins 2020 and Tyson, Johnson, and Funk 2020). More than
one-fifth say they are concerned about other diseases, and nearly one-fifth say they have "gotten
used" to social distancing, e-commerce, and avoiding in-person goods and services.
     f. Pandemic-induced innovations will improve remote interactivity
        When remote work becomes a bigger share of all work, it strengthens the incentives to advance
technologies that support WFH. This sentence recasts an old idea in a new context. Schmookler (1966)
and Acemoglu (2002), among others, stress the role of market-size effects on the pace and direction
of technical change. Acemoglu and Lin (2004) find that exogenous increases in (anticipated)
market size stimulate the entry of new drugs that serve the larger market. Changes in relative
market size also alter the direction of pharmaceutical innovations, according to their study. In a
similar spirit, Kremer (2002) argues that small markets inhibit the development of cures for poor-
country diseases like malaria and tuberculosis.
        Bloom, Davis, and Zhestkova (2021) investigate whether COVID-19 has stimulated
innovations that support WFH. To do so, they examine the text content of U.S. patent applications
from 2010 onwards, identifying the ones that advance technologies in support of video
conferencing, telecommuting, remote interactivity, and working from home (collectively, WFH
technologies). The share of new patent applications that advance WFH technologies more than
doubles from January to September of 2020 by their assessment, greatly surpassing its previous
peak, and following an upward trajectory since the onset of the pandemic. Their evidence suggests
that COVID-19 is re-directing technical change in ways that will improve remote interactivity. By
improving the quality and productivity of remote work, this re-direction of technical change will
reinforce the shift to WFH even after the pandemic ends. Other research suggests that the extent of
WFH is indeed responsive to innovations that facilitate remote work. In a study of 14 European
countries from 2008 to 2016, Jerbashian and Vilalta-Bufi (2020) find that faster price declines for
information and communication technologies (ICT) are associated with larger increases WFH, and
that the effect is stronger for industries that rely more heavily on ICT.

5.      Economic and Societal Consequences
        The shift to WFH has important societal consequences. We use our survey data to develop
evidence on consequences related to who benefits, commuting time, worker spending in city
centers, and productivity gains from re-optimizing over working arrangements. Other studies delve


                                                  22
into how WFH affects housing demand (Stanton and Tiwari, 2021), housing prices and rents
(Ramani and Bloom, 2021), the division of labor within households (Alon et al. 2020a, and Del
Boca et al. 2020), and residential electricity consumption (Cicala, 2020) ­ an incomplete list.
   a. WFH benefits will flow mainly to the well paid and highly educated
       Most SWAA respondents desire to work from home two or more days per week after the
pandemic (Figure 3). Most also place high value on the option to work from home 2 or 3 days per
week (Figure 4). Thus, many employees stand to benefit from higher levels of WFH in the post-
pandemic economy. We now develop evidence on the size and distribution of these benefits.
       Table 3 reports information about employee desires and employer plans for WFH in the
post-COVID economy. To compute the entries, we assign midpoint values to individual-level
categorical responses and then compute means within groups using our usual sample weights. The
average levels of desired WFH are high and similar across groups defined by age, sex, education,
earnings, industry sector, and the presence of children. In contrast, employer plans for WFH in the
post-pandemic economy rise steeply with education and earnings. These results suggest the
benefits of the shift to WFH will flow mainly to the highly educated and well paid.
       Figure 8 provides more granular evidence on how WFH desires and plans relate to earnings.
Desires and plans are similar for the highly paid, namely those who earned $225,000 or more in
2019. As we move down the earnings distribution, however, the gap between desires and plans
becomes wider and wider. Among persons in the lowest three earnings groups in Figure 8
(corresponding to those earning less than $50,000 in 2019), the average desired level of WFH is
about 2.2 days per week, while the average plan is for only 0.8 days.
       To quantify the benefits of WFH in the post-pandemic economy, we combine our data on
employer plans with our data on how much employees value the option to WFH 2 or 3 days per
week (Figure 5). We assign zero value to persons who are "Neutral" about WFH, 40 [-40] percent
to those who value the option at "More than a 35% pay raise [cut]," and interval midpoint values
to the remaining responses. On average, employees value the option to work from home at 7.2%
(0.1) of earnings by this measure, which is similar to the 8% estimate that Mas and Pallais (2017)
derive from experimental data on job applications. Next, we adjust each respondent's "raw perk
value" in light of his or her employer's plans for WFH in the post-pandemic economy. Specifically,
we multiply the raw perk value by 0, if the plan is to work from home "Never" or "About once or
twice per month"; 1/2, if the plan is WFH "One day per week"; and 1, if the plan is for WFH


                                                23
multiple days per week. We refer to this adjusted raw perk value as the "value of planned post-
COVID WFH."
       Table 5 reports means by group for the raw perk values and the value of planned post-
COVID WFH. The mean raw perk value ranges from around 5.6 percent of earnings for those who
did not continue to post-secondary education to 9.5 (0.1) percent for those with a graduate degree
and 11.7 (0.2) percent for persons earning more than $150,000. The raw perk value is somewhat
higher for women than men and higher for persons with children in the household. It rises steeply
with earnings. More residential space and nicer homes for high earners probably contribute to this
positive relationship, but average one-way commute times also rise with earnings except at the
very top end (Figure A.2). The average one-way commute time is less than 22 minutes for persons
earning less than $30,000 and about 44 minutes for those earning $150,000 to $250,000.
        Turning to projected consequences, WFH will yield larger benefits (as a percent of
earnings) for men, the college-educated, those with children, and persons with greater earnings. 27
Again, the earnings relationship is very steep: The value of planned post-COVID WFH ranges
from 1.7 (0.1) percent of earnings for persons earning less than $50,000 in 2019 to 6.8 (0.2) percent
for those earning more than $150,000. This steepness reflects two factors: First, higher earners
place greater value on the option to WFH, as seen in the raw perk values. Second, planned WFH
levels in the post-pandemic economy rise sharply with earnings, as seen in Figure 8 and Table 3.
Of course, actual benefits are likely to be shared between workers and employers. So, one could
restate our evidence as saying that the extra surplus created by the shift to WFH is greater for men,
the highly educated, those with children and, especially, those with higher earnings. The division
of this extra surplus between employer and employee depends on the structural characteristics of
the labor market and the wage determination process.
       Altogether, our evidence says that the persistent shift to WFH will yield benefits across a
broad range of worker groups. The mean value of planned post-COVID WFH is positive for all
groups in Table 5. The benefits are larger, and much larger on some dimensions, for groups that
experienced less hardship in the labor market during the pandemic.28 They are especially large for
the better educated and the highly paid.

27
   In unreported results, we obtain similar results when we value WFH using respondent commute times
and hourly wages instead of using their reported willingness to pay for the option to WFH.
28
   See, for example, Adams-Prassl et al. (2020), Alon et al. (2020b), and Mongey et al. (2020) on the
distribution of labor market outcomes during the pandemic.


                                                 24
      b. A big savings in commuting time
      We start with some ballpark estimates of how the shift to WFH affects aggregate commuting
time. According to the Current Population Survey, about 150 million Americans worked for pay
as of December 2020. According to the 2018 American Community Survey, workers spent an
average 54 minutes per day commuting to and from work before the pandemic. 29 Recall that WFH
rose from about 5% of workdays before COVID to 50% during the pandemic. Putting the pieces
together, the COVID-induced shift to WFH yielded an aggregate reduction in commuting time of
(0.5 minus 0.05)(150 million)(54/60 hours) = 61 million hours per work day during the pandemic.
That amounts to (5/7)(30)(61) = 1.3 billion hours per month, or more than 15 billion hours from
mid-March 2020 to March 2021. Since our survey data say that 20 (not 50) percent of full
workdays will be supplied from home after the pandemic ends, our ballpark calculations imply
that the COVID-induced shift to WFH will reduce aggregate commuting time by about 435 million
hours per month in the post-pandemic economy. Below, we draw out some implications of this
reduction in commuting time for worker spending in city centers and labor productivity.
      Drawing on SWAA data, Barrero et al. (2020a) find that Americans devote about 35% of their
savings in commuting time to their primary jobs and about 60% to work activities of all sorts,
including household chores and childcare. The allocation of time savings is broadly similar for
men and women and across groups defined by race and ethnicity, but it differs markedly by
education group and between persons with and without children at home. Their findings align well
with American Time Use Survey data on how time allocations relate to WFH in 2017 and 2018,
as analyzed in Pabilonia and Vernon (2020).
      c. Inward commuting drops will cut spending in major city centers
          The shift to WFH raises serious concerns about the future of urban centers, especially those
characterized by high inward commuting rates and large employment shares in jobs that are
suitable for remote work. One concern involves the reduction of worker spending near employer
premises, which often cluster in city centers (Althoff et al. 2020, and Liu and Su 2020). We use
our survey data to project the impact of the shift to WFH on spending in selected urban areas. To
do so, we exploit SWAA questions about employer location and pre-COVID worker spending on
food, shopping and entertainment near workplaces.


29
     This figure reflects employed persons 16 and older who did not work from home.


                                                    25
       Figure 9 displays two patterns in the data that relate to the effect of more WFH on worker
spending in city centers. The left panel summarizes the relationship between weekly worker
expenditures near their workplaces before COVID-19 and population density near those
workplaces. The message is clear: worker spending near employer premises rises with population
density in the vicinity of the workplace. Spending per worker near employer premises is $150 per
week or less in the lower half of the population density distribution but nearly $300 at the top end.
The right panel shows that planned levels of WFH rise strongly with population density in the
employer's vicinity. Thus, the projected shift to WFH is greater for employers in denser areas, and
the loss in spending per worker is also greater. These figures reinforce the view that dense urban
areas, in particular, will see less spending by inward commuters in the post-pandemic economy
than they enjoyed before COVID.
       To quantify this point, we project the implied worker spending drop and express it as a
percentage of overall consumer spending in selected urban areas. Relative to the pre-pandemic
situation, the shift to WFH in the post-pandemic economy reduces weekly spending near employer
premises by  ( -  ) for individual i, where  is average daily spending near
his or her worksite in 2019 and the second term is the planned change in days per week WFH for
person i. Among inward commuters to urban area U, the average drop in weekly worker spending
near employer premises is
      
       = (  )-1    ( -  ),                                                                 (1)

where  is a sample weight; and the average gain among outward commuters from U is
      
       = (  )-1    ( -  ).                                                                 (2)

Assuming 50 work weeks per year, we obtain the projected net drop in worker spending in area
U as a fraction of the area's overall consumer spending in 2019:
          (#                         (#
      50[    Inward Commuters for )-    Outward Commuters for )]
                                                                                           (3)
                          Overall Consumer Spending in Area  in 2019


Multiplying this quantity by 100 yields our projection for the percentage reduction in consumer
spending in urban area U due to the greater extent of WFH in the post-pandemic economy
(again, relative to the pre-pandemic situation).




                                                   26
        This draft implements a simpler calculation for two urban areas. Specifically, SWAA
respondents who work in Manhattan (San Francisco) spent an average of $288 ($168) per week
near their workplaces before COVID. The plans of Manhattan (San Francisco) employers imply
that 35 (43) percent of post-COVID workdays will be supplied from home. Multiplying by the net
daily number of inward commuters ­ 2.3 million for Manhattan and 200,000 for San Francisco ­
yields annual spending drops of $12 Billion for Manhattan and $0.8 Billion for San Francisco.30
Scaling by 2019 taxable sales in each location,31 we project that greater WFH in the post-COVID
economy will reduce consumer spending by 13% in Manhattan and 4.6% in San Francisco.
        Our simplified calculations neglect the cross-sectional correlation between the COVID-
induced shift to WFH and spending near the workplace. Empirically, persons with plans for larger
WFH increases spent more near their places of work before COVID. The fuller calculation
described above will address this issue. Our current figures also understate the drops in and around
major commercial districts, because our commuting numbers do not include persons who commute
from, say, uptown Manhattan to the downtown financial district.
     d. The re-optimization of working arrangements will raise productivity
        How will a persistent shift to WFH affect productivity? In a field experiment, Bloom et al.
(2015) find that call center workers are, on average, more productive when WFH. Whether their
finding extends to the broader workforce is an open question. A priori, it's unclear whether offices
or homes are more conducive to productivity on balance. Undoubtedly, it depends on
circumstances, the organization, the nature of the job, the tasks to be performed, and the person.
While we cannot implement a tight experimental design as in Bloom et al., we can project the
broader productivity gains associated with more WFH in the post-COVID economy. We aim to
quantify "true" productivity gains, inclusive of the savings in commuting time, and productivity
gains as conventionally measured by statistical authorities. The conventional approach ignores
time spent commuting, which misses much of the gain associated with a shift to WFH.


30
   The Manhattan commuting figure is from Moss and King (2012), and the one for San Francisco is from
www.vitalsigns.mtc.ca.gov/commute-patterns.
31
      In   San    Francisco,      2019      sales     tax   receipts     were    $16.9  Billion (Source:
https://www.cdtfa.ca.gov/dataportal/dataset.htm?url=TaxSalesByCounty). In New York City they were
$182 Billion (Source: https://data.ny.gov/Government-Finance/Taxable-Sales-And-Purchases-Quarterly-
Data-Beginni/ny73-2j3u/data.) Taxable sales are not separately reported for Manhattan, so we assume
Manhattan accounts for half of all taxable sales, which seems reasonable given Manhattan attracts more
businesses and tourists than the rest of the city but has a minority of the population.


                                                  27
      We start by estimating the productivity gain implied by the savings in commuting time. For
an individual, the projected weekly time savings associated with greater WFH in the post-
pandemic economy is the reduction in commuting time, adjusted for the fraction of commute time
devoted to work-related activities:

                        = ( -  )(1 -  ) ,                                        (4)

where  is the daily round-trip commute time when working on employer premises, expressed in
hours, and  is the fraction of commute time devoted to work-related activities. Thus, the implied
productivity gain for individual i, expressed in percentage terms, is given by

                                                 ( -)(1- )
                             = 100    
                                         = 100   +( -   )                    ,         (5)
                                                      


where  denotes total weekly hours devoted to paid work, inclusive of commuting time, 
is the number of full workday per week before COVID, and  is the conventional measure of
weekly work hours based on responses to the following question: "In 2019 (before COVID)
approximately how many hours a week did you work when employed?". Implementing these
calculations in the SWAA micro data, the average implied productivity gain due to less commuting
is 1.9 (0.1) percent on an equal-weighted basis and 2.5 (0.1) percent an on earnings-weighted
basis.32 The large size of these implied gains underscores how a persistent increase in WFH will
bring a large, continuing flow of aggregate benefits in the form of reduced commuting time.
      We now estimate the total (true) productivity gain associated with greater WFH in the post-
pandemic economy ­ again, as compared to the pre-pandemic situation. To assess relative
productivity when WFH, we draw on responses to a series of questions in the SWAA. The first
one goes to all persons who report WFH at some point during the pandemic:33
        How does your efficiency working from home during the COVID-19 pandemic compare
        to your efficiency working on business premises before the pandemic?
        -   Better -- I am more efficient at home than I was working on business premises
        -   About the same -- I'm equally efficient in both places

32
   The larger gain on an earnings-weighted basis is no surprise, given the strong positive relationship of
earnings to  (Figure 8) and to commute time (Figure A.2).
33
   As with the question about the perk value of working from home, earlier versions of this question did
not use a two-part approach or used a different level of disaggregation for the choices. For Figure 10, we
focus on survey waves where the questions and choices are comparable.


                                                    28
       -   Worse -- I am less efficient at home than I was working on business premises
For those who respond "Better" ["Worse"], we follow up with:
       How much more [less] efficient have you been working from home during the COVID-19
       pandemic than on business premises before the COVID-19 pandemic?
Response options are: Under 5% more [less] efficient; 5 to 10% more [less] efficient ; 10 to 15%
more [less] efficient; 15 to 25% more [less] efficient; 25 to 35% more [less] efficient; and Over
35% more [less] efficient. Figure 10 shows the response distribution. Forty-five percent of workers
say they were about as efficient WFH during the pandemic as working on business premises before
the pandemic. However, 40 percent say they are more efficient when WFH, and one-fifth say they
are at least 15 percent more efficient. These results suggest that the pandemic-induced shift to
WFH will raise productivity. In addition, the extent of mainly WFH during COVID, desires for
WFH after COVID, and employer plans for WFH after COVID all correlate positively with self-
assessed relative efficiency when WFH (Figure A.4).
       To develop an estimate for the overall true productivity gain, we proceed as follows. First,
we assign midpoint values to the response bins and calculate each person's self-assessed WFH
productivity gain,  . To help interpret this quantity, we also ask persons with  > 0
whether a part of their self-assessed productivity advantage when WFH reflects reduced
commuting time. They say "yes" about 85 percent of the time, and when they do we follow up by
asking how much of the WFH productivity advantage is due to reduced commuting time. Second,
we calculate the individual-level true productivity gain, in percentage terms, as

                                      -                    
             
              =  (                                    ) +   ,                       (6)
                                          


where  is an indicator variable equal to 1 when the respondent's WFH productivity advantage
excludes the role of commuting time savings.34
     Using equation (6), we estimate that the COVID-induced shift to WFH will boost true
productivity in the post-pandemic economy by 3.6 (0.2) percent on an equal-weighted basis and
by 4.6 (0.2) percent on an earnings-weighted basis. These gains are quite large, providing more
support for the view that the COVID-induced shift to WFH will yield important benefits in the
form of more output per unit of time devoted to working for pay, inclusive of commuting time.

34
  In implementing (4), we set   
                                      to zero when  < 0, on the view that people who are less
productive when WFH won't. In practice, this assumption has a negligible impact on the results.


                                                 29
        Finally, we calculate the conventionally measured productivity gain for an individual as
                                                             -
                      
                       = (1 -  ) (                                              ),             (7)
                                                                   

  where  is the fraction of the self-assessed efficiency advantage of WFH that the respondent
  attributes to reduced commuting time. Using (7) we estimate that the COVID-induced shift to
  WFH will boost conventionally measured productivity in the post-pandemic economy by 0.8 (0.1)
  percent on an equal-weighted basis and 1.0 (0.1) percent on an earnings-weighted basis.35 These
  gains are only a fraction of our estimates for the true productivity gains.
           Our estimates for the efficiency impact of the COVID-induced shift to WFH are surely
  imperfect. For example, our productivity gain figures might be underestimates, because we ask
  about WFH productivity during COVID, which involves negative effects of pandemic-related
  stress and kids at home due school closures. Alternatively, our productivity gain figures could be
  overestimates if workers fail to internalize the benefits of in-person interactions that contribute to
  firm-level productivity. Other potential sources of bias involve survey response errors and an
  imperfectly representative sample. On balance, however, our results suggest that higher WFH
  levels in the post-pandemic economy will boost true productivity by nearly five percent, while the
  boost in conventionally measured productivity will be much smaller.

6. Concluding Remarks
          Much of the COVID-induced shift to WFH will stick long after the pandemic ends. Using
  data from the ongoing Survey of Working Arrangements and Attitudes, we project that American
  workers will supply about 20 percent of full workdays from home in the post-pandemic economy,
  four times the pre-COVID level. Desires to work from home part of the week are pervasive across
  groups defined by age, education, gender, earnings, and family circumstances. Indeed, most
  workers express a willingness to accept sizable pay cuts in return for the option to work from home
  two or three days a week. In this respect, a large shift to WFH is a welcome development.
          Employer plans imply that the extent of WFH will rise sharply with education and earnings
  in the post-pandemic economy. These plans align well with worker desires at the upper end of the
  earnings distribution, but not for others. For most workers, the post-pandemic economy will entail

  35
    In practice, the effect of a shift to WFH on conventional productivity measures also depends on measurement
  errors in reported labor inputs. Suppose, for example, that employees report 40 workhours per week regardless of
  actual workhours. In this case, if actual workhours rise due to a shift to WFH, the conventional measure of hourly
  productivity would also rise.


                                                           30
more WFH than in the pre-COVID economy but considerably less than they would like. To put it
another way, the benefits of a persistent shift to WFH will be broadly felt but flow mainly to the
better educated and the highly paid.
       We also explain why the COVID-induced shift to WFH will, in large measure, stick long
after the pandemic ends. Perhaps most important, forced experimentation with WFH during the
pandemic revealed information that alters future plans for the extent of WFH after the pandemic
ends, in line with the prediction of our theoretical framework. The gist of our evidence on forced
experimentation and learning is nicely encapsulated in a remark by James Gorman, CEO of
Morgan Stanley: "If you'd said three months ago that 90% of our employees will be working from
home and the firm would be functioning fine, I'd say that is a test I'm not prepared to take because
the downside of being wrong on that is massive" (Cutter 2020). Other mechanisms that contribute
to stickiness in the shift to WFH include pandemic-induced investments to enable WFH, greatly
diminished stigma associated with WFH, long lingering fears about mingling and proximity to
others, and a pandemic-driven surge in innovations that support WFH.
       Higher levels of WFH will present pointed challenges for urban areas, especially cities with
high rates of inward commuting by well-paid professionals in the pre-COVID environment. As
these workers cut back on commuting, they will spend less on food, shopping, personal services,
and entertainment near workplaces clustered in city centers. In preliminary calculations that exploit
our survey data, we project that overall consumer spending will drop 5 to 10 percent or more
(relative to the pre-pandemic situation) in San Francisco and Manhattan because of declines in net
inward commuting and less spending near employer premises. Their central business districts will
see considerably larger spending drops relative to the pre-pandemic levels.
       We also estimate that higher levels of WFH will boost productivity by about 4.6 percent.
Over half of this productivity gain reflects the savings in commuting time afforded by WFH. These
true productivity gains will go largely unrecorded in conventional productivity statistics, because
they do not encompass the effects of reduced commuting time. Indeed, when we mimic the
conventional approach, we estimate a comparatively paltry 1.0 percent productivity boost from
higher WFH levels in the post-pandemic economy.




                                                 31
                                         References

Acemoglu, Daron, 2002. "Directed technical change," Review of Economic Studies, 69, 781-809.
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Lin, 2004. "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from
        the Pharmaceutical Industry," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, no. 3, 1049-1090.
Adams-Prassl, Abi, Teodora Boneva, Marta Golin, and Christopher Rauh. 2020 "Inequality in the
        Impact of the Coronavirus Shock: Evidence from Real Time Surveys." CEPR Discussion
        Paper 14665.
Alon, Titan, Matthias Doepke, Matthias, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey and Michele Tertilt, 2020a. "The
        Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality," NBER Working Paper 26947.
Alon, Titan, Doepke, Matthias, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey and Michele Tertilt, 2020b. "This time it's
        different: The Role of Women's Employment in a Pandemic Recession," NBER Working
        Paper 27660.
Althoff, Lukas, Fabian Eckert, Sharat Ganapati and Conor Walsh, 2020. "The City Paradox:
        Skilled Services and Remote Work," CESifo working paper no. 8734.
Altig, David, Jose Maria Barrero, Nick Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer, Emil Mihaylov
      and Nick Parker, 2020a. "Firms Expect Working from Home to Triple," Macroblog, 28
      May.
Altig, David, Jose Maria Barrero, Nick Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer, Emil Mihaylov
      and Nick Parker, 2021. "WFH Is Onstage and Here to Stay," Macroblog, 25 February.
Altig, David, Jose Maria Barrero, Nick Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Brent Meyer and Nick Parker,
        2020b. "Surveying Business Uncertainty." Forthcoming, Journal of Econometrics.
Angelici, Marta and Paola Profeta, 2020, "Smart working: Flexibility without constraints," CES
        working paper no. 8165.
Bajowaa, Sakina S., Jacob Milosch and Chandani Bansal, 2020. "Telemedicine Pays: Billing and
        Coding Update," Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 20, no. 60.
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2020a. "60 Million Fewer Commuting
        Hours per Day: How Americans Use Time Saved by Working from Home," VoxEU CEPR
        Policy Portal, 23 September.
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2020b. "COVID-19 Is Also a
        Reallocation Shock," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Summer, 329-371.
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2021. "Question Repository for the
        Survey of Working Arrangements and Attitudes," available at www.WFHresearch.com.
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, and Brent H. Meyer, 2021. "COVID-19 Is
        a Persistent Reallocation Shock," AEA Papers and Proceedings, May.
Bartik, Alexander W., Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher T.
        Stanton, 2020. "What Jobs are Being Done at Home During the Covid-19 Crisis?
        Evidence from Firm-Level Surveys," NBER Working Paper No. 27422.
Behrens, Kristian, Sergey Kichko, Jackques-Francois Thisse, 2021. "Working from Home: Too
        Much of a Good Thing?" CESifo Working Paper No. 8831.
Bick, Alexander and Adam Blandin, 2021. "Real-Time Labor Market Estimates During the 2020
        Coronavirus Outbreak," working paper, 22 January.
Bick, Alexander, Adam Blandin, and Karel Mertens, 2020. "Work from Home After the COVID-
        19 Outbreak," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper.




                                              32
Bloom, Nicholas, Steven J. Davis, and Yulia Zhestkova, 2021. "COVID-19 Shifted Patent
        Applications toward Technologies that Support Working from Home." American
        Economic Association, Papers & Proceedings, May.
Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying, 2015. "Does working from
        home work? Evidence from a Chinese experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130,
        no. 1, 165-218.
Bloom, Nicholas, Tobias Kretschmer and John Van Reenen, "Work-life Balance, Management
        Practices and Productivity', in International Differences in the Business Practice and
        Productivity of Firms, Richard Freeman and Kathryn Shaw, eds. (Chicago, IL: University
        of Chicago Press, 2009).
Brynjolfsson, Erik, John J. Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and Hong-Yi
        TuYe, 2020. "COVID-19 and Remote Work: An Early Look at US Data," NBER Working
        Paper No. 27344.
Bureau of Labor Studies (2018), "Job Flexibilities and Work Schedules ­ 2017-2018 Data from
        the American Time Use Survey," https://www.bls.gov/news.release/flex2.nr0.htm
Bunk, Scott, Clark, David and James McGibany, 2006, "Evaluating the long-run impacts of the
        9/11 terrorist attacks on US domestic airline travel," Applied Economics, 38, 363-370.
Choudhury, Prithwiraj, Cirrus Foroughi, and Barbara Zepp Larson, 2021. "Work-from-anywhere:
        The productivity effects of geographic flexibility," Strategic Management Journal, 42, no.
        4, 655-683.
Cicala, Steve, 2020. "Powering work from home," NBER Working Paper No. 27937.
Coibion, Olivier, Gorodnichenko, Yuriy and Michael Weber, 2020. "The cost of the COVID-19
        crisis: Lockdowns, macroeconomic expectations, and consumer spending," BFI Working
        Paper 2020-60.
Cooper, Russell and Andrew John, 1988. "Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian
        Models," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103, no. 3 (August), 441-463.
Davis, Steven J., Stephen Hansen, and Cristhian Seminario-Amez, 2021. "Firm-Level Risk
        Exposures and Stock Returns in the Wake of COVID-19," NBER Working Paper 27867.
Del Boca, Daniela, Noemi Oggero, Paola Profeta and Maria Christina Rossi, 2020. "Women's
        Work, Housework, and Childcare, Before and During COVID-19," CESifo w.p. 8403.
DeFilippis, Evan, Stephen Michael Impink, Madison Singell, Jeffrey Polzer, and Raffaella Sadun,
        2020, "Collaborating during coronavirus: The impact of COVID-19 on the nature of work,"
        NBER Working Paper No. 27612.
De Fraja, Gianni, Jesse Matheson and James Rockey, 2021. "Zoomshock: The geography and local
        labour market consequences of working from home," Covid Economics 64, 1­41.
Deole, Sumit, Max Deter and Yeu Huang, 2021. "Home Sweet Home: Working from Home and
        Employee Performance during the COVID-19 Pandemic in the U.K.," working paper.
Eberly, Janice, 2020. "Comments on Barrero and Bloom," remarks at the Jackson Hole Economic
        Symposium.
Emanuel, Natalia and Emma Harrington, 2021, "`Working' remotely? Selection, treatment and the
        market provision of remote work," working paper, 9 April.
Favilukis, Jack, Xiaoji Lin, Ali Sharifkhan and Xiaofei Zhao, 2020. "Labor Force Telework
        Flexibility and Asset Prices: Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic," working paper.
Gupta, Arpit, Vrinda Mittal, Jonas Peeters and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, 2021. "Flattening the
        Curve: Pandemic-Induced Revaluation of Urban Real Estate," COVID Economics, 69.




                                               33
Hopkins, Jared S., 2020. "Ahead of Covid-19 Vaccine, Half of Americans Indicate Reluctance,
        WSJ/NBC Poll Finds." Wall Street Journal, October 15.
Jerbashian, Vahagn and Montserrat Vilalta-Buffi, 2020. "The Impact of ICT on Working from
        Home: Evidence from EU Countries," GLO Discussion Paper No. 719.
Kahn, Lisa B., Fabian Lange, and David G. Wiczer. 2020. "Labor Demand in the Time of COVID-
        19: Evidence from Vacancy Postings and UI Claims." NBER Working Paper 27061.
Kremer, Michael, 2002. "Pharmaceuticals and the Developing World," Journal of Economic
        Perspectives, 16, no. 4 (Fall), 67-90.
Kunn, Steffen, Christian Seel and Dainis Zegners, 2020, "Cognitive performance in the home
        office ­ evidence from professional chess," IZA Discussion Paper No. 13491.
Larcom, Shaun, Ferdinand Rauch, and Tim Willems, 2017. "The Benefits of Forced
        Experimentation: Striking Evidence from the London Underground Network," Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 132, no. 4, 2019-2055.
Liu, Sitian and Yichen Su, 2020. "The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on the Demand for
        Density: Evidence from the US Housing Market," working paper, Queens University.
Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais, "Valuing alternative work arrangements," American
        Economic Review, 2017, 107, no. 12, 3722­59
Mas, Alexander and Amanda Pallais, "Alternative Work Arrangements," Annual Review of
        Economics, 12, 631-658.
Mateyka, Petr J., Melanie Rapino and Liana Christin Landivar, 2012. "Home-Based Workers in
        the United States: 2010," United States Census Bureau, Current Population Reports.
Mims, Christopher, 2020. "The Next Phase of the Retail Apocalypse: Stores Reborn as E-
        Commerce Warehouses," Wall Street Journal, 18 July.
Möhring, Katja, Elias Naumann, Maximiliane Reifenscheid, Alexander Wenz, Tobias Rettig,
        Ulrich Krieger, Sabine Friedel, Marina Finkel, Carina Cornesse and Annelies G. Blom,
        2021. "The COVID-19 pandemic and subjective well-being: longitudinal evidence on
        satisfaction with work and family," European Societies, 23.
Mongey, Simon, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg. 2020. "Which Workers Bear the Burden
        of Social Distancing Policies?" NBER Working Paper 27085.
Moss, Mitchell L. and Carson King, 2012. "The Dynamic Population of Manhattan." NYU
        Wagner School of Public Service Working Paper.
Naughton, Nora, 2020. "The Pandemic Has Pushed Car Buying Online. It's Expected to Stick,"
        Wall Street Journal, 20 June.
Ozimek, Adam, 2020. "The future of remote work," SSRN Working Paper.
Pabilonia, Sabrina and Victoria Vernon, 2021. "Telework, wages, and time use in the United
        States," GLO Discussion Paper No. 546.
Pagano, Marco, Christian Wagner and Josef Zechner, 2020. "Disaster Resilience and Asset
        Prices," working paper.
Papanikolaou, Dimitris, and Lawrence D. W. Schmidt. 2020. "Working Remotely and the Supply-
        side Impact of Covid-19." NBER Working Paper 27330.
Putzier, Konrad, 2021. "Hotel Owners Continue to Reel from the Pandemic," Wall Street Journal,
        2 January.
Ramani, Arjun and Nick Bloom, 2021. "The Donut Effect: How COVID-19 Shapes Real Estate,"
        SIEPR Policy Brief, January.
Rothschild, Michael, 1974. "Searching for the Lowest Price When the True Distribution of Prices
        Is Unknown," Journal of Political Economy, 82, no. 4, 689-711.



                                              34
Schmookler, Jacob, 1966. Innovation and Economic Growth. MIT Press.
Prescott, J.J., Norman Bishara, and Evan Starr, 2016. "Understanding noncompetition agreements:
        the 2014 noncompete survey project." Michigan State Law Review, 369-464.
Stanton, Christopher T. and Pratyush Tiwari, 2021. "Housing Consumption and the Cost of
        Remote Work," NBER Working Paper 28483.
Starr, Evan, J.J. Prescott and Norman Bishara, 2020. "Noncompete Agreements in the U.S. Labor
        Force," Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
Steemers, Frank, Robin Erickson, Amanda Popiela and Gad Levanon, 2020. "Adapting to the
        Reimagined Workplace: Human Capital Responses to the COVID-19 Pandemic,"
        Conference Board, October.
Taneja. Shivani, Paul Mizen and Nicholas Bloom, 2021. "Working from home is revolutionising
        the UK Labour market," VoxEU CEPR Policy Portal, 15 March.
Torry, Harriet, 2020. "Pandemic Speeds Americans' Embrace of Digital Commerce," Wall Street
        Journal, 15 November.
Tyson, Alec, Courtney Johnson, and Cary Funk, 2020. "U.S. public now divided over whether to
        get COVID-19 vaccine," Pew Research Center report.
Webster, Paul, 2020. "Virtual Health Care in the Era of COVID-19," The Lancet, 395, issue 10231.
White, Dustin R., 2019. "Agency Theory and Work from Home," Labour, 33, no. 1, 1-25.




                                              35
                     Figure 1: Extent of working from home before, during, and after COVID

            Percentage of paid full days worked from home
                                                                                           Source: Responses to the questions: "Currently
                                                                                           (this week) what is your work status?" and "After
60




                                                                                           COVID, in 2022 and later, how often is your
                                                                                           employer planning for you to work full days at
                                                                                           home?"
50




                                                                                           Notes: Data are from 33,250 survey responses
                                                                                           collected between May 2020 and March 2021 by
40




                                                                                           Inc-Query and QuestionPro. For each survey
                                                                                           wave, we compute the average percentage of
                                                                                           paid full days worked from home and plot it on the
30




                                                                                           vertical axis against the days during which that
                                                                                           wave was in the field on the horizontal axis. The
20




                                                                                           pre-COVID estimate comes from the 2017-2018
                                                                                           American Time Use Survey (see Appendix A for
                                                                                           details) and the post-COVID estimate uses data
10




                                                                                           from the March 2021 wave. We re-weight the
                                                                                           sample to match Current Population Survey data
                                                                Employer planned           from 2010 to 2019 by age-sex-education-earnings
0




                                                                                           cell.
Pre-COVID May20          Jul20      Sep20       Nov20      Jan21      Mar21   Post-COVID
     *Pre-COVID estimate taken from the 2017-2018 American Time Use Survey



                                                                                                                                   36
                                                    Figure 2: Survey responses compared to the CPS
                                   Age                                                                    Share of females                                                                              Education

                                                                                                                                                                       Less than high-school graduation
   20 - 29

                                                                                                                                                                                 High-school graduation

   30 - 39
                                                                                                                                                                                  1 to 3-years of college
                                                                            Female
                                                                                                                                                                               4 years of college degree
   40 - 49

                                                                                                                                                                         Masters or Professional Degree

   50 - 64
                                                                                                                                                                                                    PhD


             0              10         20           30                 40            0              10                   20              30          40                                                     0                10          20               30

                 Raw Data         Reweighted        CPS Distribution                     Raw Data                       Reweighted            CPS Distribution                    Raw Data                      Reweighted             CPS Distribution


                                 Earnings                                                 Industry of current (or most recent) job                                                                Census Division
                                                                                                     Agriculture                                                           New England
     $20k to $50k                                                                         Arts & Entertainment
                                                                                          Finance & Insurance                                                                Mid-Atlantic
                                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                                     Education                                                        East North Central
                                                                              Health Care & Social Assistance
    $50k to $100k                                                                  Hospitality & Food Services                                                        West North Central
                                                                                                    Information
                                                                                                 Manufacturing                                                             South Atlantic
                                                                                                         Mining
                                                                             Professional & Business Services                                                         East South Central
   $100k to $150k
                                                                                                   Real Estate
                                                                                                   Retail Trade                                                       West South Central
                                                                              Transportation and Warehousing
                                                                                                        Utilities                                                              Mountain
             $150k+                                                                           Wholesale Trade
                                                                                                   Government                                                                     Pacific
                                                                                                          Other

                      0           20           40                      60                                           0                5          10               15                         0          5                10        15             20

                 Raw Data         Reweighted        CPS Distribution                     Raw Data                   Reweighted                CPS Distribution                   Raw Data                   Reweighted             CPS Distribution


Notes: Each figure shows the distribution of raw survey responses, survey responses reweighted to match the share of persons aged 20 to 64 in a given {age x sex x
education x earnings} cell in the 2010 ­ 2019 CPS (focusing on those who earned more than $20,000 a year), and the corresponding distribution in the CPS. Data are 37
from 33,250 survey responses collected between May 2020 and March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro.
              Figure 3: Most workers want to work from home two or more days per week


                                                                                                34.2
  Rarely or never                                                          22.4
                                                                                                       Source: Responses to the question:
                                                  8.9
  1 day per week                                     10.3                                              In 2022+ (after COVID) how often would
                                                                                                       you like to have paid work days at home?
                                                       11.7
 2 days per week                                               14.2                                    Notes: Data are from 33,250 survey
                                                                                                       responses collected from May 2020 through
                                                        12.0                                           March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro.
 3 days per week                                               14.6                                    "Respondents able to WFH" are those who
                                                                                                       say they can work from home at least
                                      5.5                                                              partially and those who report having mainly
 4 days per week                            7.3                                                        worked from home at some point during the
                                                                                                       COVID-19 pandemic. We re-weight raw
                                                                                  27.6                 responses to match the share of working-
 5 days per week                                                                         31.2          age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a
                                                                                                       given {age x sex x education x earnings}
                                                                                                       cell.
                      0           5               10          15      20     25     30          35
                                                    Percent of respondents
                All respondents                                 Respondents able to WFH*
*64% of the full sample meets this criterion
                                                                                                                                                 38
                        Figure 4: Most workers value the option to work from home

                                                                                 Source: Responses to a two-part question.
Value of the option to WFH 2 - 3 days/wk, % of current pay?
                                                                                 Part 1: After COVID, in 2022 and later, how would
  More than 35% raise              4.3                                           you feel about working from home 2 or 3 days a
                                                                                 week?"
      25 to 35% raise              4.6
                                                                                 · Positive: I would view it as a benefit or extra pay
      15 to 25% raise                        9.1                                 · Neutral
                                                                                 · Negative: I would view it as a cost or a pay cut
      10 to 15% raise                                  15.1

       5 to 10% raise                                         19.6               Part 2: How much of a pay raise [cut] (as a
                                                                                 percent of your current pay) would you value as
   Less than 5% raise                          10.4                              much as the option to work from home 2 or 3 days
                                                                                 a week?
              Neutral                                                     28.2

 Less than 5% pay cut                  5.0                                       Data are from 20,750 survey responses collected
                                                                                 from September 2020 to February 2021 by Inc-
     5 to 10% pay cut       0.9
                                                                                 Query and QuestionPro. We asked a similar
    15 to 25% pay cut       0.5                                                  question in earlier and subsequent waves, but we
                                                                                 focus on the above waves, which use identical
    25 to 35% pay cut       0.7
                                                                                 questions and response options. We re-weight raw
More than 35% pay cut        1.5                                                 responses to match the share of working age
                                                                                 respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age
                                                                                 x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                        0          5         10      15       20     25   30
                                              Percent of respondents

                                                                                                                         39
               Figure 5: Productivity when working from home has exceeded expectations

                                                                                   Source: Responses to the question:
   Relative to expectations, how has WFH turned out?                               Compared to your expectations before COVID (in
                                                                                   2019) how has working from home turned out for
           Hugely better, 20%+                                    20.6             you?
                                                                                   · Hugely better -- I am 20%+ more productive than
                                                                                      I expected
Substantially better - 10 to 20%                                    21.9           · Substantially better -- I am to 10% to 19% more
                                                                                      productive than I expected
            Better -- up to 10%                            17.0                    · Better -- I am 1% to 9% more productive than I
                                                                                      expected
                                                                                   · About the same
               About the same                                              26.7    · Worse -- I am 1% to 9% less productive than I
                                                                                      expected
                                                                                   · Substantially worse -- I am to 10% to 19% less
            Worse - up to 10%                6.8
                                                                                      productive than I expected
                                                                                   · Hugely worse -- I am 20%+ less productive than I
Substantially worse - 10 to 20%        3.4                                            expected

                                                                                   Notes: Data are from 30,750 survey responses
          Hugely worse, 20%+           3.7
                                                                                   collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query
                                                                                   and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to
                                   0    5      10      15     20     25       30   match the share of working age respondents in the
                                              Percent of respondents               2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x
                                                                                   earnings} cell. We did not ask about productivity
                                                                                   relative to expectations in May 2020.

                                                                                                                             40
                                                     Figure 6: Desired and planned levels of WFH after the pandemic
                                                     increase with WFH productivity surprises during the pandemic
                                                                                                          Source: Response to the questions:
                                              Employee desired          Employer planned                   After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often
                                   60




                                                                                                           would you like to have paid workdays at home?
Percent of full workdays at home




                                                                                                           After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often is
                                                                                                           your employer planning for you to work full days
                                   50




                                                                                                           at home?

                                                                                                           Compared to your expectations before COVID
                                   40




                                                                                                           (in 2019) how has working from home turned out
                                                                                                           for you?
                                   30




                                                                                                          Notes: This figure shows bin scatters of worker
                                                                                                          desires and employer plans for WFH after the
                                                                                                          pandemic against WFH productivity surprises
                                   20




                                                                                                          during the pandemic.

                                                                                                          Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected
                                   10




                                                                                                          from July 2020 to March 2021 and reweighted to
                                                                                                          match the share of working age respondents in the
                                                                                                          2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education
                                   0




                                                                                                          x earnings} cell. We did not ask about productivity
                                        -25    -20     -15   -10   -5      0    5    10    15   20   25   relative to expectations in May 2020.
                                        WFH productivity during COVID relative to expectations, percent
                                                                                                                                                 41
                                            Figure 7: WFH stigma has fallen sharply
                                                                                Source: Responses to the question:
                                                                                Since the COVID pandemic began, how have perceptions
                                                                                about working from home (WFH) changed among people
 Change in WFH Perceptions Among People You Know                                you know?
                                                                                ·   Hugely improved -- the perception of WFH has improved
Improved among almost all                                        22.2               among almost all (90-100%) the people I know
                                                                                ·   Substantially improved -- the perception of WFH has
    Improved among most                                                  28.3       improved among most but not all of the people I know
                                                                                ·   Slightly improved -- the perception of WFH has improved
    Improved among some                              14.6                           among some people I know but not most
                                                                                ·   No change
               No change                                                 28.3   ·   Slightly worsened -- the perception of WFH has worsened
                                                                                    among some, but not most, people I know
   Worsened among some                3.5                                       ·   Substantially worsened -- the perception of WFH has
                                                                                    worsened among most, but not all, people I know
    Worsened among most         1.7                                             ·   Hugely worsened -- the perception of WFH has worsened
                                                                                    among almost all (90-100%) the people I know

Worsened among almost all       1.4                                             Notes: Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected
                                                                                between July 2020 and March 2021 by Inc-Query and
                                                                                QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to match the share
                            0          5     10     15      20      25   30
                                                                                of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given
                                             Percent of respondents
                                                                                {age x sex x education x earnings} cell. We did not ask about
                                                                                WFH perceptions in May 2020.

                                                                                                                                42
                                                   Figure 8: Worker desires for WFH increase modestly with earnings,
                                3                     but employer plans for WFH increase steeply with earnings.
Number of paid WFH days post-COVID




                                                                                                                        Source: Response to the questions:

                                                                                                                        After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often would
                                                                                                                        you like to have paid workdays at home?
                                2




                                                                                                                        After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often is your
                                                                                                                        employer planning for you to work full days at
                                                                                                                        home?

                                                                                                                        Notes: Data are from 30,750 survey responses
                                1




                                                                                                                        collected between July 2020 and March 2021 by
                                                                                                                        Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw
                                                                                                                        responses to match the share of working age
                                                                                                                        respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age
                                                                                                                        x sex x education x earnings} cell. We did not ask
                                                                                                                        about employer plans in May 2020.
                                                             Employee desired             Employer planned
                                0




                                     20                         50                  100                 200 250+
                                                       Annual Earnings in 2019 ($'000s)
                                     Note: Marker size is proportional to the number of respondents per income level.
                                                                                                                                                                43
                                       Figure 9: Spatial reallocation of worker spending away from dense city centers




                                                                                                      Employer planned WFH days post-COVID (%)
                               300




                                                                                                                                                 35
Weekly expenditure near work




                                                                                                                                                 30
                               250




                                                                                                                                                 25
                               200




                                                                                                                                                 20
                               150




                                                                                                                                                 15
                               100




                                                                 Coef = 15.23 (.95), N = 17969                                                                                     Coef = 2.2 (.18), N = 19447




                                                                                                                                                 10
                                         100              1000            10,000            100,000                                                       100              1000            10,000            100,000
                                     Population Density of Job Location, persons/sq. mile                                                             Population Density of Job Location, persons/sq. mile

             Source: Responses to the questions "In 2019, before COVID, in what ZIP code was your job located?", "In 2019, when you worked at your
             employer's business premises, roughly how much money did you spend during a typical day on food and drinks (e.g., lunch, coffee, snacks,
             etc.)?", and "In 2019, when you worked at your employer's business premises, roughly how much money did you spend during a typical week in
             bars, restaurants, and other entertainment venues that are near to your workplace?"

             Notes: The left panel uses data from 22,500 survey responses collected from August 2020 to January 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. The
             right panel uses data from 28,250 responses collected from August 2020 to March 2021. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of
             working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.                                   44
                   Figure 10: Efficiency of WFH vs. working on business premises


        Much more, >35%                           13.2
                                                                                              Source: Responses to the question:

Substantially more, 15-25%                  8.3                                               "How does your efficiency working from home
                                                                                              during the COVID-19 pandemic compare to your
                                                                                              efficiency working on business premises before the
              More, <15%                                 18.2                                 pandemic?"


           About the same                                                            45.0     Notes: Data are from 28,250 survey responses
                                                                                              collected from August 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-
                                                                                              Query and QuestionPro. We asked a similar
               Less, <15%             5.7
                                                                                              question in earlier waves but focus on August 2020
                                                                                              to March 2021 when we kept the question and
                                                                                              response options consistent. We re-weight raw
 Substantially less, 15-25%       3.8
                                                                                              responses to match the share of working age
                                                                                              respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in each {age x
          Much less, >35%             5.7                                                     sex x education x earnings} cell.



                              0   5     10        15     20     25   30   35   40   45   50
                                            Percent of respondents
                                                                                                                                     45
                          Table 1: Share of respondents mainly WFH during COVID-19

Percent of respondents WFH during COVID                    Estimate (SE)      Percent of respondents WFH during COVID          Estimate     (SE)

Overall                                                      32.5     (0.3)   Overall, ever WFH during COVID                      56.0      (0.3)

Women                                                        33.6     (0.4)   Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K                        24.2      (0.5)
Men                                                          31.7     (0.4)   Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K                       39.7      (0.5)
                                                                              Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K                      51.2      (0.7)
Age 20 to 29                                                 34.3     (0.7)   Ann. Earnings over $150K                            55.4      (0.7)
Age 30 to 39                                                 36.6     (0.5)
Age 40 to 49                                                 33.6     (0.5)   Goods-producing sectors                             24.4      (0.7)
Age 50 to 64                                                 27.6     (0.5)   Service sectors                                     34.2      (0.3)

Less than high school                                         9.7     (1.9)   No children                                         29.4      (0.4)
High school                                                  19.4     (0.6)   Living with children under 18                       34.8      (0.4)
1 to 3 years of college                                      25.9     (0.5)
4year college degree                                         45.0     (0.5)   Red (Republican-leaning) state                      30.1      (0.4)
Graduate degree                                              50.2     (0.5)   Blue (Democratic-leaning) state                     34.7      (0.4)

Notes: Percent share of respondents who are working from home ("this week") during the COVID-19 pandemic, except the top right which estimates the
share who "ever" worked from home during the pandemic. Data are from 33,250 survey responses collected from May 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query
and QuestionPro. Until October 2020, we ask respondents whether they were primarily working from home, working on business premises, or not
working. Since November 2020, we ask whether they are working and then how many full days they are working from home, and code the respondent as
"working from home" if the WFH share exceeds 66 percent. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019
CPS in each {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                                                                                                                                           46
                   Table 2: What predicts working from home during the COVID pandemic?
                                                        (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)                (6)           (7)
Dependent Variable                                                               100 x 1(Mainly WFH during COVID)

Years of education                                   11.23***       8.72***        8.48***       8.42***       8.32***       8.00***       6.39***
                                                      (0.39)         (0.43)         (0.43)        (0.44)        (0.44)        (0.43)        (0.46)
log(Earnings)                                                       8.42***        8.51***       8.29***       8.22***       9.27***       8.12***
                                                                     (0.45)         (0.47)        (0.48)        (0.48)        (0.48)        (0.48)
1(Male)                                                                           -2.67***      -2.78***      -2.87***      -3.40***      -3.44***
                                                                                    (0.96)        (0.96)        (0.96)        (0.95)        (0.96)
1(Lives with children under 18)                                                      1.44          1.55          1.54          -0.56         -0.41
                                                                                    (0.95)        (0.95)        (0.95)        (0.98)        (0.97)
1(Male) x 1(Lives with children under 18)                                            1.87          1.70          1.68          1.76           0.68
                                                                                    (1.44)        (1.44)        (1.44)        (1.44)        (1.41)
Biden vote share (state of residence)                                                            1.51***       1.47***       1.34***       1.23***
                                                                                                  (0.36)        (0.36)        (0.36)        (0.35)
Internet quality                                                                                               1.57***       1.52***       1.26***
                                                                                                                (0.37)        (0.37)        (0.37)

Survey wave fixed effects                                Y             Y             Y             Y             Y              Y             Y
Age bin fixed effects                                                                                                           Y             Y
Industry Fixed Effects                                                                                                                        Y

Dependent variable mean                                   31.79         31.79         31.79         31.79          31.79       31.79       31.79
Observations                                             25,056        25,056        25,056        25,056         25,056      25,056      25,056
R-squared                                                  0.07          0.08          0.08          0.08           0.09        0.09        0.12
Notes: This table reports how the probability of mainly WFH during COVID varies with worker characteristics. For continuous independent variables, the
coefficients reflect a one-standard deviation change. Data are from 33,250 survey responses collected from May 2020 to March 2021. We re-weight raw
responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in each {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.                47
                 Table 3: Worker desires for WFH are fairly uniform. Employer plans are not.

Percent share of paid WFH       Worker              Employer               Percent share of paid WFH days       Worker              Employer
                                            (SE)                  (SE)                                                      (SE)                    (SE)
days post-COVID                 desired              planned               post-COVID                           desired              planned

Overall                          45.5       (0.3)      21.3      (0.2)

Women                            48.7       (0.4)      18.9      (0.3)     Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K           43.4      (0.5)      15.9         (0.4)
Men                              43.1       (0.4)      23.1      (0.3)     Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K          46.9      (0.4)      24.8         (0.4)
                                                                           Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K         50.1      (0.6)      33.6         (0.6)
Age 20 to 29                     46.9       (0.6)      23.9      (0.6)     Ann. Earnings over $150K               53.3      (0.6)      41.5         (0.7)
Age 30 to 39                     48.7       (0.5)      24.9      (0.4)
Age 40 to 49                     46.0       (0.5)      21.3      (0.5)     Goods-producing sectors                40.5      (0.7)      18.7         (0.6)
Age 50 to 64                     41.4       (0.6)      16.5      (0.4)     Service sectors                        46.6      (0.3)      21.9         (0.3)

Less than high school            40.7       (3.2)      12.6      (2.3)     No children                            44.4      (0.4)      17.8         (0.3)
High school                      37.9       (0.7)      15.2      (0.6)     Living with children under 18          47.3      (0.4)      25.4         (0.3)
1 to 3 years of college          45.6       (0.6)      17.3      (0.5)
4-year college degree            50.5       (0.5)      26.4      (0.5)     Red (Republican-leaning) State         44.8      (0.4)      20.5         (0.4)
Graduate degree                  49.2       (0.4)      30.4      (0.4)     Blue (Democratic-leaning) State        46.1      (0.4)      22.0         (0.3)

Notes: Average percent of full paid working days workers desire and employers plan to be spent working from home post-COVID, by group. Data are from
30,750 survey responses collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We exclude workers who claim to have "no employer" in the
employer plans question and impute zero employer planned working days for respondents who have not received any clear indication from their employer. We
re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell. This table
excludes data from the May 2020 wave because we didn't ask about post-COVID employer plans that month.


                                                                                                                                               48
                      Table 4: Residual fear of proximity to other people

   Once most of the population has been vaccinated against COVID, which of the
   following would best fit your views on social distancing?

                                                                                  Percent of respondents         (SE)

Complete return to pre-COVID activities                                                    28.4                  (0.3)

Substantial return to pre-COVID activities, but I would still be wary of things
                                                                                           34.3                  (0.3)
like riding the subway or getting into a crowded elevator

Partial return to pre-COVID activities, but I would be wary of many activities
                                                                                           23.6                  (0.3)
like eating out or using ride-share taxis

No return to pre-COVID activities, as I will continue to social distance                   13.7                  (0.2)


Observations                                                                                    25,002
Notes: The table shows the response distribution to the question, "Once most of the population has been vaccinated against
COVID, which of the following would best fit your views on social distancing?" The latter is the question wording as of
March 2021, but we have updated the precise wording as vaccine developments have taken place during the pandemic. Data
are from 31,750 survey responses collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw
responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in each {age x sex x education x earnings}
cell.


                                                                                                                             49
               Table 5: Working from home is a valuable perk. The benefits of a shift towards WFH are
                                  unevenly distributed across demographic groups
                                                                                                        Value of        Perk value of
                            Value of planned      Perk value of the
                                                                                                     planned post-      the option to
                             post-COVID      (SE) option to WFH, (SE)                                              (SE)               (SE)
                                                                                                     COVID WFH,           WFH, %
Percent share of paid       WFH, % earnings         % earnings        Percent share of paid WFH days
                                                                                                      % earnings          earnings
WFH days post-COVID                                                   post-COVID

Overall                             2.5         (0.1)        7.2       (0.1)

Women                               2.0         (0.1)        7.6       (0.1) Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K             1.7       (0.1)      6.6         (0.2)
Men                                 2.9         (0.1)        6.9       (0.1) Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K            2.8       (0.1)      7.2         (0.1)
                                                                             Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K           4.5       (0.2)      8.7         (0.2)
Age 20 to 29                        2.8         (0.1)        8.2       (0.2) Ann. Earnings over $150K                 6.8       (0.2)      11.7        (0.2)
Age 30 to 39                        3.0         (0.1)        8.4       (0.2)
Age 40 to 49                        2.6         (0.1)        7.6       (0.2) Goods-producing sectors                  2.4       (0.1)       6.2        (0.2)
Age 50 to 64                        1.7         (0.1)        5.1       (0.2) Service sectors                          2.5       (0.1)       7.4        (0.1)

Less than high school               2.5         (0.6)        5.7       (1.1)   No children                            1.9       (0.1)       6.1        (0.1)
High school                         1.7         (0.1)        5.6       (0.3)   Living with children under 18          3.2       (0.1)       8.4        (0.1)
1 to 3 years of college             1.8         (0.1)        6.7       (0.2)
4year college degree                3.0         (0.1)        7.9       (0.1)   Red (Republican-leaning) State         2.3       (0.1)       7.2        (0.1)
Graduate degree                     4.0         (0.1)        9.5       (0.1)   Blue (Democratic-leaning) State        2.7       (0.1)       7.2        (0.1)

Notes: The "value of planned WFH" is equal to the "perk value of WFH" 2 to 3 days per week, adjusted to reflect employer plans. The "perk value of WFH" is
based responses to the following two-part question: Part 1: "After COVID, in 2022 and later, how would you feel about working from home 2 or 3 days a week?"
Part 2: "How much of a pay raise [cut] (as a percent of your current pay) would you value as much as the option to work from home 2 or 3 days a week?". See
the text for details. Data are from 28,250 survey responses collected from July 2020 to February 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw
responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                                                                                                                                                  50
Appendix A
Additional tables and figures




                                51
Figure A.1 Sample survey questions




                                     52
                              Figure A.2 Higher income workers have longer commutes

                         Average one-way commute length
                                                                                               Source: Responses to the questions:
      50




                                                                                               In 2019 (before COVID) how long was your
                                                                                               typical commute to work in minutes?

                                                                                               How much did you earn by working in 2019?
      40




                                                                                               Notes: The figure shows the average one-way
Minutes




                                                                                               commute time as a function of reported
                                                                                               earnings in 2019. Data are from 23,250 survey
                                                                                               responses collected between May 2020 and
      30




                                                                                               March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro.
                                                                                               We did not ask about commuting time in
                                                                                               December 2020 or January 2021. We re-
                                                                                               weight raw responses to match the share of
                                                                                               working age respondents in the 2010-2019
      20




                                                                                               CPS in each {age x sex x education x
                                                                                               earnings} cell. Marker sizes are proportional to
                                                                                               the weighted number of respondents.

           20                         50                  100                  200 250+
                             Annual Earnings in 2019 ($'000s)
           Note: Marker size is proportional to the number of respondents by earnings level.
                                                                                                                                             53
           Figure A.3 Desired post-COVID WFH days by sex among the college-educated

              Percent of respondents by desired WFH days
                                                                  39.4
40


                                                                                          Source: Responses to the question:
                                                         35.3
                                                                                          After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often
                                                                            32.4
                                                                                          would you like to have paid workdays at
                                                                                          home?
30




           23.9    23.5                                                                   Notes: Data are from 30,750 survey
                                                                                   23.1
                                                                                          responses collected from July 2020 to March
                                                                                          2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. The
20




                                                                                          sample includes respondents with at least
                                           14.1                                           some college (1 to 3 years of college or more)
                                                                                          who live with children under 12 years old. In
                                                                                          July and August 2020 we did not collect child
10




                                   8.4                                                    ages and instead asked whether the youngest
                                                                                          child in the household is in High School,
                                                                                          Elementary School, etc. We assume children
                                                                                          are under 12 if they are in Elementary School
                                                                                          or lower in those months.
0




             0 days                  1 day               2 to 4 days          5 days

                                           Women                     Men
     Sample: Respondents with at least some college and children under 12



                                                                                                                                      54
                             Figure A.4 Self-assessed efficiency of WFH during COVID rises with
                               WFH during COVID and desires and plans for post-COVID WFH
             During COVID: Percent of respondents mainly WFH                                   Post-COVID: Percent of full workdays at home




                                                                                    80
  70




                                                                                    60
  60




                                                                                    40
  50




                                                                                    20
  40




                                                                                                                   Worker desired          Employer planned
  30




                                                                                    0
       -40             -20               0                20                40           -40             -20                0                20                40
                Self-assessed efficiency while WFH during COVID                                  Self-assessed efficiency while WFH during COVID
Source: Responses to the questions: "After COVID, in 2022 and later, how often would you like to have paid workdays at home?", "After COVID, in 2022
and later, how often is your employer planning for you to work full days at home?", ""How does your efficiency working from home during the COVID-19
pandemic compare to your efficiency working on business premises before the pandemic?" and questions about current working status.
Notes: The figure on the left shows a binscatter of an indicator for the respondent mainly working from home at the time of the survey (self-reported before
November 2020, and since then if they worked from home at least 66 percent of working days in the survey week) against self-assessed relative efficiency
of WFH. The figure on the right shows binscatters for the amount of worker-desired and employer-planned WFH post-COVID. Data are from 28,250 survey
responses collected from August 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of working-age
respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in each {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                                                                                                                                                               55
                                                               Table A.1 Summary statistics
Variable                                                                                                    Mean            SD          25p          50p          75p               N
Earnings, $'000s                                                                                              63.1         73.5           35           45          75       28,597
Age                                                                                                           43.0         11.6           35           45          57       28,597
Years of education                                                                                            14.5          2.4           12           14          16       28,597
100*1(Ever WFH during COVID?)                                                                                 56.0         49.6            0         100          100       23,503
100*1(Currently WFH during COVID)                                                                             32.5         46.8            0            0         100       28,597
Percent worker desired post-COVID WFH days                                                                    45.7         41.0            0           40         100       28,597
Percent employer planned post-COVID WFH days                                                                  21.3         35.6            0            0          40       22,720
Commute time pre-COVID (minutes)                                                                              27.1         26.4           10           20          35       20,554
Percent raise equal to option to WFH 2-3 days/week                                                              7.0        12.5            0            5          13       25,232
How much more productive than expected has WFH been?                                                            7.1        13.0            0            5          15       16,309
Can you do your job from home (0 to 100 % scale)                                                              50.4         48.9            0           57          90       22,086
Percent higher effectiveness WFH during COVID over business premises pre-COVID                                  4.5        17.2            0            0          13       16,611
Investments in infrastructure, equipment for WFH by employer or self, $                                      561.1      1086.4             0         100          500       13,642
Hours invested learning to WFH effectively                                                                    14.9         24.2            2            7          20       13,658
Weekly spending near work, $                                                                                 151.9        163.9           35         100          200       20,578
1(Female)                                                                                                     43.8         49.6            0            0         100       28,597
1(Red State)                                                                                                  47.6         49.9            0            0         100       28,597
 Notes: Summary statistics for key variables, re-weighted to match the share of people in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell. Data are from
 33,250 survey responses collected between May 2020 and March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age
 respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in each {industry x state x earnings} cell. Not all questions (and hence not all variables) appear in all waves. Number of observations is less
 than the 33,250 survey responses primarily due to dropping responses that took less than 2 minutes in May, less than 3 minutes in the July to November 2020 waves, and less
                                                                                                                                                                    56
 than 5 minutes in the December 2020 to March 2021 waves.
  Using the ATUS to estimate the extent of WFH before the pandemic

We supplement our data collection efforts with published data from the Job Flexibilities and Work Schedules
module of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). This survey module ran continuously in 2017 and 2018,
yielding about 10,000 responses from wage and salary workers.
According to the tabulations at https://www.bls.gov/news.release/flex2.t03.htm, only 14.7 percent of
employees performed any full workdays from home before the pandemic. Among those who did, the frequency
distribution of full WFH days is as follows: Less than once a month (18.4%), once a month (13.5 %), once
every two weeks (13.1%), at least 1 day per week (10.2%), 1 to 2 days per week (17.4%), 3 to 4 days per week
(12.8%), and 5 or more days per week (14.5%). Thus, we estimate the share of full workdays at home before
the pandemic as 4.8 percent, computed as 100 times [ 0  1 - .147 + .147  (0  0.184 + 0.05  .135 +
0.1  .131 + 0.2  .102 + 0.3  .174 + 0.7  .128 + 1  .145) ]. We plot this 4.8% figure as the leftmost data
point in the right panel of Figure 1. The full survey is at https://www.bls.gov/news.release/flex2.nr0.htm.




                                                                                                              57
   Table A.2 Working-from-Home Productivity during COVID relative to expectations

Percent difference between WFH productivity and                           Percent difference between WFH
expectations                                          Mean        (SE)    productivity and expectations              Mean       (SE)

Overall                                                7.1        (0.1)

Women                                                  6.9        (0.2)   Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K                 6.0      (0.2)
Men                                                    7.4        (0.1)   Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K                7.5      (0.2)
                                                                          Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K               9.0      (0.2)
Age 20 to 29                                           7.3        (0.2)   Ann. Earnings over $150K                    10.4      (0.2)
Age 30 to 39                                           8.1        (0.2)
Age 40 to 49                                           7.4        (0.2)   Goods-producing sectors                      7.8      (0.3)
Age 50 to 64                                           5.7        (0.2)   Service sectors                              7.0      (0.1)

Less than high school                                  6.6        (1.6)   No children                                  6.0      (0.2)
High school                                            5.8        (0.4)   Living with children under 18                8.3      (0.1)
1 to 3 years of college                                6.5        (0.2)
4year college degree                                   7.3        (0.2)   Red (Republican-leaning) state               7.1      (0.2)
Graduate degree                                        8.5        (0.2)   Blue (Democratic-leaning) state              7.1      (0.1)

Notes: This table computes the average percent difference between productivity while working from home during COVID and expected WFH
productivity prior to the pandemic. The underlying survey question asks "Compared to your expectations before COVID (in 2019) how has
working from home turned out for you?" Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected between July 2020 and March 2021 by QuestionPro
and IncQuery. We reweight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x
education x earnings} cell.                                                                                                        58
                                  Table A.3 Investments that enable working from home

Average investment into                              $ (employer                                                                    $ (employer
                                 Hours      (SE)                    (SE)     Average investment into WFH         Hours      (SE)                    (SE)
WFH                                                  + employee)                                                                    + employee)



Overall                           15.0      (0.2)       561.2       (9.3)

Women                             13.4      (0.3)       417.9      (11.7)    Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K         15.7      (0.5)      438.4        (16.5)
Men                               16.2      (0.3)       674.6      (13.6)    Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K        14.8      (0.3)      599.4        (16.1)
                                                                             Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K       13.1      (0.4)      751.8        (24.4)
Age 20 to 29                      15.4       (0.5)      628.7      (24.9)    Ann. Earnings over $150K             13.4      (0.4)      960.2        (27.8)
Age 30 to 39                      16.3       (0.4)      584.3      (16.4)
Age 40 to 49                     605.4      (18.1)       15.7       (0.4)    Goods-producing sectors              18.1      (0.7)      634.2        (27.3)
Age 50 to 64                      12.3       (0.4)      432.2      (16.9)    Service sectors                      14.4      (0.2)      548.6         (9.9)

Less than high school             34.1      (5.6)       845.0      (143.0)   No children                          13.3      (0.3)      453.4        (12.4)
High school                       17.0      (0.8)       475.4       (27.5)   Living with children under 18        16.5      (0.3)      662.8        (13.4)
1 to 3 years of college           14.7      (0.5)       462.8       (18.2)
4year college degree              12.6      (0.3)       524.0       (15.5)   Red (Republican-leaning) State       15.3      (0.3)      543.0        (14.0)
Graduate degree                   14.6      (0.3)       737.6       (18.0)   Blue (Democratic-leaning) State      14.7      (0.3)      575.8        (12.4)

Notes: Average number of hours and dollars (paid by employer or employee) invested in enabling work from home during the pandemic. Data are from 30,750
survey responses collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We did not ask about the investments enabling WFH during COVID in
May 202. We reweight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                                                                                                                                               59
                               Table A.4 The stigma of working from home has diminished
                                                       Positive
                            Net change in                                                                        Net change in        Positive change
                                                      change in
Percent of respondents          WFH          (SE)                     (SE)     Percent of respondents                WFH         (SE)    in WFH          (SE)
                                                        WFH
                             perception                                                                           perception            perception
                                                      perception

Overall                          58.6        (0.4)        65.1        (0.3)

Women                            58.5        (0.6)        65.4        (0.4)    Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K          54.0        (0.7)       60.9        (0.6)
Men                              58.6        (0.5)        64.9        (0.4)    Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K         62.1        (0.6)       68.4        (0.5)
                                                                               Ann. Earnings of $100 to
                                                                               $150K                                 70.1        (0.9)       75.7        (0.6)
Age 20 to 29                     62.4        (1.0)        69.6        (0.7)    Ann. Earnings over $150K              74.7        (0.9)       80.8        (0.6)
Age 30 to 39                     64.6        (0.7)        70.6        (0.5)
Age 40 to 49                     58.4        (0.7)        65.1        (0.6)    Goods-producing sectors               54.5        (1.0)       61.5        (0.8)
Age 50 to 64                     52.0        (0.7)        58.5        (0.6)    Service sectors                       59.4        (0.4)       65.9        (0.3)

Less than high school            50.7        (4.1)        56.6        (3.4)    No children                           54.9        (0.6)       63.1        (0.5)
High school                      45.5        (1.0)        52.6        (0.8)    Living with children under 18         61.5        (0.5)       69.7        (0.4)
1 to 3 years of college          56.0        (0.8)        62.9        (0.6)
4-year college degree            66.4        (0.7)        72.5        (0.5)    Red (Republican-leaning) state        57.8        (0.6)       64.1        (0.5)
Graduate degree                  72.7        (0.6)        78.8        (0.5)    Blue (Democratic-leaning) state       59.2        (0.5)       66.1        (0.4)

Notes: This table reports (1) the net change in perceptions about working from home, equal to the percent of respondents who report WFH perceptions have improved
among some, most, or almost all the "people they know" minus the percent who report they have worsened; (2) the percent of respondents who report perceptions of
WFH have improved among people they know. Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-
weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                                                                                                                                                    60
                                Table A.5 Residual fear of proximity to other people

Percent of workers who would return to pre-COVID                                 Percent of workers who would return to
activities "completely"                                    Mean         (SE)     pre-COVID activities "completely"               Mean       (SE)

Overall                                                     28.4        (0.3)

Women                                                       21.1        (0.4)    Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K                     26.0      (0.5)
Men                                                         34.2        (0.4)    Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K                    29.3      (0.5)
                                                                                 Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K                   36.2      (0.7)
Age 20 to 29                                                26.8        (0.7)    Ann. Earnings over $150K                         42.1      (0.8)
Age 30 to 39                                                30.2        (0.5)
Age 40 to 49                                                31.2        (0.6)    Goods-producing sectors                          37.4      (0.8)
Age 50 to 64                                                25.8        (0.5)    Service sectors                                  26.6      (0.3)

Less than high school                                       35.8        (3.3)    No children                                      25.6      (0.4)
High school                                                 30.5        (0.8)    Living with children under 18                    32.0      (0.4)
1 to 3 years of college                                     25.5        (0.6)
4year college degree                                        25.1        (0.5)    Red (Republican-leaning) state                   28.2      (0.4)
Graduate degree                                             34.1        (0.5)    Blue (Democratic-leaning) state                  28.6      (0.4)

Notes: This table reports the percent share of workers who would return to pre-COVID activities "completely" if a vaccine is found and made widely
available. Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to
match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.
                                                                                                                                           61
    Table A.6: Residual fear of proximity to other people (reasons cited)

 You have stated that you would not return completely to pre-COVID activities, if a
 COVID vaccine is discovered and made widely available. What reasons are behind
 your answer? Please check all that apply

                                                                              Percent of respondents            (SE)

I am concerned about the effectiveness/safety/that not enough people will
                                                                                          84.28                (0.559)
take the COVID vaccine

I am concerned about other potential diseases                                             22.12                (0.637)

I have gotten used to social distancing, using e-commerce, and avoiding in-
                                                                                          19.62                (0.610)
person goods and services

Observations                                                                                    4,245
Notes: Data are from 7,500 survey responses collected in September, October, and November 2020 by Inc-Query and
QuestionPro. Each wave collected 2,500 responses, but we only asked this question if the respondent stated they would not
return "completely" to pre-COVID activities in the event a vaccine was discovered and made widely available. We re-
weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x
education x earnings} cell.




                                                                                                                            62
Table A.7. Employer plans and employee desires for post-COVID WFH correlate
                positively with improved perceptions of WFH
                                                                 Percent WFH days post-COVID (SE)
            Perceptions about WFH                               Employee desired Employer planned                    N


            Improved among almost all (90 to 100%)               56.8        (0.5)        30.9         (0.5)       6955


            Improved among most                                  49.8        (0.5)        23.4         (0.4)       7442


            Improved among some                                  43.2        (0.7)        19.7         (0.6)       3540


            No change                                            34.9        (0.6)        12.3         (0.4)       5480


            Worsened                                             40.7        (1.1)        20.6         (0.9)       1585

            Notes: This table estimates the percent share of days spent working from home post-COVID desired by workers
            and planned by their employers, as a function of how the employee believes perceptions about working from
            home have changed since the onset of the pandemic. Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected from July
            2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We exclude workers who have "no employer" in the
            employer plans question and impute zero planned WFH days to respondents who claim to have received no clear
            indication from their employer. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the
            2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.



                                                                                                                              63
                                                         Table A.8 Vaccine concerns
Percent of respondents voicing concerns about vaccine                                 Percent of respondents voicing concerns about
safety, effectiveness, or take-up                              Mean          (SE)     vaccine safety, effectiveness, or take-up              Mean         (SE)

Overall                                                         84.3         (0.6)

Women                                                           86.2         (0.7)    Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K                            84.8        (1.0)
Men                                                             82.3         (0.8)    Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K                           83.8        (1.0)
                                                                                      Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K                          82.9        (1.4)
Age 20 to 29                                                    81.1         (1.4)    Ann. Earnings over $150K                                83.0        (1.5)
Age 30 to 39                                                    81.3         (1.1)
Age 40 to 49                                                    87.1         (1.0)    Goods-producing sectors                                 78.0        (1.8)
Age 50 to 64                                                    86.4         (1.0)    Service sectors                                         85.3        (0.6)

Less than high school                                           86.1         (5.9)    No children                                             84.9        (0.8)
High school                                                     80.9         (1.6)    Living with children under 18                           83.4        (0.8)
1 to 3 years of college                                         85.8         (1.1)
4year college degree                                            84.4         (1.0)    Red (Republican-leaning) state                          83.5        (0.8)
Graduate degree                                                 86.3         (1.0)    Blue (Democratic-leaning) state                         85.0        (0.7)

Notes: This table reports the percent of respondents concerned about vaccine effectiveness, safety, or take-up, among those who would not "completely" return to
pre-COVID activities in the event a vaccine is discovered and made widely available. Data are from 7,500 survey responses collected in September, October, and
November 2020 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. Each wave collected 2,500 responses, but we only asked this question if the respondent stated they would not
return "completely" to pre-COVID activities in the event a vaccine was discovered and made widely available. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of
working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.

                                                                                                                                                     64
                          Table A.9 Efficiency of WFH vs. working on business premises

                                                                              Efficiency while WFH during COVID relative
Efficiency while WFH during COVID relative to business                        to business premises before COVID, %
premises before COVID, % difference                         Mean      (SE)    difference                                         Mean          (SE)

Overall                                                       4.5    (0.1)

Women                                                         3.7    (0.2)    Ann. Earnings of $20 to $50K                         2.9         (0.3)
Men                                                           5.2    (0.2)    Ann. Earnings of $50 to $100K                        4.8         (0.2)
                                                                              Ann. Earnings of $100 to $150K                       7.8         (0.3)
Age 20 to 29                                                  4.9    (0.3)    Ann. Earnings over $150K                            10.5         (0.3)
Age 30 to 39                                                  6.0    (0.2)
Age 40 to 49                                                  4.7    (0.3)    Goods-producing sectors                             4.7          (0.3)
Age 50 to 64                                                  2.5    (0.3)    Service sectors                                     4.5          (0.1)

Less than high school                                         1.7    (1.8)    No children                                         3.3          (0.2)
High school                                                   3.1    (0.4)    Living with children under 18                       5.7          (0.2)
1 to 3 years of college                                       4.0    (0.3)
4year college degree                                          4.7    (0.2)    Red (Republican-leaning) state                      4.8          (0.2)
Graduate degree                                               6.4    (0.2)    Blue (Democratic-leaning) state                     4.3          (0.2)

Notes: This table estimates the difference in efficiency while working from home during COVID relative to working on business premises before
COVID, among respondents working from home at some point during COVID. Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected from July 2020 to March
2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x
sex x education x earnings} cell.

                                                                                                                                          65
                                    Table A.10 What predicts desired and planned WFH post-COVID?

                                                                          a. Worker desired WFH
                                                                    (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)                     (6)              (7)
Dependent Variable                                                                               Worker Desired WFH Days, Post-COVID (%)

Years of education                                                3.53***          3.23***          2.64***          2.63***          2.55***          2.27***          1.82***
                                                                   (0.48)           (0.50)           (0.49)           (0.49)           (0.49)           (0.48)           (0.49)
log(Earnings)                                                                       1.00**          1.74***          1.72***          1.65***          2.50***          1.75***
                                                                                    (0.43)           (0.46)           (0.46)           (0.46)           (0.46)           (0.46)
1(Male)                                                                                            -5.25***         -5.26***         -5.33***         -5.80***         -6.15***
                                                                                                     (1.04)           (1.04)           (1.04)           (1.03)           (1.06)
1(Lives with children under 18)                                                                     2.55***          2.56***          2.55***             0.14             0.47
                                                                                                     (0.89)           (0.89)           (0.89)           (0.93)           (0.92)
1(Male) x 1(Lives with children under 18)                                                             -0.81            -0.83            -0.85            -0.80            -1.68
                                                                                                     (1.45)           (1.45)           (1.45)           (1.44)           (1.42)
Biden vote share (state of residence)                                                                                   0.15             0.12             0.03            -0.04
                                                                                                                      (0.40)           (0.40)           (0.39)           (0.38)
Internet quality                                                                                                                      1.30***           1.24**           1.05**
                                                                                                                                       (0.50)           (0.49)           (0.49)

Survey wave fixed effects                                            Y                Y                Y               Y                Y                Y                Y
Age bin fixed effects                                                                                                                                    Y                Y
Industry fixed effects                                                                                                                                                    Y

Dependent variable mean                                             46.34            46.34            46.34        46.34              46.34            46.34            46.34
Observations                                                       25,056           25,056           25,056       25,056             25,056           25,056           25,056
R-squared                                                            0.01             0.01             0.02         0.02               0.02             0.03             0.04
Notes: This table reports how the number of worker-desired post-COVID WFH days is associated with worker characteristics. Coefficients on continuous independent variables reflect a
1-standard deviation change. Data are from 33,250 survey responses collected from May 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to match the
share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {sex x age x education x earnings} cell.


                                                                                                                                                                         66
                                                              b. Employer planned WFH
                                                                 (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)                    (6)             (7)
Dependent Variable                                                                        Employer Planned WFH Days, Post-COVID (%)

Years of education                                             5.56***         3.55***         3.82***         3.80***         3.77***         3.50***          2.83***
                                                                (0.36)          (0.38)          (0.38)          (0.38)          (0.38)          (0.38)           (0.41)
log(Earnings)                                                                  6.79***         5.79***         5.67***         5.64***         6.75***          6.03***
                                                                                (0.39)          (0.41)          (0.41)          (0.42)          (0.42)           (0.42)
1(Male)                                                                                        2.34***         2.29***         2.27***          1.67**           1.39*
                                                                                                (0.82)          (0.82)          (0.82)          (0.81)           (0.81)
1(Lives with children under 18)                                                                4.30***         4.35***         4.35***         2.98***          2.90***
                                                                                                (0.78)          (0.78)          (0.78)          (0.80)           (0.80)
1(Male) x 1(Lives with children under 18)                                                       2.73**          2.65**          2.64**          2.87**            1.81
                                                                                                (1.21)          (1.21)          (1.21)          (1.21)           (1.21)
Biden vote share (state of residence)                                                                          0.76**          0.75**           0.61*             0.49
                                                                                                                (0.32)          (0.32)          (0.32)           (0.31)
Internet quality                                                                                                                 0.48            0.43             0.26
                                                                                                                                (0.35)          (0.35)           (0.35)

Survey wave fixed effects                                         Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y                Y
Age bin fixed effects                                                                                                                             Y                Y
Industry Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                             Y

Dependent variable mean                                           21.35            21.35           21.35           21.35            21.35         21.35           21.35
Observations                                                     22,165           22,165          22,165          22,165           22,165        22,165          22,165
R-squared                                                         0.03             0.05            0.06             0.06            0.06          0.07            0.09
Notes: This table reports how the number of employer planned post-COVID WFH days is associated with worker characteristics. Coefficients on continuous independent variables
reflect a 1-standard deviation change. Data are from 30,750 survey responses collected from July 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We exclude workers who
have "no employer" in the employer plans question and impute zero employer planned working days to respondents who have received no clear indication from their employer. We
re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in the 2010-2019 CPS in a given {age x sex x education x earnings} cell.

                                                                                                                                                                    67
                     Table A.11 What predicts self-assessed efficiency while WFH during COVID?
                                                                    (1)               (2)             (3)           (4)              (5)              (6)                  (7)
Dependent Variable                                                           Relative efficiency of WFH during COVID vs. on business premises before COVID (%)

Years of education                                                1.29***          0.64**           0.68**           0.68**           0.57**           0.56**           0.70**
                                                                   (0.25)           (0.27)           (0.26)           (0.26)           (0.26)           (0.26)           (0.28)
log(Earnings)                                                                      2.18***          1.93***          1.93***          1.78***          2.22***          1.88***
                                                                                    (0.22)           (0.23)           (0.23)           (0.23)           (0.23)           (0.23)
1(Male)                                                                                               -0.20            -0.20            -0.36            -0.57            -0.87
                                                                                                     (0.56)           (0.56)           (0.56)           (0.55)           (0.56)
1(Lives with children under 18)                                                                      1.19**           1.19**           1.24**             0.46             0.51
                                                                                                     (0.52)           (0.52)           (0.51)           (0.53)           (0.53)
1(Male) x 1(Lives with children under 18)                                                             1.51*            1.52*           1.53**           1.66**             1.18
                                                                                                     (0.78)           (0.78)           (0.77)           (0.76)           (0.76)
Biden vote share (state of residence)                                                                                  -0.03            -0.09            -0.15            -0.17
                                                                                                                      (0.18)           (0.18)           (0.18)           (0.18)
Internet quality                                                                                                                      2.63***          2.63***          2.50***
                                                                                                                                       (0.28)           (0.28)           (0.28)

Survey wave fixed effects                                            Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                Y                   Y
Age bin fixed effects                                                                                                                                     Y                   Y
Industry Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                                        Y

Dependent variable mean                                                 4.90             4.90              4.90           4.90             4.90              4.90            4.90
Observations                                                          15,947            15,947           15,947          15,947           15,947            15,947         15,947
R-squared                                                               0.01             0.02              0.02           0.02             0.04              0.05            0.06
Notes: This table reports how the relative efficiency of WFH during COVID vs. on business premises before COVID (%) is associated with worker characteristics. Only respondents
currently WFH during COVID or with some WFH experience during COVID got this question. Coefficients of continuous independent variables reflect a 1-standard deviation change. Data
are from 28,250 survey responses collected from August 2020 to March 2021 by Inc-Query and QuestionPro. We re-weight raw responses to match the share of working age respondents in
the 2010-2019 CPS in each {industry x state x earnings} cell. The table excludes data from the May and July 2020 waves because we did not ask about efficiency while WFH during COVID
in May, and the July version of the question provided response options that were not symmetric about zero.

                                                                                                                                                                         68
