                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      KNOWLEDGE SPILLOVERS, TRADE, AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

                                        Wolfgang Keller

                                       Working Paper 28739
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28739


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




I have no financial relationships regarding this research to report. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Wolfgang Keller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Knowledge Spillovers, Trade, and Foreign Direct Investment
Wolfgang Keller
NBER Working Paper No. 28739
April 2021
JEL No. F1,F23,O3

                                         ABSTRACT

I study knowledge spillovers, positive externalities that augment the information set of an
economic agent, and reviews the evidence on such spillovers in the context of international
economic transactions. Even though spillovers are by their very nature difficult to identify, over
recent decades a number of advances-conceptual, empirical, as well as in form of new data­have
produced robust evidence that both trade and foreign direct investment lead to sizable knowledge
spillovers.


Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Colorado, Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
and NBER
Wolfgang.Keller@colorado.edu
1       Introduction

The surge in interest in the relationship between knowledge spillovers, trade, and FDI can be
explained by two factors. First, the 1970s onwards witnessed increasing evidence that outward-
oriented economies performed systematically better in a number of ways including productivity
gains than inward-oriented economies.1 Second, endogenous growth theory formalized the idea
that through their impact on productivity, knowledge spillovers are central in generating long-
run per-capita income growth.2 Born was the idea that outward-oriented economies performed
relatively well because opening up to foreign trade and investment generates additional knowledge
spillovers because it means that domestic agents interact with foreign agents that have larger (or
different) stocks of knowledge. This entry synthesizes the evidence by tracing out the literature
from its beginning in the 1990s to current research by discussing a number of key papers.3



2       Knowledge Spillovers and Trade

2.1      Imports

Industry Studies Intermediate input imports is among the channels of international knowledge
spillovers that empirical work started out with. Incorporating the gains from product variety of
static models (Ethier 1982) into growth models in which R&D leads to an increase in intermediate
inputs (Romer 1990), countries that begin to import these new inputs benefit from foreign R&D
expenditures both because they amount to embodied technology and because reverse-engineering
may lead to additional knowledge gains (Grossman and Helpman 1990, 1991, Rivera-Batiz and
Romer 1991).4 Thus, a country's import composition should matter. If imports are an important
conduit of knowledge spillovers, then countries that import disproportionately from high-R&D
countries should tend to have high productivity levels compared to countries that whose import
    1
      Early work includes Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1975), Bhagwati (1978), and Krueger (1978).
    2
      Romer (1990). A key feature of knowledge is that it is non-rival. See also Arrow (1969).
    3
      For broader discussions, see also Keller (2010, 2004).
    4
      Such inputs may also be shipped between multinational parent and affiliate, see Keller and Yeaple (2013).

                                                         2
patterns are more directed to low-R&D countries. In Coe and Helpman (1995), these considerations
                                                        f
lead the authors to define the foreign knowledge stock Sct of country c in year t as


                                             f                d
                                            Sct =        mck Skt ,                                      (1)
                                                    k


       d
where Skt is country k's domestic knowledge stock in year t, measured as cumulative R&D spending
subject to some rate of depreciation, and mck is country c's bilateral import share from country
k.5 Holding constant R&D spending, high values of the foreign knowledge stock indicate that a
country's import pattern is skewed towards high-R&D countries, so a coefficient 1 > 0 in the
regression
                                                     f         d
                                lnT F Pct = c + 1 lnSct + 2 lnSct + ct ,                                (2)

may be taken as evidence for knowledge spillovers through imports; T F Pct is a measure of country
productivity and c are country fixed effects. By estimating 1 to be positive and significant in a
sample of 22 OECD countries, Coe and Helpman (1995) concluded that indeed imports are a major
channel of international knowledge spillovers. Subsequent work by Keller (1998) questioned this
conclusion by showing that a placebo exercise yielded equally strong 'evidence' for import-related
international knowledge spillovers. Specifically, Keller (1998) showed that replacing the actual
bilateral import shares mck in equation (1) by randomly generated shares or simply by a constant
yielded estimates of 1 that are similar in sign and magnitude to the estimate obtained with the
actual import shares.

Keller's (1998) result was an earlier warning that empirical work on international knowledge
spillovers would be challenging. By definition, spillovers­as external effects­are not reflected in
market transactions, and any evidence will therefore have to be of an indirect nature. Furthermore,
measures related to technology such as R&D, patents, and (total factor) productivity are compar-
atively noisy, which makes econometric identification particularly hard. In the case of Coe and
  5
   The approach of applying weights to external R&D has a long tradition in research on identifying domestic
knowledge spillovers, see Terleckyj (1974), Griliches (1979), and Scherer (1984).



                                                     3
Helpman (1995), trending productivity and R&D variables at the country level created a strong
spurious correlation-whether or not actual import shares are employed. Subsequent work in the
same spirit but at the industry level, greatly increasing the amount of identifying variation, finds
robust evidence for import-related international knowledge spillovers (Keller 2000, 2002).

Key to obtaining robust evidence on knowledge spillovers is to employ a variable capturing spillovers
not related to imports in addition to a measure of the import channel of international knowledge
spillovers. Acharya and Keller (2009) estimate the impact of import-related R&D spillovers from
six large OECD economies in a sample of manufacturing industries of other high-income countries.
Their regression specification is as follows:


                 T F Pcit = 1 Scit +          2s Ssit +          3s (mcsit × Ssit ) + X + cit ,   (3)
                                       s G6               s G6


where T F Pcit is defined as log total factor productivity in country c's industry i and year t, s
indexes the six large OECD countries whose imports are being considered, Ssit is the cumulative
R&D stock of in country s's industry i in year t, and mcsit is country c's bilateral import share from
country s in industry i and year t; the term X is a vector of control variables that includes import
shares ( mcsit ) as well as country-by-industry and year fixed effects. Notice that the specification
distinguishes import-related from general spillovers, with the former captured by 3s and the
latter by 2s , respectively. Another advantage of this specification is that the non-symmetric
specification­examining spillovers from one set of countries to another set of countries­reduces
endogeneity concerns. Acharya and Keller (2009) find strong evidence of import-related R&D
spillovers in the sense of 3s > 0.


Firm- or Plant-level Studies A new wave of results was triggered by the availability of micro
data on firms or plants for an increasing number of countries. Data at the level of firms (or,
more typically, plants) also allows to examine whether changes in industry productivity, the left
hand side in equation (3), are due to the reallocation of market shares between high- and low-


                                                          4
productivity firms or due to changes in productivity firm by firm (between-firm and within-firm
effects, respectively). In principle, productivity gains through the reallocation of market shares
from low- to high-productivity domestic firms in response to a change in imports need not involve
positive externalities (such as technological learning) ­ it is consistent with unchanged productivity
in each of the domestic firms. However, if productivity changes within-firm as a consequence of an
import change this provides evidence for trade-related spillovers.

Pavcnik (2002) examines the productivity impact of a trade liberalization in Chile, which reduced
import tariffs to a uniform 10% rate by 1979 from rates of often above 100% in the year 1974. She
finds that after the trade reform, plants in import-competing industries experience sizable ­between
3 and 10 percent­productivity increases. These results are largely unchanged with the inclusion
of plant fixed effects, indicating that these are within-plant effects in line with positive spillovers
from the adoption of new technology or improvements in management techniques through new
import competition. In addition to evidence on learning spillovers through import competition,
Pavcnik (2002) also finds evidence for increases in industry productivity through market share
reallocations, especially through the exit of low-productivity plants.

The imports considered in Pavcnik (2002) is trade in final goods, not intermediate goods as in the
Coe and Helpman (1995) and Keller (1998) spillover regressions. Along these lines, Pavcnik's (2002)
result is significant because the increase in final goods trade constitutes additional competition,
which depending on the model may lower profits as well as the incentive to adopt new management
techniques or technology. Amiti and Konings (2007) shift the focus back to intermediate goods
trade by showing with manufacturing census data for Indonesia that it is primarily the liberalization
of input tariffs, not output tariffs, that is behind the observed productivity gains. They argue that
lower input tariffs may lead to gains due to variety, quality, embodied technology, and learning.




                                                  5
2.2     Exports

Research on knowledge spillovers through export activity starts typically from the premise that
exporting might lead to access to new knowlege, such as learning about tastes or technologies in
foreign markets, which in turn increases productivity. In this sense, exporting may be considered to
be a technology sourcing activity, and research on spillovers in this context addresses the question
whethere there is "learning-by-exporting".

A well-established finding at least since the late 1990s is that in a given given cross-section, firms
that export tend to be more productive than firms that do not export (Clerides, Lach, and Tybout
1998, Bernard and Jensen 1999). This result is consistent both with the idea that more productive
firms select into exporting and that there is learning-by-exporting. Based on US data, Bernard and
Jensen (1999) find that conditional on plant survival, there is higher labor productivity growth
among the set of exporting compared to non-exporting firms, though this difference becomes
smaller and even insignificant for longer time horizons.6 Moreover, exporters are also more likely
to survive than non-exporters. Because low productivity growth is an important reason for exit
of plants, Bernard and Jensen's (1999) estimate of the productivity growth differences between
exporters and non-exporters is likely to be an underestimate.

The paper by Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998) provides evidence on learning externalities from
exporting using micro data from Columbia, Morocco, and Mexico. By estimating simultaneously
a dynamic discrete choice equation that determines export market participation, these authors
take account that it is on average the already-productive firms that self-select into the export
market. The authors estimate jointly an export market participation equation stipulating that a
firm exports if there are profits to it given the firm's past cost, any fixed cost of entering the export
market, and the exchange rate together with the autoregressive evolution of the firm's cost, which
allows for learning-by-exporting because the firm's cost may depend on past export participation.
   6
     Usually a measure of total factor productivity (TFP) would be preferred because it accounts for the contribution
of all factors of production, not only labor. Bernard and Jensen (1999) however estimate TFP as the residual from
an OLS regression, which suffers from a number of problems that have been addressed in future applications of
control function approaches (e.g. Olley and Pakes 1996).


                                                         6
Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998) show results for the three countries separately, and also by
major industry, using maximum likelihood and generalized method of moments estimation.

They also discuss results for each country separately, and also by major industry. In general, they
tend to show no signicant effects from past exporting experience on current performance. In fact, to
the extent that Clerides et al.'s estimates are significant, they go into the wrong direction (exporting
raising costs). It would be surprising if indeed there would be negative learning effects, and the
authors give a number of plausible reasons of why this finding may have to be discounted. Another
interpretation of the generally insignificant estimates may be that the estimation framework is
demanding too much of the data. However, Clerides et al.s descriptive plots of average cost before
and after export market entry support their main result of no evidence for learning-by-exporting
effects. Exporters are more productive, but that is because they self-select themselves into the
export market.

Using similar methods as Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998), van Biesebroeck (2005) has revisited
the issue by studying productivity dynamics of firms in nine African countries. In contrast to
Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998), he estimates that starting to export boosts productivity by
about 25% for the average firm in his sample. Van Biesebroeck (2005) also estimates that the higher
productivity growth of exporters versus non-exporters is sustained. By employing instrumental-
variable and semi-parametric techniques as alternative ways to deal with the selection issue, van
Biesebroeck's analysis is more comprehensive than most. His analysis generally supports the notion
that exporting leads to the transfer of technological knowledge.

In trying to reconcile his findings with some of the earlier results, van Biesebroeck shows that part
of the difference in productivity growth between exporters and non-exporters appears to be due to
unexploited scale economies for the latter. This suggests that at least in part his results are due
to constraints imposed by demand, and not due to technology transfer in the sense of an outward
shift of the production possibility frontier at all levels of production. Richer data is needed to
make further progress on distinguishing these hypotheses.


                                                   7
De Loecker (2007) uses matched sampling techniques to analyze whether firms that start exporting
become more productive, using micro data of Slovenian manufacturing firms. Controlling for self-
selection into exporting, De Loecker finds that export entrants indeed become more productive
once they start exporting, and that the productivity gap between exporters and their domestic
counterparts increases further over time.

The previous discussion has highlighted the importance of distinguishing differences in firm pro-
ductivity that exist before entry into the export market, versus increases in productivity as the
result of exporting. Since the late 1990s, the literature has increasingly relied on control function
approaches such as Olley and Pakes (1996) to model the productivity process because it addresses
selection and simultaneity issues in the estimation by including a proxy, it , for time-varying firm
specific productivity
                                       yit = 0 + 1 xit + 2 kit + eit
                                                                                                                (4)

                                       eit =              it + uit

where yit , xit , and kit are outout, intermediate inputs (e.g. labor and materials), and capital of
firm i at time t, while uit is a well-behaved error term. Olley and Pakes (1996) show that under
reasonable conditions the unobserved term it can be modeled by inverting investment, it , of the
firm at time t
                                        it = - 1
                                             it (it , kit ) = it (it , kit ).                                   (5)

Substituting equation (5) into equation (4), Olley and Pakes (1996) show that the production func-
tion parameters 1 and 2 , and therefore total factor productivity, can be consistently estimated.7
Early work in this framework tended to assume that the time-varying firm-specific productivity
evolves as an exogenous first-order Marov process


                                            it+1 = g1 (it ) + it+1 ,                                            (6)
   7
     Given that the function it (.) is unknown it is in practice typically approximated by a higher-order polynomial
in investment and capital.


                                                         8
where productivity at time t+1, it+1 , consists of expected productivity given firm i's information
set at time t, g1 (it ), and a productivity shock, it+1 . Work on the importance of international
knowledge spillovers has developed the econometric toolkit by noting that the assumption of an
exogenous process of productivity is restrictive because in the case of the learning-by-exporting
hypothesis, for example, the key question is whether the productivity process changes as the result
of export market entry. Thus, the productivity process should depend on the firm's export status
(De Loecker 2013):
                                          it+1 = g2 (it , Eit ) + it+1 ,                                     (7)

where Eit is a measure of firm i's export activity at time t. Furthermore, De Loecker (2013) shows
that accounting for export activity in the productivity process is not only appropriate conceptually
but that it also strengthens the evidence in favor of learning-by-exporting relative to earlier work
that had not done so.

Examining the evolution of output-based productivity to detect learning-by-exporting­see equation
(4)­ the focus of the literature has so far been on what is referred to as revenue total factor
productivity (TFPR). TFPR depends on the output price of the firm, and firms' output prices
might well fall upon the liberalization of trade­such as Chile's liberalization from 1974-79­that
includes substantial cuts in tariffs. Lower output tariffs increase competition by changing the
residual demand that firms face. To the extent that firm markups­price over marginal cost­are
largely constant as firms enter the export market, a decline in the firm's output price implies a
decrease in its marginal cost. Based on De Loecker and Warzynski's (2012) approach to estimating
mark-ups and product-level output prices for a sample of Chilean plants 1996-2007, Garcia-Marin
and Voigtlaender (2019) show that upon export entry productivity increased by between 15-25%.8

Overall, there is by now solid evidence for spillovers through learning-by-exporting that increase
firm productivity. Where we know still relatively little is what mechanisms are most important for
the spillovers to materialize. The relative contribution of learning about new products or inputs,
  8
      Their analysis of multi-product plants follows De Loecker, Goldberg, Khandelwal, and Pavcnik (2016).



                                                         9
management techniques, information about new process technologies, or simply demonstration
effects is still largely undetermined.




                                           10
3     Spillovers through Foreign Direct Investment

3.1    Spillovers through Inward Foreign Direct Investment

Spillovers from FDI in the same Industry A sizable literature has studied the evidence
for positive externalities in form of technological learning through foreign direct investment (FDI).
Spawning hundreds of papers, it is typically referred to as the FDI spillovers literature. Aitken and
Harrison (1999), one of the early papers employing firm-level longitudinal data, asks whether the
special treatment of foreign-owned firms--e.g., lower income tax rates, tax holidays, or subsidies
for infrastructure­ to attract FDI can be justified through the positive externalities these firms
generate in form of technology transfer in a sample of about 4,000 Venezuelan plants between 1976
to 1989. Aitken and Harrison (1999) note that inward FDI might also affect short-run productivity
of domestic plants negatively by reducing their demand and forcing them up the average cost curve,
an effect that one might refer to as a business-stealing effect (e.g., Aitken and Harrison 1999, p.606).

The measure of inward FDI in Aitken and Harrison (1999) is the share of foreign employment in
total sector employment (Emp):


                                                i   F Sijt × Empijt
                                     F Sjt =                        ,                               (8)
                                                       i Empijt



where F Sijt , 0 < F Sijt  1, is firm i's foreign ownership share in sector j at time t. The hypothesis
is that a higher value of sector-level FDI increases the chance that information on new products or
processes introduced by foreign firms diffuses to domestic firms. This could be simply by observing
foreign firms, or diffusion might occur from labor turnover as domestic employees move from foreign
to domestic firms.

Regressing changes in log output on changes in log materials, skilled, and unskilled workers, year
fixed effects and the sector-level measure of FDI in equation (8), Aitken and Harrison (1999) find
that the coefficient on sector-level FDI is significantly negative (Table 1, columns 5 to 8). In
terms of magnitude, the coefficient is about -0.27, suggesting that an increase in the share of FDI

                                                     11
from 0 to 10 percent leads to a decline in domestic productivity by almost 3 percent. Based on
this and a range of additional results Aitken and Harrison (1999) conclude that there are large,
negative spillovers from foreign investment to domestic firms, and no evidence for the existence of
knowledge spillovers to domestic firms from inward FDI. If indeed there are no significant positive
externalities from inward FDI, there would be no case for using public funds to attract such FDI.

However, there are reasons to be more optimistic about using public funds to attract FDI. The
first set of reasons for that lies in the fact that Aitken and Harrison (1999) does not address a
number of key issues that have been shown to greatly matter in the time since they presented their
pioneering work back in the late 1990s. First, we now know from the recent emphasis on control
function approaches that a regression of output on labor, materials, and capital is unlikely to yield
a consistent estimate of plant productivity (see, e.g., Olley and Pakes 1996).

Second, if one believes that the entry of foreign-owned firms into the domestic economy may lead
to business stealing, or product market rivalry, it will be important to account for such effects
in the empirical specification. As noted by Lucking, Bloom, and van Reenen (2020), econometric
estimates of technology spillovers in the literature may be severely contaminated by product market
rivalry effects.

Studying domestic knowledge spillovers Bloom, Schankerman, and van Reenen (2013) account for
product market rivalry by employing the Compustat Segment Dataset, which gives each firm's
total sales broken down across four-digit industries (597 of them). The product market closeness
between any two firms i and j, SICij ,is calculated as the uncentered correlation between the firms
market shares across all four-digit industries:

                                                      (Si Sj )
                                    SICij =                           ,                          (9)
                                              (Si Si )1/2 (Sj Sj )1/2

where Si is the vector of market shares across 597 four-digit industries by firm i. The authors then




                                                  12
define the pool of product market R&D for firm i in year t, RIV ALit , as


                                            RIV ALit =             SICij Sit ,                                    (10)
                                                            j =i


where Sit is the R&D stock of firm i at time t. Notice that the variable RIV ALit will be high
if firm i shares the same product space with many other firms, and conditional on product space
it will be high if other firms spend substantial amounts of R&D in order to protect or enlarge
their markets. Bloom, Schankerman, and van Reenen (2013) tend to find negative coefficients on
RIV ALit in their productivity estimation, consistent with a negative effect of R&D by neighbors
                                                       9
in product space on the firms' own business.

The other reason for being more optimistic than Aitken and Harrison (1999) about using public
funds to help generating FDI spillovers to domestic firms is that Aitken and Harrison (1999)
apply the term "spillovers" indiscriminately to both externalities and non-externalities. Finding
a negative correlation between FDI and domestic productivity can have many reasons, including
that upon an inflow of FDI domestic firms lose market shares and have to move up their average
cost curves. No matter the reason for the negative correlation, however, we know that these are
not FDI spillovers since by definition such externalities would have to be positive. While in terms
of positive economics such so-called "negative spillovers" might be of interest, they do not play
a role for the key policy question of this research, namely are there positive externalities from
FDI sufficient in size so as to warrant the public incentives that are expended to attract foreign-
owned firms? The issue particularly important because many papers in the large literature on FDI
spillovers have followed Aitken and Harrison's (1999) approach of not making a clear distinction
between externalities and non-externalities.
   9
    Instead of R&D one could employ a measure of firm size such as employment. Bloom, Schankerman, and
van Reenen (2013) prefer R&D because then the market rivalry measure is analogous to their technology spillover
measure, SP ILLT ECHit , which is defined as SP ILLT ECHit =               j =i T ECHij Sit , where T ECHij , following
Jaffe (1986) is defined as the correlation between firm i's and j's patent portfolios. Notice that as in the analysis of
import-related spillovers of Acharya and Keller (2009) above, Bloom, Schankerman, and van Reenen (2013) improve
identification by making sure that the spillover measure SP ILLT ECHit is not the only measure of other (firm or
industry) R&D in the regression (see equation (3)).



                                                           13
In their analysis of the United Kingdom between 1973 and 1992, Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter
(2007) have also asked whether the size of FDI spillovers justifies the UK government's outlays to
attract these foreign-owned firms. In contrast to the work by Aitken and Harrison (1999), these
authors account for business stealing effects by including several variables that control for changes
in the degree of competition. Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2007) estimate positive sector-level
FDI spillovers using one-year differences OLS though the corresponding instrumental-variables (IV)
specification to address the endogeneity of FDI produces no significant results. More generally,
the size of the spillover point estimates is small, leading Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter (2007) to
conclude that positive externalities through inward FDI are too small to justify the outlays of the
UK government to attract foreign-owned firms.

A paper that estimates large FDI spillovers at the sector level is Keller and Yeaple (2009). These
authors study spillovers from inward FDI in the US between 1996 and 2007 using the Compustat
database. Their approach is similar to earlier work in that revenue-based total factor productivity
growth is related to inward FDI in the sector in which the domestic firm operates. Keller and
Yeaple (2009) estimate that FDI spillovers account for as much as 19% of US manufacturing
productivity growth during 1996 to 2007.

Since finding economically large sector-level FDI spillovers is not a common finding in the literature,
it is important to ask what drives Keller and Yeaple's (2009) result. One possibility is that it follows
from the choice of country, the US. The typical firm in the US is likely to be more productive than
in, say, Venezuela, and moreover, Compustat firms tend to larger and more productive than other
US firms. To the extent that the technology gap between foreign-owned and domestic firms is
too large, the latter might not have the absorptive capacity (Keller 1996) to benefit from positive
externalities provided by foreign-owned firms.

While this is at some level plausible, there are also reasons to believe it does not drive Keller and
Yeaple's (2009) findings. Not only is the technology gap between typical domestic firm and foreign-
owned firms in Keller and Yeaple's (2009) sample sizable, given that only the most productive firms


                                                  14
become multinationals, but Keller and Yeaple (2009) also show that FDI spillovers in their analysis
are larger for firms with a relatively large technology gap (smaller, less productive firms). This is
inconsistent with country-level technology gap being the main reason for their large FDI spillover
estimates.

Other elements of their estimation strategy such as the control function approach to productivity
estimation, controls for changes in market competition, and accounting for the possible endogeneity
of FDI help to improve the estimation results but they are not central to the size of Keller and
Yeaple's (2009) estimates. Rather, it is that they have a relatively precise measure of foreign
ownership in the US economy at the sector level. Typically, researchers classify a foreign-owned
firm or plant based on the industry in which the majority of its sales occurs ("main line of business").

In contrast, Keller and Yeaple (2009) compute their sector-level FDI measure summing over all
employment in the US based not only on the majority-of-sales industry but the eight largest
industries in which each of the foreign-owned firms is active. This information at the sub-firm
level is comparable to the "business segment" data available in some data sets, and it yields a more
precise characterization of changes in industry foreign ownership from year to year.10

To corroborate this simple point, Keller and Yeaple (2009) compare their FDI spillover coefficients
with the alternative based on the standard "main line of business" definition. The results from
this exercise reveal that the FDI spillover estimate using the measurement-error prone main line
of business variable is an order of magnitude smaller than using the business segment definition to
create the FDI variable, and the typically available main line of business FDI variables tends to
be not significantly different from zero.11

Overall, the analysis of Keller and Yeaple (2009) shows that issues of measurement can greatly
affect the findings on FDI spillovers, and that once key issues are addressed there is evidence of
substantial positive externalities from inward FDI in the same sector.
  10
     Compounding this, the measure of sector FDI in many studies tends to be at a relatively aggregate level, such
as two-digit industries.
  11
     For example, Keller and Yeaple (2009) estimate a FDI spillover coefficient of 0.379 (robust s.e. of 0.196) using
"business segment" information, compared to 0.035 (s.e. of 0.095) using "main line of business" data, see Table 7.

                                                         15
Spillovers from FDI in Other Industries The relative lack of evidence in the early literature
on spillovers to domestic firms in the same industry has led researchers to look for spillovers
from FDI in other industries, especially in industries that buy inputs from domestic firms (so-
called backward spillovers). One way of thinking about this strategy is that it is a simple way
of addressing competition effects that are present through FDI in the same industry. While one
consequence of foreign-owned firms in the same industry is typically that they steal some of the
business of domestic firms in the same industry, a multinational that buys from domestic input
suppliers does not compete with them, in fact FDI spillovers may be particularly likely because
the multinational may want to transfer technology to its supplier. An influential paper is Javorcik
(2004) who finds evidence for FDI spillovers through backward linkages, a result that has been
replicated in other papers.

There are some reasons to be careful in interpreting these results. For one, while multinational
buyers have an incentive to transfer technology to their suppliers, they will also internalize the
incentive that suppliers may start selling their improved input to other buyers that compete with
the multinational. Moreover, the multinational buyer will typically demand something in return
for any technology transfer (such as lower-priced inputs, see Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout 2008),
which poses a challenge for quantifying the size of the externality.12 Furthermore, because of
unavailability of data work on backward FDI spillovers typically models the multinational buyer-
domestic seller relationship by using the economy's input-output matrix for some particular year.
However, input-output linkages are bound to be a very imperfect measure of linkages between
multinationals and their domestic suppliers. Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and Vasquez (2020) show
that sector-level backward linkages predict less than 1% of the actual firm-level linkages between
multinationals and their suppliers. Given the importance of measurement in the analysis of same-
sector FDI spillovers (see above) existing results on FDI spillovers through backward (or forward)
linkages are unlikely to be the last word (see also section 4).
 12
      For additional discussion on these issues, see Keller (2010).




                                                           16
3.2    Outward FDI Spillovers

In analogy to the import and export side of trade, research has not only considered spillovers from
inward FDI but also positive externalities from outward FDI. An important hypothesis in this
context is that outward FDI provides a way to source new technologies in foreign countries (FDI
as a 'listening post'). While the literature on outward FDI spillovers is smaller than that on inward
FDI spillovers, some research provides evidence that technology sourcing through outward FDI is
important.

Employing data on British outward FDI in the United States, Griffith, Harrison, and van Reenen
(2005) show that controlling for a host of other factors, the productivity growth of UK firms
is higher for those firms that have foreign affiliates in regions of the US with the highest R&D
spending (think Silicon Valley). As the measure for technological presence, the authors compute
for each UK firm the fraction of its US patent applications for which the lead inventor is located
in the United States. The evidence is consistent with the idea that outward FDI helps to bring
foreign technology into a country.




                                                 17
4    New Directions

This overview has shown that research on knowledge spillovers through international trade and
FDI has made some major progress. While quantifying the size of positive externalities will always
be challenging, not least because data on technological knowledge and innovation ­such as it is­
imposes significant constraints, a lot has been learned over the last three decades. In addition to
the breakthrough in terms of theory, our understanding has been improved through a combination
of advances in econometric methodology, new sources of data, and appropriate empirical work.

But the work is far from done, and it is reasonable to expect that some of the same factors will play
a key role in the future. In terms of new sources of data, in particular, the increasing availability
of data sets such as that in Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and Vasquez (2020) on Costa Rica that record
actual firm-to-firm level trade­instead of input-output matrix approximations­will likely lead to a
re-writing of the literature on FDI spillovers through backward and forward linkages.

Other parts of the research on international knowledge spillovers will also be affected by the
availability of new data sources. They will increasingly shed light on the precise way through which
international transactions generate positive externalities. Anecdotally, face-to-face interactions are
important to transmit knowledge, for example, and there is evidence consistent with the hypothesis
that business travel helps to diffuse knowledge internationally (Hovhannisyan and Keller 2015).
At the same time, cell phone location data, as in Atkin, Chen, and Popov (2020), may be a
great way of substantiating these accounts by quantifying the returns to face-to-face interactions
in international business transactions.

Another fruitful area for more research is empirical strategy. Much existing research seeks to
estimate the impact of international trade or FDI on spillovers by appealing to a general increase
in the level of globalization, perhaps combined with an instrumental-variables strategy. Some
recent research has considered specific policy changes that yield a substantial period for analysis
both before and after the policy change. This would generally seem to be a promising line of
research. In one of these papers, Lu, Tao, and Zhu (2017) study the spillover effect of China's FDI

                                                 18
liberalization as the country entered the World Trade Organization in 2002.

Lu, Tao, and Zhu (2017) find that an increase in industry FDI significantly lowers the level of
productivity of domestic firms, at the same time when it increases their productivity growth rate.
These results may be in part due, as the authors discuss, to the way FDI spillovers develop over
time. Another possibility is that the abolishment of the joint venture requirement with China's
WTO entry­foreign firms had to pair up with a Chinese firm to do FDI­led to an inflow of
marginal wholly-foreign-owned FDI in China. Consistent with that, a recent study studying both
joint ventures and wholly foreign-owned FDI as China entered the WTO finds stronger spillovers
post-2002 from the former than from the latter (Jiang, Keller, Qiu and Ridley 2020). A structural
shift from one to another form of FDI might play a similar role for the spillover estimation as lower
output prices due to tariff reductions, for example.

Recent work by Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and Vasquez (2020) employs an event-study design to
examine various impacts on domestic firms that become first-time suppliers to multinational firms
in Costa Rica between the years 2010 and 2015. Importantly, despite the unusual level of infor-
mation, the sample is with about 450 multinationals and around 3,700 first-time suppliers sizable.
Consistent with learning externalities from FDI, the authors find that after a couple of years first-
time multinational suppliers not only have grown in size and started selling to other new buyers
but they also experience an increase in total factor productivity of between 4 to 9 percent.

Complementary survey evidence from Costa Rica provides some general clues on how to think
about these knowledge spillovers.13 First-time multinational suppliers had to improve their quality
management system, change their sourcing of inputs, and hire more high-skilled workers. This
suggests that spillovers come partly in form of process technology improvements, perhaps also
product innovation, to the extent that higher quality products require more skilled workers. These
are costly investments for the supplier that will take time to pay off. Furthermore, many first-time
multinational suppliers also had existing employees work harder. Working existing workers harder
  13
    See Alfaro-Urena, Manelici, and Vasquez (2020). Similar results are found in the relationship of large retailers
versus its suppliers, see Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout (2008), Iacovone, Javorcik, Keller, and Tybout (2015).


                                                        19
may raise measured productivity, but it is not a Pareto-improving positive externality.

Overall, the view of knowledge spillovers associated with international trade and FDI that emerges
is that the latter activities increase the probability that an agent can access new, business-relevant
knowledge. To implement this knowledge, additional investment and effort is typically required,
and any measured gains in terms of innovation, productivity, or sales are the result of positive
knowledge externality minus costs of investment and effort.




                                                 20
References

 [1] Acharya, R., and W. Keller (2009), "Technology Transfer through Imports", Canadian Journal
    of Economics 42(4): 1411-1448.

 [2] Aitken, B., and A. Harrison (1999), "Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign Invest-
    ment? Evidence from Venezuela", American Economic Review 89(3): 605-618.

 [3] Alfaro-Urena, A., I. Manelici, and J. Vasquez (2020), "The Effects of Joining Multinational
    Supply Chains: Evidence from Firm-to-Firm Linkages", UC Berkeley, December.

 [4] Amiti, Mary, and Jozef Konings (2007), "Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs and Pro-
    ductivity: Evidence from Indonesia", American Economic Review 97(5): 1611-1638.

 [5] Arrow, K. (1969), "Classificatory Notes on the Production and Transmission of Technological
    Knowledge", American Economic Review 59(2): 29-35.

 [6] Atkin, D., K. Chen, and A. Popov (2020), "The Returns to Face-to-Face Interactions: Knowl-
    edge Spillovers in Silicon Valley", Geneva Trade and Development Workshop, November.

 [7] Bernard, A., and B. Jensen (1999), "Exceptional exporter performance: cause, effect, or
    both?", Journal of International Economics 47(1): 1-25.

 [8] Bhagwati, J. (1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Anatomy and Con-
    sequences of Exchange Control Regimes, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

 [9] Bhagwati, J., and T.N. Srinivasan (1975), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:
    India, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

[10] Bloom, N., M. Schankerman, and J. Van Reenen (2013), "Identifying Technology Spillovers
    and Product Market Rivalry", Econometrica 81(4): 1347-1393.




                                              21
[11] Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach, and James Tybout. (1998), "Is learning by exporting impor-
    tant? Micro-dynamic evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco", Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 113: 903-948.

[12] Coe, David., and Elhanan Helpman (1995), "International R&D Spillovers", European Eco-
    nomic Review 39: 859-887.

[13] De Loecker, J. (2013), "Detecting Learning by Exporting", American Economic Journal: Mi-
    croeconomics 5(3): 1-21.

[14] De Loecker, J., P. Goldberg, A. Khandelwal, and N. Pavcnik (2016), "Prices, Markups, and
    Trade Reform", Econometrica 84(2): 445-510.

[15] De Loecker, J. (2007), "Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from Slovenia",
    Journal of International Economics 73(1): 69-98.

[16] De Loecker, J., and F. Warzynski (2012), "Markups and Firm-Level Export Status", American
    Economic Review 102(6): 2437-71.

[17] Ethier, W. (1982), "National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of
    International Trade", American Economic Review 72(3): 389-405.

[18] Garcia-Marin, A., and N. Voigtlaender (2019), "Exporting and Plant-level Efficiency Gains:
    It's in the Measure", Journal of Political Economy 127(4): 1777-1825.

[19] Griffith, R., R. Harrison, and J. van Reenen (2006), "How special is the special relationship?
    Using the impact of US R&D spillovers on British firms as a test on technological sourcing",
    American Economic Review 96(5): 1859-1875.

[20] Griliches, Z. (1979), "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Development to
    Productivity Growth", Bell Journal of Economics 10(1): 92-116.

[21] Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, MIT
    Press.

                                                22
[22] Grossman, G., and E. Helpman (1990), "Comparative Advantage and Long-run Growth",
    American Economic Review 80(4): 796-815.

[23] Haskel, J., S. Pereira, and M. Slaughter (2007), "Does inward foreign direct investment boost
    the productivity of domestic firms?", Review of Economics and Statistics 89(3): 482-496.

[24] Hovhannisyan, N., and W. Keller (2015), "International business travel: an engine of innova-
    tion?", Journal of Economic Growth 20(1): 75-104.

[25] Iacovone, L., B. Javorcik, W. Keller, and J. Tybout (2015), "Supplier Responses to Walmart's
    Invasion of Mexico", Journal of International Economics 95(1): 1-15.

[26] Jaffe, A. (1986), "Technological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms'
    Patents, Profits and Market Value", American Economic Review 76(5): 984-999.

[27] Javorcik, B. (2004), "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
    Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages", American Economic Review
    94(3): 605-627.

[28] Javorcik, B., W. Keller, and J. Tybout (2008), "Openness and Industrial Responses in a Wal-
    Mart World: A Case Study of Mexican Soaps, Detergents and Surfactant Producers", World
    Economy, December.

[29] Jiang, K., W. Keller, L. Qiu, and W. Ridley (2020), "International Joint Ventures and Internal
    versus External Technology Transfer: Evidence from China", working paper, University of
    Colorado-Boulder, September.

[30] Keller, W. (2010), "International Trade, Foreign Direct Investment, and Technology
    Spillovers", in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, (eds.) B. Hall, N. Rosenberg, Volume
    2, Elsevier, pp.793 - 829.

[31] Keller, W. (2004), "International Technology Diffusion", Journal of Economic Literature
    42(3): 752-782.

                                                23
[32] Keller, W. (2002), "Trade and the transmission of technology", Journal of Economic Growth
    7: 5-24.

[33] Keller, W. ( 2000), "Do trade patterns and technology flows affect productivity growth?",
    World Bank Economic Review 14: 17-47.

[34] Keller, W. (1998), Are international R&D spillovers trade related? Analyzing spillovers among
    randomly matched trade partners, European Economic Review 42: 1469-1481.

[35] Keller, W. (1996), "Absorptive capacity: On the creation and acquisition of technology in
    development", Journal of Development Economics 49: 199-227.

[36] Keller, W., and S. Yeaple (2013), "The Gravity of Knowledge", American Economic Review
    103(4): 1414-1444.

[37] Keller, W., and S. Yeaple (2009), "Multinational Enterprises, International Trade, and Pro-
    ductivity Growth: Firm-Level Evidence from the United States", Review of Economics and
    Statistics 91(4): 821-831.

[38] Krueger, A. (1978), Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Liberalization At-
    tempts and Consequences, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

[39] Lu, Y., Z. Tao, and L. Zhu (2017), "Identifying FDI spillovers", Journal of International
    Economics 107: 75-90.

[40] Lucking, B., N. Bloom, and J. Van Reenen (2020), "Have R&D Spillovers Declined in the 21st
    Century?", Fiscal Studies 40(4): 561-590.

[41] Olley, S., and A. Pakes (1996), "The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
    equipment industry", Econometrica 64: 1263-1297.

[42] Pavcnik, N. (2002), "Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
    from Chilean Plants", Review of Economic Studies 69(1): 245-276.


                                                24
[43] Rivera-Batiz, L., and P. Romer (1991), "Endogenous Growth and Economic Integration",
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 531-555.

[44] Romer, P. (1990), "Endogenous Technological Change", Journal of Political Economy 98(5),
    Part 2: S71-S102.

[45] Scherer, F. (1984), "Using Linked Patent and R&D Data to Measure Interindustry Technology
    Flows", in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, (ed.) Z. Griliches, NBER, Cambridge, MA, pp.
    417-464.

[46] Terleckyj, N. (1974), "Effects of R&D on the productivity growth of industries: An exploratory
    study", Washington, D.C.: National Planning Association.

[47] Van Biesebroeck, J. (2005), "Exporting raises productivity in sub-Saharan African manufac-
    turing firms", Journal of International Economics 67(2): 373-391.




                                                25
