                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MYOPIC LOSS AVERSION AND INVESTMENT DECISIONS:
                     FROM THE LABORATORY TO THE FIELD

                                          Kazi Iqbal
                                         Asadul Islam
                                         John A. List
                                         Vy Nguyen

                                      Working Paper 28730
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28730


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021


We are grateful to generous financial support from Monash University, to our partnered
brokerages in Dhaka (Reliance, IIDFC, Lanka Motijheel, Lanka Uttara, PFI, Prime Bank,
Mercantile, and Modern) and to Arif Islam, who provided us the confidential data for this study,
as well as to the Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies for research support. We also thank
Foez Mojumder for excellent research assistance and Chau Nguyen for involvement in the project
at the initial stage. Finally, we appreciate the comments of Klaus Abbink, Peter Bossaerts, Chris
Clapp, Silvio Contessi, Huu Duong, Glenn Harrison, Jean Paul Rabanal Sobrino, Jeffrey
Lafrance, Thomas Langer, Matthew Leister, Birendra Rai, ChoonWang, and participants at the
University of Chicago (Chicago, 2019, 2018), the Australia Conference of Economists
(Melbourne, 2019), the Experimental Finance Conference (Copenhagen, 2019), the Advances
with Field Experiments (Boston, 2018), the Academy of Behavior Finance (Chicago, 2018), the
Behavioral and Experimental Economics and Finance Workshop (Sydney, 2017), and Monash
University Seminars (Melbourne, 2017, 2018). The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Kazi Iqbal, Asadul Islam, John A. List, and Vy Nguyen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Myopic Loss Aversion and Investment Decisions: from the Laboratory to the Field
Kazi Iqbal, Asadul Islam, John A. List, and Vy Nguyen
NBER Working Paper No. 28730
April 2021
JEL No. C9,C93,D03,N97

                                         ABSTRACT

Whether, and to what extent, behavioral anomalies uncovered in the lab manifest themselves in
the field remains of first order importance in finance and economics. We begin by examining
behavior of retail traders/investors making investment decisions in constructed laboratory
markets. Our results show that the behaviors of the traders are consistent with myopic loss
aversion. We combine the lab results with a unique individual-level matched dataset on daily
stock market transactions and portfolio positions over a two year period. We find that lab
behaviors help to predict, but do not fully capture, the essential real-world trading analogs of
retail traders.

Kazi Iqbal                                            John A. List
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies           Department of Economics
E-17 Agargaon, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar                    University of Chicago
Dhaka 1217                                            1126 East 59th
Bangladesh                                            Chicago, IL 60637
kazi.iqbal2013@gmail.com                              and NBER
                                                      jlist@uchicago.edu
Asadul Islam
Department of Economics                               Vy Nguyen
Monash University                                     Blockchain Innovation Hub
asadul.islam@monash.edu                               RMIT University
                                                      Melbourne, VIC 3000
                                                      Australia
                                                      vyttn90@gmail.com
                                            I.      Introduction
    The remarkable acceleration in market news and stock-market trading has raised an important
economic question: Does more frequent information result in more efficient asset allocation and
investment strategy? Pioneered by Benartzi and Thaler (1995) in an attempt to explain the equity
premium puzzle, myopic loss aversion (MLA) is a behavioral trait that combines loss aversion and
myopia in mental accounting.1 An agent who suffers from MLA is more aware of losses than gains
and suffers from narrow temporal framing, inducing a negative response to frequent information in
price movements of the risky asset. Due to the high volatility nature of the equity market, feedback
intensity plays a key role in determining investors' preferences over assets under the MLA theory.
    Yet, determining the effect of feedback frequency in markets remains challenging. On the one
hand, existing evidence on MLA and its role in investment strategy rely almost exclusively on lab-
oratory evidence that may not adequately represent real-life investment-decision processes. Alter-
natively, parsing market data to isolate mediators and moderators consonant with MLA represents
a difficult empirical challenge. The main purpose of this paper is to combine laboratory and unique
field data to explore if data from each setting are consonant with predictions from MLA theory.
    In a creative set of studies, Thaler, Tversky, Kahneman and Schwartz (1997) and Gneezy and
Potters (1997) demonstrate the effect of MLA using experimental laboratory settings in which
participants were asked to make investment decisions involving risky assets under different levels
of feedback frequencies.2 In accordance with MLA theory and observations about the equity
premium puzzle, both papers found that participants in the low-frequency condition tended to
invest more in risky assets. Evaluating stocks or other risky assets daily raises the likelihood
of assets yielding lower (or even negative) returns than safer options, such as bonds and saving
accounts. This finding has been advanced to several modified experimental settings, such as using
an asset market (Gneezy, Kapteyn and Potters (2003)), a setting with flexibility in investment
horizon (Fellner and Sutter (2009)), and settings with professional traders in a framed (Haigh and
List (2005) and a natural field experiment (Larson, List and Metcalfe (2016)).
    1 The  "equity premium puzzle" refers to the empirical observation that the return on stocks is much larger than the
risk-adjusted bond yield. Loss aversion refers to the tendency to emphasize losses over gains of equal size. Conversely,
myopia in mental accounting refers to the tendency for individuals to disproportionately focus on the near term when
making decisions involving a temporal component.
     2 In Thaler et al. (1997), laboratory investment returns were provided to mimic either a monthly, a yearly, or five-

yearly horizon. In Gneezy and Potters (1997), subjects either made a decision and received feedback every round or
in every block of three rounds.


                                                           1
   In this study, we take a different approach. We combine two quite different sources of data:
controlled data from a framed field experiment and naturally-occurring data from private invest-
ment accounts. In this spirit, we not only are able to examine the power of MLA across controlled
and naturally-occurring settings, but we can also explore the external validity of the original MLA
lab insights. We do so by recruiting a sample of traders across eight brokerages in the Dhaka Stock
Exchange (DSE) in Bangladesh to participate in a framed field experiment measuring their indi-
vidual MLA. Most importantly, we link their laboratory choices with their actual trading activities
over a two-year period to examine the comparability between investment decisions in a controlled
laboratory setting and their actual trading decisions on the Dhaka stock market.
   In our data generation, we leverage the standard lab treatment Gneezy and Potters (1997), but
use a within-subject design to estimate person-specific MLA from the framed field experiment. In
Task 1, subjects were randomly assigned into either the high feedback frequency where they made
the decision and learned about the outcome every individual round or the low feedback frequency
in which decisions (and feedback) were made in blocks of three rounds. In Task 2, we switched
treatment and repeated the experiment under the other feedback frequency. Our within-subject
design not only permits us to examine data from a standard between-subjects approach, but also
provides a unique MLA measure for each individual. In this manner, our approach also allows us
to explore the effect of learning (sequencing) and other individual characteristics can mitigate the
degree of MLA.
   We report several findings. First, behavior in the lab is largely consonant with MLA theory,
as we find a significant treatment effect under the standard between-subject design.3 Specifically,
subjects invested 18.6% more when receiving a lower feedback frequency. This higher investment
profile maps into higher experimental earnings, showing that information provision can have real
financial implications.
   Second, turning to the correlation between experimental MLA and real-life trading patterns of
the same traders, the results using the daily transaction and portfolio data of each trader identify
several interesting patterns. For example, traders who exhibit a high degree of MLA tend also to
hold a smaller portfolio size (as measured by both volume and value). This result is consistent with
the notion that MLA is correlated with portfolio holdings. An interesting second result is that MLA
is also correlated with trade frequency: those with higher MLA trade more frequently. Finally,
    3 We first examine the prevalence of MLA among these traders using the standard between-subject design to avoid
the potential confound in our within-subject design.



                                                        2
while our participants as a whole demonstrated a strong disposition effect (sell the "winner" and
hold onto the "loser"), those who exhibited MLA in the lab had a lower degree of the disposition
effect.
   Our third result is methodological in nature. We find that when using a within-subject design,
measured MLA is considerable lower. More specifically, when we exposed each subject to both
treatments, thus allowing learning and carry-over effects, the average difference fell to 5.86%. We
also analyzed the within-subject distribution and found that 51.03% of our subjects exhibited MLA.
Yet, the order of the treatment in the within-subject design matters. Only 42.77% exhibited MLA
in the group with infrequent feedback first, compared to 58.24% for the other group. However,
the order difference does not change our final conclusion on the existence of MLA. Although our
design does not allow us to pinpoint why this effect occurs, the overall set of results is consistent
with learning opportunities, sequencing effects, and experience of trading.
   We view our results as speaking to several literatures. First, we contribute to bridging the gap
between experimental and natural trading behavior by examining the decisions made by the same
group of non-professional traders in two quite distinct environments. Financial traders are a vital
component of financial decision-making and price-setting processes. Thus, observing their behav-
ior under both experimental and natural domains serves several purposes. For instance, our study
provides evidence for the results of Gneezy and Potters (1997) not only via replication among pro-
fessional traders, as in Haigh and List (2005), but also with non-professional traders. In addition,
we provide insights into the behavior of traders in an emerging market context - an area that re-
mains underexplored in the literature. In this manner, our results confirm the findings of several
studies that generate empirical evidence from the developed world (see Barber and Odean (2013),
Barber and Odean (2000), Barber and Odean (2001), Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000), Grinblatt,
Keloharju and Linnainmaa (2011)). Our analysis also contributes to a growing area of research ex-
ploring the link between the experimental lab and the field - we show that MLA in the lab partially
extends to the field and remains a viable explanation for the equity premium puzzle.
   A second literature our work relates to is the growing research agenda documenting the financial
decisions of stock-market traders using both experimental and naturally occurring data (see, e.g.,
Alevy, Haigh and List (2007). Using professional traders from the Chicago Board of Trade as a
treatment group, Haigh and List (2005) explored the boundary conditions of Gneezy and Potters
(1997). Somewhat unexpectedly, the professional traders in their study exhibited a higher degree of
MLA than university students. In a more recent paper Larson et al. (2016) extends the literature by


                                                 3
using different timing in price realizations in a natural field experiment. Their setting was designed
to mimic the complexity of trading platforms and market interactions. The paper confirms that
MLA exists even in a natural setting.
   Finally, our study also contributes to the understanding of MLA by reporting evidence that
mental accounting dynamics play a role in reducing or exacerbating the degree of risk-taking (see
Fellner and Sutter (2009), Evers and Imas (2019), Imas (2016), Langer and Weber (2005)). In
general, repeating the same decision over multiple periods of high feedback frequency exacerbated
participants' willingness to invest in the risky lottery. However, exposing subjects to both low and
high feedback frequencies reduced individual MLA. Overall, this pattern is consistent with limited
feedback and increased market experience causing traders to avoid narrow framing and behave less
myopically. If the key mediator works in that fashion, our findings imply that stock-market traders
may benefit from alternating between periods of high and low information feedback frequencies.
More research is necessary, of course.
   A key fruit of the longitudinal aspect of our design is that it provides the distribution of indi-
vidual MLAs. The lack of a within-subject design in the literature hinders our understanding of
heterogeneity and the mechanisms of experimental treatment (Charness, Gneezy and Kuhn (2012)
and Czibor, Jimenez-Gomez and List (2019)). Our design allows us to examine whether, and the
extent to which, MLA exists at the individual level among a group of traders. The evaluations of
traders' behaviors under different feedback frequencies may benefit the targeted communication
strategies of fund managers and also improve long-term investments in the stock market. For ex-
ample, a risky trust fund could strategically issue financial statements less frequently to improve
the sheer volume of investment and avoid market volatility.
   The remainder of our paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 outlines the experimental design and
sample selection. Section 3 summarizes the experimental results and the results of the randomiza-
tion check. Section 4 describes the financial transactions and portfolio data set and outlines the
empirical results. Section 5 concludes.


       II.    Experimental Design and Conceptual Framework
   In the spirit of Fehr and List (2004), we embedded our experiment within a financial training
program for non-professional traders in the DSE. We recruited 341 traders from eight brokerage
firms in Dhaka and offered them participation in a free intensive training program on trading tech-

                                                  4
niques and risk diversification.4 Before any of the professional training began, we conducted in-
centivized games to study the traders' behavioral biases regarding time preferences, risk aversion,
ambiguity avoidance, and MLA. We focus on MLA in this paper.
    In brief, the MLA experiment proceeded as follows. First, subjects read and signed a consent
form. Second, subjects were informed that (i) the experiment consisted of four segments that
would last 2 hours each, (ii) their payments in each game depended on their performance, and
(iii) all payments were blind and anonymous. At the beginning of each game, subjects received
detailed written instructions; all instructions were also read aloud by the field staff. The subjects
were given a few additional minutes to examine the instructions and (privately) ask questions, if
any. The demographic and trading information survey was conducted on the next day.
    For each part of the experiment, the participants were informed of the payment procedure ex
ante. The experimental instructions for each task were generally not handed out until the previous
task had been completed. Our research assistants were instructed to use neutral terms for all
instructions. A translated sample of the instructions for all the games can be found in Appendix
B (the version used in our experiment is written and announced in Bengali). The next sections
discuss the details of our experimental design.


A.     Experimental design
A.1.     Treatments

    We adopted a similar treatment design to that of Gneezy and Potters (1997) and Haigh and
List (2005). Specifically, we randomly assigned participants to two treatment groups: frequent
treatment, F, and infrequent treatment, I. Under Treatment F, the participants made a series of in-
vestment decisions over nine periods. In each period, the participants were given an endowment
of 100 units (1 unit = 100 takas) that could be invested totally or partially (the possible investment
amount [X] ranged from 0 to 100 units inclusive) in a lottery L(1/3, 2.5X ; 2/3, -X ). Thus, the par-
ticipants had a one-third chance of winning 2.5 times the amount invested and a two-thirds chance
     4 The training involved six sessions over a three-week period, and all the training and materials were free of charge.

Each training session was conducted by senior professional traders in the brokerages--all the trainers were Chartered
Financial Analysts at the time of training. The curriculum covered basic terminologies in the stock market, how to
manage portfolio risk to maximize sound money-management principles and risk-analysis techniques, and how to
utilize trading tools and market information available in the market. Traders who enrolled in this program consented
to giving us their actual trading data via their brokerage.



                                                             5
of losing the amount. Under this treatment, the participants placed an investment in every single
round and learned about the outcome of each round directly after they recorded an investment and
before they made their next investment.
   The lottery and investment decisions under Treatment I were similar; however, the allocation
decisions were made in blocks of three rounds. Specifically, in each decision round t in 1, 4, 7,
the participants placed their investments for rounds t , t + 1 and t + 2. The investment allocation
had to be identical across the blocks of three rounds. At the ends of rounds 3, 6, and 9, the
participants were informed of their combined earnings for the three blocks. In both treatments,
the participants were informed that their final payments would equal the sum of all earnings of
each round. Essentially, the two group decision tasks were identical in all aspects except in the
frequency of feedback (see the upper part in Figure 1).

                                               [Figure 1 about here.]

A.2.    Experimental setting

    Before the session, the enumerator randomly allocated the participants into two groups: ap-
proximately half the participants (182 participants) were allocated to Group F-I, and the remaining
traders (159 participants) were allocated to Group I-F. As illustrated in the lower panel of Figure
1, the two groups were exposed to both frequent and infrequent feedback but in the opposite order.
The following two-task procedure was adopted:

     · In Task 1, each group invested under their initial randomly assigned treatment, that is, partic-
       ipants in Group F-I received frequent feedback and participants in Group I-F made decisions
       under infrequent feedback.5

     · In Task 2, we swapped the treatments between two groups. Participants in Group F-I were
       reassigned to the infrequent feedback treatment, while participants in Group I-F invested
       under frequent feedback.6
    5 We  also allowed a difference in endowment by asking subjects to play an additional three rounds. They received
no additional starting amount; they played the game with their own earnings up to that point equally divided into three.
A presents the results of the varied endowment setting.
     6 Subjects also invested in three additional rounds, as in Task 1. Panel B of Appendix Table A.3 presents the results

of the varied endowment setting.




                                                            6
We essentially have the full sample of 341 observations in a within-design experiment with order
effects controlled for and two between-subject comparisons. First, denote investment amount un-
der frequent feedback as F1 (Task 1) and (F2) in Task 2; similarly, the infrequent feedback level
of investments is referred to as I1 (Task 1) and I2 (Task 2). For simplicity, we refer to infrequent
feedback as the "control" setting. The treatment effect of high-frequency feedback was obtained
by comparing the means of the two groups.
   In Task 1, the control group was Group I-F, so the average treatment effect of high feedback
frequency would be F1 I1. If the difference in the amount of money invested in F and I in Task 1 is
significantly negative, then there is evidence of MLA. Notably, this analysis is identical to Gneezy
and Potters (1997).
   The second set of between-subject comparisons is the reversal of the control-treatment group in
Task 2. In this task, the control group is now group F-I, whose average investment amount is I2 .
Hence, the treatment effect of frequent feedback is now (F2 - I2 ) if the assumption of independence
between the two tasks holds (a very strong assumption). The variation between these two between-
subject comparisons, if any, is likely due to learning or experimental carry-over effects.
   Combining Tasks 1 and 2, we analyze myopia and investment decisions under the scope of a
within-subject design - the within-difference is now F1 - I2 and F2 - I1 . This also captures real
stock-market trading conditions, which involve non-professionals alternating between periods of
high and low feedback frequency.


B.     Conceptual framework
B.1.   MLA with no prior experience

  We first rely on Benartzi and Thaler (1995) for MLA in a static setting. Consider an individual
who has the following value function:

                                      u(z) = - z      for z < 0
                                                                                                 (1)
                                      u(z) = z        for z  0

in which the parameter  reflects his loss aversion ( > 1 for risk-averse agent) and z represents
the change in wealth. Tversky and Kahneman (1992) referred to  and  (0 <  ,  < 1) as the
diminishing sensitivity. When  is small, the agent is more risk-averse in the gain domain and


                                                 7
risk-seeking in the loss domain and the opposite relationship applies for  . For the linear case
 =  = 1, the benchmark case of `pure loss aversion' is included into the analysis.
   Let Sn denote the value of the aggregate distribution of n independent draws of the gamble
L(-x, 2/3; 2.5x, 1/3), with a linear case  =  = 1 an individual who faces gamble S1 and S3 will
obtain:

                                      2   2.5x
                              S1 = -  x +                                                         (2)
                                      3     3
                                    1       6  12    8
                              S3 = 7.5x + 4x + 0.5x -  3x                                         (3)
                                   27      27  27    27

While S1 is negative for any   1.25, S3 remains positive as long as   1.5625. In other words,
a loss averse individual perceives three gambles more positively if they evaluate such gambles in
a form of a single unit bundle. The average traders who fail to properly evaluate a sequence of
investment should always find lotteries with frequent feedback less attractive (see Figure A.1).

B.2.   MLA with prior experience

    For some trader types, current investment decisions are not only based on expected outcomes
(i.e., forward-looking evaluations) but also on the negative or positive reference points generated
in previous games (i.e., backward-looking evaluations).
    To analyze the effects of a previous gain or loss on a risk-taking decision, we modified the value
function to examine the effect of a previous experience on a subsequent decision. Supposedly,
rather than using the status quo (zero) as a reference, agents maximize the total utility of a course
of action and compare the expected value of future decision(s) with previous lottery outcome(s)
as a reference. For example, it might be the case that for some myopic types, investors who
had just won in the previous round should find the risky asset less desirable, as the reference has
now shifted from zero to positive. In non-myopic backward evaluations, over time, the difference
between single and bundle evaluations was expected to diminish.

                                       u(z) = - z       for z < r
                                                                                                  (4)
                                       u(z) = z        for z  r
Depending on the choice of reference point r, we can have investors who base the reference point



                                                  8
on their accumulated winning in the past by evaluating
                                    
                                                               t -1
                                    u(z) = - z
                                    
                                                     for z <   L
                                    
                                                                 1
                                                                                                 (5)
                                                               t -1
                                             
                                    u(z) = z         for z 
                                                               L
                                                                1

or myopically evaluate
                                     u(z) = - z      for z < Lt -1
                                                                                                 (6)
                                     u(z) = z        for z  Lt -1
Combining (5) and (6) leads us to three predictions: (1) forward-looking myopia decreases in-
vestment under high-frequency feedback; (2) myopic traders deviate from their ex ante investment
plans to take on more risk after a short-term loss; and (3) risk-taking is greater for myopic traders
with higher backward-looking myopia.
   These predictions can be tested using our design summarized above. Prediction (1) can be tested
using the average treatment effect in a standard between-subject design, as in Gneezy and Potters
(1997). Predictions (2) and (3) can be analyzed by a dynamic setting using the same design. In
particular, we test the following:

     · Hypothesis 1: Higher feedback frequency leads to a lower investment in risky assets

     · Hypothesis 2: The reference point, defined as recent gain or loss, affects the degree of my-
       opia

     · Hypothesis 3: The reference point, defined as cumulative gain or loss, affects the degree of
       myopia?


                             III.     Experimental Results

A.    Balance and participant characteristics
   Between-subject designs rely on the success of the random assignment of the treatment. Table I
provides the balance check for the randomization. The two groups were homogeneous across sev-
eral behavioral preferences and demographic characteristics. Most participants were male and held

                                                 9
at least a bachelor's degree (61% held a master's degree). The average age of the participants was
37 years, and their average monthly earnings was 780 USD. These levels of education and income
reflect the general distribution of the average non-professional traders in Dhaka. The participants
had approximately five years of trading experience, and nearly 40% worked in the business sector.

                                       [Table 1 about here.]


B.     Between-subject results
B.1.   Task 1

    We first examine the prevalence of myopia in a standard setting (as in Gneezy and Potters
(1997) and Haigh and List (2005)) by comparing the difference in average endowment allocations
made by the two groups in Task 1. We compare the unconditional mean difference between the
investment levels under high-frequency feedback (F1 ) and those under low-frequency information
(I1 ). Table II shows the raw data of the mean differences and standard deviations of the investment
allocations of the two treatment groups.
    First, we consider the average investments across all rounds. We observe that traders in control
group I bet 69.92 units, while those in treatment F only bet 58.95. To attenuate data dependencies,
we also divide the rounds into blocks of three and analyze the differences between the two treat-
ments in each block, as shown in the last three rows of the upper panel of Table II. In every block
(blocks 1­2-3, 4­5-6 and 7­8-9), the average allocation into the risky lottery is higher in Treatment
I. Using Mann-Whitney non-parametric tests, we find that the average investment across the blocks
is statistically different ( -value=0.1248 for block 1-3, 0.0012 for block 4-6, 0 for block 7-9 and
the block of all rounds).

                                       [Table 2 about here.]

   To explore the robustness of our findings, we use a simple Tobit model to control for the panel
structure of our data (Specification 1) and a random-effects Tobit model (Specification 2) to regress
individual investments on the dummy variable of treatment allocation. The dummy variable takes
a value of 1 when an agent is assigned to Treatment F.
   Table III shows the results for both models in relation to the data from Task 1. The coefficients
are significant at 1%, and their signs support our findings from the raw data analysis. We find that

                                                 10
participants in Treatment F bet 16.9 fewer units per round than those in Treatment I. In Specifi-
cation 2, we use a random-effects Tobit model with the inclusion of the time effect and find that
participants bet nearly 20 units less when they receive more frequent feedback. Both results are
consistent with MLA among average traders. 7

                                               [Table 3 about here.]

   The results from Task 1 are consonant with the idea that MLA is prevalent amongst our traders;
however, reference points generated by previous experiences may affect the degree of MLA. Over
the course of the decision rounds, participants repeated their allocation decisions under the same
feedback conditions, so in each subsequent round, participants could reflect on their previous in-
vestment outcomes. In this case, previous experience may generate reference points from previous
losses or gains. In contrast to the findings of Gneezy and Potters (1997), we find that investment
under frequent feedback decreased over the course of the experiment. That is, in the same high-
frequency treatment, our data suggest that as experienced is gained, less is invested in the risky
asset. The decreasing monotonic trends in investment under frequent treatment over the course of
the experiment support the results of both Haigh and List (2005) and Larson et al. (2016) and, to a
certain extent, suggest that the participants' investment levels in each round were not independent.
   One possible explanation for this result is that subjects were making backward-looking evalu-
ations to mentally account for their risky decisions. The lottery was designed so that participants
in Treatment F would be more likely to experience losses than gains on average (these participants
experienced six losses and three gains, while those in the infrequent treatment group received one
loss and two gains). If participants revised their strategies to take less risk after a recent loss to
avoid disappointment, we would see a lower investment level under frequent feedback, but that
does not necessarily reflect the participants' narrow framing behaviors.8
   We also regress the investment amount in each round on the outcome from the previous round(s)
to see if the treatment effect is generated by disappointment or myopia. Table IV shows the estima-
tion of the effects of wins/losses in the previous round(s) on participants' investment decisions in
Treatment F. The regressions include a set of dummy variables as controls; the first dummy takes
    7 Our  results do not change after controlling for several demographic characteristics, such as (log of) income,
(years of) education, and age.
    8 Previous research has suggested that the form of learning has an effect on behavior, such that participants repeat

behaviors that they have previously associated with gains and avoid behaviors that have previously coincided with
losses.


                                                          11
a value of 1 if the participant won the most recent round, and the second dummy means the cumu-
lative earning of all previous rounds were positive. The first column uses only data from the first
task, while the second column presents the pooled data in both tasks. Under both samples, a gain
in the previous round decreased participants' average bets in the lottery by approximately ten units
in Treatment F. The effect of cumulative gains is smaller. These results suggest that participants
did not decrease their investment due to disappointment.

                                            [Table 4 about here.]

B.2.    Task 2

   In Task 2, we seek to explore a different aspect of the trading experience by swapping the feed-
back frequencies between the two groups. Specifically, the 182 participants who had previously
been assigned to Treatment F (i.e., the high-frequency investment condition) in Task 1 were now
reassigned to Treatment I. Similarly, the 159 participants who were initially under Treatment I was
assigned to Treatment F. The participants were informed of the new feedback frequency at the start
of Task 2.

                                            [Table 5 about here.]

Table V compares the results from both between-subject designs, in which panel A shows the raw
data and the Mann-Whitney rank-sum tests for the investment amounts in Task 2. We compare
the investment decisions in Tasks 1 and 2 in panel B. As shown in panel A, in Task 2, the mean
difference in investment amount across all rounds is only 3.86, as compared to the 10.97-unit
between-treatment difference in Task 1 (see Table 2 and column (6), Table 5). Thus, participants'
degrees of MLA appear to be reduced by either learning, carry-over effects, or other psychological
factors, as outlined in Charness et al. (2012).9
   We also attempt to account for the initial endowment difference using a separate new task: at the
ends of Tasks 1 and 2, we asked each group to repeat the game under the same frequency treatment.
However, this part differed in two respects: (1) The investment only lasted for three rounds and
(2) we gave no initial endowment, so each subject had to play with their earnings earnings up to
    9 Overall,as documented in column (6), panel B, the average treatment effect decreases when we compare across
each block of three rounds.




                                                       12
that point. As we can see from Appendix Table A.3, MLA still holds even with differences in the
starting endowment of each trader.10
   Finally, to further explore the robustness of our findings in Task 2, we use a simple Tobit model
(Specification 1) and a random-effects Tobit model (Specification 2) to regress individual invest-
ments on the dummy variable of treatment allocation. The dummy variable takes a value of 1 when
an agent is assigned to Treatment F. We control for the payment in Task 1 by including the total
amount of payment each traders receive as a covariate.


C.      Within-subject Results
C.1.      Within-subject distribution

    While within-designs have certain weaknesses, a strength is that data generated from them can
go beyond marginal distributions to produce the full joint distribution under certain assumptions
(see Czibor et al., 2019). This is because the combination of Tasks 1 and 2 generate data whereby
all participants were exposed to both frequency environments. We can therefore tabulate the dif-
ference in investment allocation for each individual.

                                              [Figure 2 about here.]

    Figure 2 shows a histogram of the linear difference between the percentage of units allocated
in high- and low-feedback treatments. A negative value indicates that the respondent made deci-
sions consistent with MLA theory. While the average treatment effects show a great difference
between the two treatments, this distribution shows that many subjects did not invest less under
high-frequency feedback. Interestingly, the data reveal that the average MLA treatment effect is
economically and statistically significant but is driven by a relatively small number of traders who
show strong MLA patterns.
    We classify MLA traders as those who invest more under infrequent feedback. Table VI pro-
vides the distribution of traders who invest less, the same, or more under frequent feedback. Over-
all, 51.03% of the participants exhibited MLA, investing an average of 25.45 experimental units
     10 Task 1,
             when traders had no prior experience of the other treatment (the treatment to which they were not initially
assigned), had a 10% level of significance. These results support the existing literature on the prevalence of myopia,
even when we relax the assumption of fixed initial endowment. When we switch the treatment, the raw data show
that MLA still exists even with a different endowment, but such a difference is not significant if we consider it under
a non-parametric test. This further enforces our hypothesis that giving the subjects experience with both evaluation
frequencies reduces myopia.

                                                          13
(33.8%) less under high feedback frequency. Of the traders who did not exhibit MLA, 58 behaved
exactly the same under both feedback frequencies, and those who invest more under infrequent
feedback account for 31.96% of the data.

C.2.   Order effects

    In a within-subject design, subjects may behave differently in the treatment they play second
because of their exposure to the first treatment. If participants had been exposed to infrequent
evaluations in Task 1, they might have effectively learned how to evaluate the lottery sequence in a
more aggregated manner, even if they received the high-frequency feedback in Task 2. Conversely,
if participants evaluated gains and losses based on their historical returns, I-F participants would
have bet significantly more under the frequent feedback condition in Task 2 than Group F-I bet in
Task 1. Thus, Tasks 1 and 2 may not be truly counterfactual.
    The raw data analysis in panel B of Table V confirms that the order of treatment matters for the
between-subject analysis, but only for the decisions made under Treatment F. As shown in column
(4), under Treatment F, participants allocated 6.89 units more in Task 2 than the average amount
in Task 1. However, investment levels under infrequent feedback did not differ between the two
tasks, as detailed in column 5 in panel B of Table V.
    In the within-subject analysis, we investigate the differences in the distribution of MLA and
non-MLA traders across frequency orders. As shown in column (3) in panel (B) and column (5)
in panel (C) of Table VI, the percentage of subjects who exhibited MLA was higher if they were
assigned to Treatment F in Task 1. The percentage of MLA traders is smaller for Group I-F (those
who were exposed to infrequent feedback first)--only 42.77% exhibited MLA, as compared to
58.24% in Group F-I. In Figure 2, we observe that the two groups have different distributions 11
but not markedly. These results from both between- and within-subject analysis suggest that while
the order matters, it does not change our inference: the average treatment effect remains significant,
and approximately half the subjects exhibited MLA. However, the strong average treatment effect
is still mainly driven by the traders at the left tail of the distribution.

                                                [Table 6 about here.]
  11 The   distribution is significantly different at 5% using Kolmogrov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution




                                                           14
C.3.    Who are the MLA traders?

   A significant share of traders did not reduce their investment levels in response to high-frequency
feedback in the market. However, more than half the traders did behave myopically. It is of interest
to both policymakers and stock brokerages to identify the relevant sub-groups that are MLA types.
Of course, there are both observed and unobserved correlates for such behavior. As reported in
Table VII, the most important predictors of MLA are age, the initial level of capital endowment,
and trading behavior. On average, older traders and those with greater capital endowments were
12­15% more likely to exhibit MLA. Those who traded for short-term opportunities were also
more likely to exhibit MLA; however, this was not significant.12 The correlation is the opposite
sign for those who update market news more frequently--they were 11.7% less likely to exhibit
MLA.13 In terms of other correlates, we find that observable characteristics, such as gender, edu-
cation, total income, and income from one's main occupation, are not significantly or consistently
correlated to myopia.

                                               [Table 7 about here.]

   We are also interested in the extent to which individual characteristics correlate with MLA. Fig-
ure 3 shows the average treatment effects by sub-group characteristics.14 Overall, a higher degree
of MLA is correlated with several observable characteristics, such as age and initial endowment.
The top left in Figure 3 shows that the older age group15 and those with higher capital endowments
had twice the average treatment effect. Those who often engaged in short-term or day-trading
activities in real life were also more affected by MLA. Notably, a negative correlation existed
between the self-reported frequency of checking market news and MLA. While our setting does
not allow for a causal interpretation, one possible explanation is that those who suffer more from
MLA were aware of the effect of high-frequency news on their trading behavior and reduced their
   12 The  average treatment effect, however, is significantly correlated to short-term trading.
   13 The  within-subject analysis allows us to categorize traders into three categories of myopia (Table VI). Consid-
ering only MLA and non-MLA may not fully reflect the heterogeneity in treatment effect of feedback frequency. We
re-examine the heterogeneity among the three levels of within-subject myopia, as shown in Figure A.2 in Appendix
A. There are no significant difference between the demographic information of myopic neutral and and myopic risk
seeking trader.
    14 The treatment effect here is referred to the difference between investment levels of an individual under frequent

and infrequent feedback.
    15 Older age group is defined as those who were above the median age (35).




                                                          15
tendency to update market news too frequently in real life.16

                                               [Figure 3 about here.]


          IV.       Naturally-occurring trading data of participants

A.      Data description
    In this section, we explore the confidential individual-level investment data from our experimen-
tal participants in the DSE.17 We collected a unique, account-level dataset of all the participants
consisting of official hard-copy transaction statements recording all transactions from January 2015
through April 2017. We focus on their trading of common stocks and mutual funds from October
2015 to September 2016.18 For our complete analysis, we merge four datasets: individual transac-
tion ledger data, individual portfolio holdings data, DSE market data, and the experimental/survey
data.

A.1.     Transaction ledger data

   The transaction ledger contains information on each transaction recorded daily for each trader
at their respective brokerage firm. This dataset reflects the trading activity, including purchases,
sales, IPO applications and allocations, and transaction and other administrative costs associated
with the account and each activity. Some traders had more than one transaction on the same stock
on the same day. To mitigate the effect of day trading and its noise, we netted all same-day trades
of the same stock by the same investor and averaged their buying or selling prices.19
     16 The
          traders also participated in a risk-preference elicitation in a similar setting to Holt and Laury (2002). We find
no apparent correlation between risk behavior and MLA; those results are available upon request.
   17 Founded in 1954, the DSE is the largest and the main stock exchange in Bangladesh. As of 2018, the combined

market capitalization of listed companies on the DSE stood at over $47 billion. The DSE is open for trading Sunday
through Thursday between 10:30 am and 2:30 pm BST, except for holidays declared by the Exchange in advance. In
the month of Ramadan, the Exchange is open for trading between 10:00 am and 2:00 pm BST.
   18 Our participants also received trading training intervention as part of the RCT. The first session started from 2

September 2016, after this framed-field experiment was conducted.
   19 For example, if an investor buys 1,000 of stock A at 20 takas, sells 700 of the same stock later that day at 22

takas, and buys 100 more of stock A at the end of the day at 21 takas, our data would record all three transactions as a
net buy of 400 stocks at a price of 20.091.




                                                           16
A.2.    Portfolio holding data

   The brokerages provided us with the portfolio holdings of the traders from 30 October 2015 to
31 July 2016. Based on these data, we constructed and cross-verified the traders' daily portfolio
holdings over this period excluding non-trading days (i.e., weekends and public holidays).20

A.3.    Market data

   Our market dataset comprises the day-end statistics of all the common stocks listed on the DSE
from 1990 to 2017. We exclude stocks not actively traded at any given time from 2015 to 2017 or
any companies lacking information on daily stock returns, trading turnover, market capitalization,
or the fraction of shares held by institutional investors. We also exclude those who were inactive
during that period as a sample restriction.
   Table VIII summarizes all the data gathered for the daily transactions of the traders. Our data
not only includes our experimental participants but also individuals chosen at random from the list
of traders in these brokerage houses. The final sample comprised traders with a diverse range of
individual characteristics, so most trading measurements varied considerably among the traders.
   Panels A and B report the trading characteristics at the individual stock level and the overall
portfolio diversification statuses of the traders. The traders tended to trade at a loss; that is, the
average cost (450,000 takas) exceeded the average market value (360,000 takas). The average beta
for a single stock was 1.18 (compared to a beta of 1 for the DSE).21 However, the average weighted
beta of the portfolio was 0.43, indicating that traders diversified by placing insignificant weights
on risky assets. Panel C shows the purchase and sale frequencies aggregated daily and measured
in number, volume, and value. On average, our traders made a total of approximately 19,000 sales
and 22,000 transactions (each transaction had a volume of 1,260 shares for sales and 1,235 shares
for purchases) from September 2015 to August 2016.

                                              [Table 8 about here.]
   20 Our constructed portfolio holdings on 31 July 2016 are exact duplicates of the official version from the broker-
ages, confirming the reliability of the data.
   21 Our beta is measured by regressing stock-price variation on the market index variation of the day. A beta larger

than 1 implies that the stock risk is higher than the systematic market risk.




                                                         17
B.      Experimental measures and actual trading
    Theoretical and experimental evidence has shown that MLA lowers investor willingness to par-
ticipate in the stock market. True to the equity premium puzzle, if MLA in the laboratory correlates
with real-life trading, a reduced-form set of results is that MLA types should hold smaller port-
folios in both size and volume, have lower portfolio betas, and react more strongly to short-term
movements in the market.

B.1.     Stock market exposure and MLA

   In order to establish the link between the lab and field, we utilize the results from the within-
subject analysis and correlate them with the natural occuring data. We define MLA tendency by
two measurements: a binary indicator of MLA, and the degree of MLA.
   Table IX presents the correlations between myopic MLA tendency and several measurements
of traders' portfolio positions and trading frequencies. Overall, traders who exhibited high degrees
of myopia tended to hold smaller portfolios (as measured by both volume and value). The daily
average cost of each stock for the non-myopic group was 0.5 million takas (61% higher than that
of those with narrow framing). Relative to the daily aggregate level, the MLA types had a portfolio
size (i.e., the total cost of the portfolio of the day) of 2.65 million takas, while the other group had
a portfolio size of 1.32 million takas.22
   Relative to the total cost level, myopic traders tended to have a higher exposure to the stock
market in terms of trading frequencies. They had a higher level of both purchases and sales in terms
of raw numbers, volume, and value. Perhaps non-myopic traders tend to adopt a long-term strategy
of investing lump sums at the beginning and then only trading when a necessity to rebalance arises.
Conversely, myopia induces traders to react more to short-term market movements, which is a
characteristic of stock markets. The myopic group also underperformed in terms of the rate of turn
on papers (the myopic group traded at an 11% loss, while the benchmark group traded at a 7%
loss).

                                              [Table 9 about here.]
     22 The
          difference in portfolio size does not stem from the difference in the initial level of wealth. Traders in the
myopic group reported having average 846,695 takas in their initial endowments when they first started, 20% higher
than those in the neutral group.




                                                         18
B.2.   Disposition effect and MLA

   According to prospect theory and mental accounting, the disposition effect is the tendency of
traders to sell stocks as soon as their prices increase but hold onto stocks whose value has declined
over a long period. The difference between the market price and the purchase price of the stock
remains a paper gain or loss until the account holder decides to sell the share(s) (only then is the
gain or loss realized). An investor is said to have a disposition effect if that investor tends to realize
gains significantly more often than losses. Adopting the approach of Odean (1998), we calculate
the proportion of realized gains (PGR) against total gain opportunities (realized gains plus paper
gains). The proportion of realized losses (PLR) is calculated using the same structure:

                                            Realized Gains
                               PGR =                                                                  (7)
                                     Realized Gains + Paper Gains
                                            Realized Losses
                               PLR =                                                                  (8)
                                     Realized Losses + Paper Losses

The null hypothesis for the disposition effect is that PGR  PLR. The average PGR for non-
myopic traders is 0.47, while their PLR is 0.39. The within-group absolute difference for non-
myopic traders was 0.08 (compared to 0.05 for the myopic group). The null hypothesis for the
differences was rejected at the 1% and 10% significance levels using a standard t-test for the mean
difference. However, the significance level did not hold when we conducted the Mann-Whitney
non-parametric test on the PGR-PLR differences between the two groups of traders. Thus, while
both groups exhibited a certain degree of the disposition effect, there was insufficient evidence to
conclude that MLA correlates to the degree of the disposition effect.
   Notably, the disposition effect is a sophisticated measure that relates to several dimensions
of market trends and personal characteristics. Thus, an aggregate measurement may not be the
best approach to capture this behavioral bias. We use the panel structure of our data and run the
following regressions to examine the prevalence of the disposition effect and how it correlates with
the personal characteristics of the traders:

 Salei jt =  + 1 Gaini jt + 2 MLAi + 3 MLAi  Gaini jt +   (MLAi  Re f erencePrice) + i jt (9)

in which:

    · The dependent variable Salei jt is the dummy variable that takes value of one if the stock j

                                                   19
       was sold by an individual i at time t .

    · Gaini jt is a dummy variable that equals one if the asset's open price exceeds its purchase
      price.23

The mean of the dependent variable is the probability of selling a particular position given that
an investor sold something on that day. The gain coefficient measures the marginal effect of the
probability of selling a stock if that position is at a gain position. If the gain coefficient is positive,
it implies that a trader is selling a winner (disposition effect). Conversely, a negative coefficient
represents the reverse disposition effect. The interaction coefficient between gain and behavior
indicates how such elicited behavioral preferences in the laboratory correlate to real trading behav-
iors.
    Table X shows a strong disposition effect (i.e., the coefficient sign was consistently positive)
among our participants. When the stock is at a gaining position as compared to its cost (purchase
price plus transaction fee), the traders in our sample tend to sell. To better understand the mag-
nitude of the coefficients, consider an investor who must decide whether to sell Stock A, which
is trading above the purchase price, or Stock B, which is trading below the purchase price. The
non-myopic trader has a coefficient of 0.713 for stock at a gaining position; that is, the probability
                                                   exp0.713
of selling the winner Stock A is 67% higher ( 1+    exp0.713
                                                             ) than stock B - the "loser".
    On average, for any given transaction, a trader who exhibited MLA in the lab has a higher
propensity to sell a losing stock--the propensity of selling is 64.25%, which corresponds to a log
of the odds of 0.586. Those who suffered more from myopia were less likely to sell a winner--for
example, the MLA interactions with the gain dummy of 0.0969 suggests that the probability of
selling a winner decreases from 67% to 64%.

                                              [Table 10 about here.]

The propensity to sell is generally correlated with whether a stock has held a gaining position for
a certain period. Some traders use market movement as their price benchmark to decide whether
to sell. Thus, a winning stock is defined as having a current market price that exceeds its previous
market price. Table X also sets out the coefficients of the short-term (one day and one week),
medium-term (one month), and long-term price changes (one year). We find that myopia also re-
duced the disposition effect in both short-term and long-term market fluctuations--the coefficients
   23 We also define gain as a dummy equal to 1 if the stock was at a gain position in the previous week. However, this
result does not change qualitatively.

                                                         20
for the interactions between MLA and reference prices are all negative. Overall, myopia reduced
the probability of selling a winner by 2.17% (when the market gain is defined as the stock-market
price exceeding its price one year ago) to 4.04% (when the market gain is defined as the stock-
market price exceeding its price one month ago). Notably, if a trader reacts more to short-term
movements and less to long-term movements, a stronger effect of short-term price gain should be
found. While the effect is larger for a one-year gain, the difference is not significant.


                                            V.       Conclusions
   MLA provides a theoretical explanation for the equity premium puzzle, while providing predic-
tions on how feedback affects investment profiles. In this paper, we use standard tools to measure
MLA among a group of non-professional traders/investors from eight brokerage houses in Dhaka
and correlate those experimental results with their transactions and portfolio positions. A key
contribution of our work is to show that the experimental data correlate with essential real-world
trading analogs of non-professional traders. To be specific, we find that MLA correlates to a lower
portfolio cost and a higher disposition effect, but MLA traders do not necessarily trade more on a
daily basis.
   Methodologically, our results from the within-design reveal that once participants are exposed to
both high and low feedback frequency, their degree of MLA decreases considerably. We also make
a methodological contribution by showing that experience can aggravate or mitigate the degree of
MLA. This follows because experience with gains and losses act as a reference point, and we find
that MLA can be curtailed at the individual level if professional traders are first presented with
lower-frequency feedback. However, the effect remains the same if they had experienced frequent
feedback prior.
   In closing, we would be remiss not to mention generalizability of our experimental and empir-
ical results. To do so, we follow four transparency SANS conditions outlined by List (2020).24
First, our selection of traders is based on responses to the random invitation to all clients of our
partnered stock brokerages. These traders did not have a financial advisor at the time of the study.
In other words, they made investment decisions based on their own strategy. Our sample reflects the
non-professional traders in the market. Second, we have a zero attrition rate in the experiment, and
more than 90 percent of the traders consent to give access to their trading data. Third, our subjects
  24 SANS   conditions are Selection, Attrition, Naturalness, and Scalability.

                                                          21
are placed under both ends of the spectrum of the naturalness of the choice task and investment
environment. The experimental session happens in a laboratory setting, in which investment deci-
sions are potentially on the artificial margin and the experiment uses a certain type of risk portfolio
that is standard in the literature.25 We then observe the same traders' naturally-occurring data from
the stock market by analyzing their trading decisions. Finally, to understand the effect of feedback
frequency on the stock market, replications need to be completed to understand if our results can
be extended in other settings such as using institutional and professional traders of the markets.




    25 The literature offers mixed conclusion to what degree the MLA experimental results depend on the risk profile

of the lottery (see Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2017)).


                                                        22
                                         References
Alevy, J. E., Haigh, M. S. and List, J. A. (2007). Information cascades: Evidence from a field
  experiment with financial market professionals, The Journal of Finance 62(1): 151­180.

Barber, B. M. and Odean, T. (2000). Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock
  investment performance of individual investors, The Journal of Finance 55(2): 773­806.

Barber, B. M. and Odean, T. (2001). Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
  stock investment, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1): 261­292.

Barber, B. M. and Odean, T. (2013). The behavior of individual investors, Handbook of the
  Economics of Finance 2: 1533­1570.

Benartzi, S. and Thaler, R. H. (1995). Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1): 73­92.

Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D. and Madrian, B. C. (2017). Does aggregated returns disclosure
  increase portfolio risk taking?, The Review of Financial Studies 30(6): 1971­2005.

Charness, G., Gneezy, U. and Kuhn, M. A. (2012). Experimental methods: Between-subject and
  within-subject design, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 81(1): 1­8.

Czibor, E., Jimenez-Gomez, D. and List, J. A. (2019). The dozen things experimental economists
  should do (more of), NBER Working Papers 25451, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc.

Evers, E. and Imas, A. (2019). Mental accounting, similarity, and preferences over the timing of
  outcomes, Similarity, and Preferences Over the Timing of Outcomes (September 12, 2019) .

Fehr, E. and List, J. A. (2004). The hidden costs and returns of incentives--trust and trustworthi-
  ness among ceos, Journal of the European Economic Association 2(5): 743­771.

Fellner, G. and Sutter, M. (2009). Causes, consequences, and cures of myopic loss aversion­an
  experimental investigation, The Economic Journal 119(537): 900­916.

Gneezy, U., Kapteyn, A. and Potters, J. (2003). Evaluation periods and asset prices in a market
  experiment, The Journal of Finance 58(2): 821­837.

                                                23
Gneezy, U. and Potters, J. (1997). An experiment on risk taking and evaluation periods, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 631­645.

Grinblatt, M. and Keloharju, M. (2000). The investment behavior and performance of various
  investor types: a study of finland's unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55(1): 43­
  67.

Grinblatt, M., Keloharju, M. and Linnainmaa, J. (2011). Iq and stock market participation, The
  Journal of Finance 66(6): 2121­2164.

Haigh, M. S. and List, J. A. (2005). Do professional traders exhibit myopic loss aversion? an
  experimental analysis, The Journal of Finance 60(1): 523­534.

Holt, C. A. and Laury, S. K. (2002). Risk aversion and incentive effects, American Economic
  Review 92(5): 1644­1655.

Imas, A. (2016). The realization effect: Risk-taking after realized versus paper losses, American
  Economic Review 106(8): 2086­2109.

Langer, T. and Weber, M. (2005). Myopic prospect theory vs. myopic loss aversion: how general
  is the phenomenon?, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 56(1): 25­38.

Larson, F., List, J. A. and Metcalfe, R. D. (2016). Can myopic loss aversion explain the equity
  premium puzzle? evidence from a natural field experiment with professional traders, Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

List, J. A. (2020). Non est disputandum de generalizability? a glimpse into the external validity
  trial, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Odean, T. (1998). Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, The Journal of Finance
  53(5): 1775­1798.

Thaler, R. H., Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. and Schwartz, A. (1997). The effect of myopia and loss
  aversion on risk taking: An experimental test, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 647­
  661.

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation
  of uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5(4): 297­323.

                                               24
                                                                  Treatment F
                   Decision       Decision   Decision     Decision       Decision   Decision     Decision       Decision    Decision



                       1             2          3             4             5          6             7             8           9

                   Outcome        Outcome    Outcome      Outcome        Outcome    Outcome      Outcome        Outcome     Outcome




                                                                  Treatment I
                 Decision 1,2,3                         Decision 4,5,6                         Decision 7,8,9



                       1             2          3             4             5          6             7             8           9

                                             Outcome                                Outcome                                 Outcome
                                              1+2+3                                  4+5+6                                   7+8+9




                                                                         F-I
                                                                          I-F

                           F1                                        Task 1                                            I1

                           I2                                      Task 2                                              F2

                                  Figure 1. Illustration of treatment and task design

Notes: In Treatment F, participants record their decision at the beginning of each round, then receive the feedback
at the end of the same round. In Treatment I, partipants make the decision in block of three round, and receive the
cumulative feedback at the end of every third round. Group FI was exposed to Treatment F in Task 1, then invests
under Treatment I in Task 2. Group I-F follows the opposite direction of treatment allocations.




                                                                          25
Figure 2. Distributions of Within-subject treatment effect




                           26
Figure 3. Average Treatment Effect by different demographics and trading characteristics




                                          27
    Table I. Demographics information and behaviour preference across two treatment groups

                                              Panel A - Group F-I                       Panel B - Group I-F                Difference c
                                       Mean          SD.       Min      Max        Mean          SD       Min     Max
Age (years)                   37.46                  9.30  22             65   37.46            9.02 24             72           0
Trading starting year       2011.15                 3.43  1989          2016 2011.378          3.60 1994          2016        -0.268
Endowment ('000 taka)        777.23                184.52   5           2000    704            143.5  5           1100         73.23
Having a Master degree         0.61                  0.49   0             1     0.66            0.48  0             1          -0.05
Male                           0.95                  0.21   0              1    0.96            0.21  0              1          0.01
Married                        0.72                  0.45   0              1    0.74            0.44  0              1         -0.02
Main job in business sector    0.40                  0.49   0             1     0.38            0.49  0             1          -0.02
Monthly income ('000 taka)    56.35                 62.09   6            600   60.30           64.19  0            540         -3.95
Observations                                           177 b                                      156 b
Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports descriptive statistics for the traders in our sample at the time of survey. Panel A provides information on group
    F-I (initially assigned to Frequent) and Panel B provides the figures for group I-F (initially assigned to Infrequent). The last column
    represents the difference between these two groups - none of the difference is statistically significant using t-test.
a   Explanation for the games design and index construction can be found in Section A.
b   8 traders (5 in group FI and 3 in group IF) did not fill in the demographics questionnaire.
c   Last column reports difference between two groups. All the differences are not different at 10% level of significance.




                                                                   28
Table II. Raw data summary and Mann-Whitney test for treatment effect - Task 1

                    Panel A - Average investmenta(SD)            Panel B - Treatment Effect
                        (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)
                    Treatment F      Treatment I       Total     Difference       Z-statistics
All Rounds             58.95            69.70         64.06         10.75          4.101***
                      (25.56)          (26.05)       (24.66)
Rounds 1-3             63.00            67.62         65.16          4.62           1.535 **
                      (27.70)          (28.50)       (28.12)

Rounds 4-6             59.00            69.12         63.72         10.12          3.250***
                      (31.38)          (30.28)       (31.24)

Rounds 7-9             54.84            73.02         63.31         18.18          5.078***
                      (33.83)          (29.70)       (33.20)
Observations            182              159            341
Notes:      p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports the raw data summary (mean and standard deviation) and Mann-Whitney test
    for differences in investment level in Task 1.
    Panel A presents the average investment level in the first row and standard deviation in paren-
    theses. Average investment is the mean of investment across all 9 rounds of investment. Panel
    B reports the average difference treatment effect (I¯1-F  ¯1 ) and Mann-Whitney z-stats for the
    difference between two Tasks.
    The first row presents data across all rounds. We also report average amount in block 1-3, 4-6,
    and 7-9 in the next three rounds. Data is drawn exclusive from Task 1.
a   All investment levels are in unit of experiment. One unit of experiment equals 100 taka.




                                                29
             Table III. Panel regression result (Task 1) - MLA

                                 Dependent variable: Investment amount
                                     (1)                     (2)
                                 Simple Tobitb        Random-effect Tobitb
Treatment Fa                       -16.33                    -19.41
                                     (1.98)                    (5.94)

Constant                            84.1                     89.42
                                     (1.73)                   (5.12)
Subject Random Effects                 No                       Yes
Time Effects                           No                       Yes
Observations                          3087                     3087
Notes:      p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports the panel regression result of investment level on the dummy
    variable of treatment allocation. Dependent variable is the amount of invest-
    ment in each decision round.
a   Treatment F indicates the participant received Frequent feedback.
b   The Tobit regressions are censored at 0. Bootstrap Standard errors in parenthe-
    ses.




                                        30
Table IV. Panel regression result (Task 1) - Effect of previous result investment level

                                                         Dependent variable: Investment amount
                                                            (1)                     (2)
Winning in previous rounds (cumulative)                  -8.406***             -6.662***
                                                           (3.054)               (2.003)

Winning in the most recent round                         -10.89***             -9.470***
                                                           (2.002)               (1.352)

Round                                                    -1.212***              -0.760**
                                                           (0.457)               (0.295)

Group FIc                                                                        7.681**
                                                                                 (3.089)

Constant                                                 69.40***               58.52***
                                                          (2.952)                (4.693)

Observations                                               1456                    2728
Notes:      p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
     Notes:
     This table reports the panel regression result of previous outcome on current investment level.
     Dependent variable is the amount of investment in each decision round. For column (1), the data
     only includes observations in Task 1. For column (2), the data includes pooled observations in both
     tasks. We exclude Round 1 out of the analysis since there is no previous outcome at round 1.
 a   The dummy variable indicates the cumulative number of wins exceed the number of losses in pre-
     ceding rounds , as shown to the participant before each decision round.
 b   For treatment F, it is the single winning result at round t-1.
 c   Group FI is a dummy variable equals one if the trader invested under Frequent Feedback first.




                                                    31
            Table V. Average Treatment Effect - Comparison between Task 1 and Task 2

                           Panel A-Investment under Task 2 a                      Panel B - Task 1 versus Task 2
                        (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)c           (5)d           (6)e
                             ¯2 )
                   Frequent (F        Infrequent (I¯
                                                   2)      z-statisticsb      ¯2 - F
                                                                             (F     ¯1 )     2 - I¯
                                                                                           (I¯     1)   (Task 2- Task 1)

All Rounds              65.84               69.70             3.86            6.89***        -0.22          -7.11 ***
                       (29.04)             (26.01)

Round 1-3               68.69               66.40             -2.29            5.69**        -1.22          -6.91***
                       (29.33)             (29.33)
Round 4-6               64.58               68.67             4.09            5.58***        -0.45          -6.03***
                       (33.42)             (31.83)
Round 7-9               64.25               74.03            9.78**           9.41***        1.01            -8.4 **
                       (33.04)             (33.24)
Observations             182                 159               341
Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports the treatment effect in Task 2 and the difference in investment level under these two tasks. Panel
    A presents the raw data summary (mean and standard deviation) of investment levels under Frequent and Infrequent
    Feedback. Panel B shows the difference between Task 1 and Task 2 using Mann-Whitney test.
a   All the average investment levels are measured using unit of experiment. Each unit of experiment equals 100 taka. Average
    investment amount is in the first row, the standard deviation in parentheses beneath
b   Column (3) reports Mann-Whitney z-statistics for the difference between Frequent and Infrequent treatment in Task 2.
c   Column (4) presents the difference between average investment level under Frequent Feedback in Task 1 and Task 2
    (F¯2 - F¯1 ).
d   Column (5) presents the difference between average investment level under Infrequent Feedback in Task 1 and Task 2
    (I¯
      2 - I¯
           1 ).
e   Column (6) presents the difference between average treatment effects under two task ((F  ¯2 - I¯     ¯1 - I¯
                                                                                                   2 ) -(F     1 )).




                                                             32
                                              Table VI. Within-subject distribution

                                       Panel A- Pooled data                        Panel B- Only F-I                          Panel C - only I-F
                                    (1)                   (2)                  (3)                   (4)                 (5)                    (6)
                                Distribution          Difference           Distribution          Difference          Distribution           Difference
MLA Traders                          174          -25.45 (-33.89%)             106           -25.78 (-33.91%)             68           -24.93 (-33.87%)
                                   51.03%                                    58.24%                                     42.77%

Neutral Traders                      58                     0                  27                      0                  31                     0
                                   17.01%                                    14.84%                                     19.50%

Myopic Seeking Traders               109           16.71 (31.86%)              49             15.83 (32.41%)              60            17.43 (31.46%)
                                   31.96%                                    26.92%                                     37.74%

Observations                         341                                         182                                       159
  Notes:
  This table provides information on the within-subject distribution of participants who invest more, the same, or less in Frequent Feedback as compared
  to Infrequent Feedback.
  Panel (A), (B), and (C) uses data from all participants (pooled), group F-I (play Frequent game first), group I-F (play Infrequent game first), respectively.
  In each panel, the first column shows the numbers of observations in the first rows and the percentage in the second row. The second column gives the
  difference between investment under Frequent Feedback and Infrequent Feedback.




                                                                            33
    Table VII. Sub-group analysis: Correlation between MLA and individual characteristics

                                                                    Dependent Variable: MLA
                                                           (1)a            (2)a           (3) b           (4)b

Older than median age                                  0.119**
                                                       (0.0542)

Initial level of capital above median level                            0.150***
                                                                       (0.0539)

Trading on short term opportunity                                                       0.0471
                                                                                       (0.0706)

Check market news at least every week                                                                 -0.117*
                                                                                                      (0.0657)

Group FI c                                            -0.147***       -0.143***       -0.157***      -0.155***
                                                       (0.0542)        (0.0540)        (0.0539)       (0.0536)

Constant                                               0.665***        0.644***       0.731***        0.831***
                                                       (0.0874)        (0.0881)       (0.0838)        (0.0965)

Observations                                              333             333             341            341
Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table provides linear probability regression of MLA on several observable or self-reported characteristics.
    Each panel controls for the order of the game an individual plays.
a   Panel (1) and (2) report the correlation between MLA and age of the respondent, and capital endowment. Age
    is defined as those who were above 35 (the median age of the sample) at the time of the survey. The initial
    level of the capital endowment is the dummy variable that takes value one if the respondent has a capital level
    above the median value (100000 takas). There were eight traders did not report this information.
b   Panel (3) and (4) show the correlation between MLA and self-reported trading behaviour. Trading behaviour
    survey was conducted on the training date, before the first training session.
c   Group FI is the dummy variable equals one if the trader plays the game under Frequent Feedback First.




                                                         34
                                         Table VIII. Trading transactions description

                                                                                            Panel A - Variableaat stock level
                                                                      Observations          Mean        Standard Deviation          Min          Max

Stock Beta                                                                361711             1.18                 0.44             -1.15         2.44

Total cost of the stock (million taka)                                    366819             0.45                 1.48              0.00        22.55

Stock's market value by day, in million taka                              400788             0.36                 1.12              0.00        21.38

Quantity of stock purchase , in volume                                     20924           4278.7              10783.3              1.00      500000.0

Quantity of stock sale (daily), in volume                                  18769           4862.4              13757.9              1.00      600000.0

Value of stock purchase (daily), in taka                                   20912          147341.9             297062.9             2.25     9901927.0

Value of stock sale(daily), in taka                                        18769          166288.7             344379.9             0.00     7322603.5
                                                                                           Panel B - Portfolio diversification
                                                                      Observations          Mean        Standard Deviation          Min          Max

Weighted average beta                                                      73977             0.43                 0.53             -0.52         2.44

Dominant sector: Bank/Financial Institution                                73977             0.23                 0.42              0.00         1.00

Pharmaceuticals being dominant industry                                    73977             0.12                 0.33              0.00         1.00

Ceramic being dominant industry                                            73977             0.01                 0.10              0.00         1.00

Daily total number of DSE sectors in the portfolio                         73977             3.60                 2.58              0.00        16.00

Daily total variety of stocks in the portfolio                             73977             5.43                 5.91              1.00        59.00

Maximum daily value of stock by sector                                     73977             0.69                 0.25              0.16         1.00
                                                                                            Panel C - Daily aggregate trading
                                                                      Observations          Mean        Standard Deviation          Min          Max

Daily total cost of the portfolio (million taka)                           73977             2.24                 8.14              0.00       125.21

Daily number of sales transaction                                          73977             0.26                 0.77              0.00        15.00

Daily number of buy transaction                                            73977             0.30                 0.83              0.00        16.00

Daily volume of sales transaction                                          73977           1260.70             8612.47              0.00      636577.0

Daily volume of buy transaction                                            73977           1235.9               7142.5              0.00     500000.00

Daily value of sales (million taka)                                        73977             0.04                 0.23              0.00         9.82

Daily value of purchases (million taka)                                    73977             0.04                 0.21              0.00         9.90
                                                                           35
Total daily market value of the portfolio (million taka)                   73977             1.97                 6.62              0.00        98.57
    Notes:
    This table reports the descriptive data on transaction ledger and portfolio position of the sample. In Panel A, the data is measured at the stock level.
    Panel B and C provides data at the aggregate portfolio level.
a   Variable Description is given in Table A.2.
                          Table IX. The correlation between MLA and portfolio holdings

                                                                     Panel A - Portfolio size and trading frequency at the stock level
                                                            (1)                          (2)                          (2)                       (4)
                                                        Whole Sample                  Non-MLA                        MLA                    Difference
Variables                                              Mean          SD           Mean           SD          Mean           SD       Mann-Whitney z test
Stock holding (quantity)                             9849.64      34705.41      10399.27     38244.13      8896.65      23985.23            -13.19***


Total cost of the stock, (million taka)                 0.45         1.47          0.50         1.67         0.32           0.63            -26.14***


Daily stock market value, in million taka               0.36         1.11          0.40         1.25         0.28           0.57            -26.36***


Average holding period                                 86.59        77.96         91.31         80.77        71.44        66.91             60.66***


Rate of return                                         -0.08         1.18         -0.07         1.37         -0.11          0.23            -46.20***

                                                               Panel B - Portfolio size and trading frequency at the daily aggregate level
                                                            (1)                          (2)                          (3)                       (4)
                                                        Whole Sample                  Non-MLA                        MLA                    Difference
Variables                                              Mean          SD           Mean           SD          Mean           SD       Mann-Whitney z test
Daily total cost of the portfolio, million taka         2.23         8.05          2.65         9.58         1.32           2.29             -4.92***


Daily market value, million taka                        1.95         6.55          2.29         7.77         1.23           2.07             -3.60***


Daily number of sales transaction                       0.27         0.77          0.26         0.77         0.31           0.82             -8.54***


Daily number of buy transaction                         0.30         0.83          0.29         0.86         0.32           0.82             -7.47***


Daily volume of sales transaction                    1259.56       8505.8         1301.5       9341.0      1108.77      6125.33              -7.65***


Daily volume of buy transaction                      1231.31       7061.86      1259.86       7489.40      1102.52      5665.39              -6.91***


Daily value of sales transaction, million taka          0.04         0.22          0.05         0.25         0.04           0.14             -7.49***


Daily value of buy transaction million taka             0.04         0.21          0.04         0.23         0.04           0.14             -6.82***


Weighted average beta                                   0.43         0.53          0.41         0.53         0.47           0.52            -19.95***
Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
  Notes:
  This table reports the correlation between MLA and several index in Portfolio position. Individual traders are aggregated into either Non-MLA or MLA. Variable
  description is given in Appendix A.
  Column (1) provides the sample size, mean, and standard deviation for whole sample, while the second and third columns present Non-myopic and Myopic group
  respectively. Z-statistic for Mann-Whitney non-parametric test is given in the last column.
  Panel A presents the daily statistics at the individual stock level and Panel provides the daily aggregate data.

                                                                             36
                     Table X. Disposition effect versus Laboratory behavioral preference

                                                         Dependent variable: The propensity of sell versus hold
                                             Coefficient                        Confidence Interval               Transformed Coefficient
                                     Benchmark          MLAx             Benchmark               MLAx             Benchmark          MLAx
MLAa                                  0.586***                          [0.46 ; 0.71]                                 64.25
                                      (0.0644)

Gainb(Market Price >Cost)             0.713***        -0.0969**          [0.66; 0.76]      [-0.19;-0.0022]            67.11           64.93
                                      (0.0255)         (0.0484)

Market Gainc- 1 Day                   0.455***        -0.133***         [0.41 ; 0.50]      [-0.22 ; -0.050]         61.18%           57.98%
                                      (0.0219)         (0.0424)

Market Gain - 1 Week                  0.421***        -0.147***         [0.38 ; 0.47]      [-0.24 ; -0.059]         60.37%           56.81%
                                      (0.0232)         (0.0452)

Market Gain - 1 Month                 0.325***         -0.0921*         [0.28 ; 0.37]     [-0.18 ; 0.00053]         58.05%           55.80%
                                      (0.0241)         (0.0472)

Market Gain - 1 Year                  0.245***         -0.163**         [0.18 ; 0.31]      [-0.30 ; -0.030]         56.09%           52.05%
                                      (0.0340)         (0.0679)
Notes:      p < 0.1,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports results of a panel random effect logit regression with the dependent variable being dummy variable taken value one when a
    trader sold a stock for which the cost is known. If no purchase or sales decisions are made, the dependent variable obtains the value of zero,
    indicating "Hold". We provide the transformed coefficient in (4) to ease the interpretation of the log of the odds.
a   Myopic Loss Aversion is a dummy variable that takes the value of one if subject invests myopically in the laboratory. The definition is given
    in Table A.1. The benchmark column corresponds to the non-MLA trader.
b   Stock gain takes value of 1 if the Open market price of the day exceeds the purchase price.
c   Reference price one day, one month, and one year take dummy value of one if the market price the stock exceeds its past market price one
    day, one month, and one year ago, respectively.
    Unreported are individual characteristic of the age, experience, and income dummy that equals one if the trader's income rank above the
    median level.




                                                                      37
                   Appendix A                 Additional Tables and Figures

                         Table A.1. Summary of experimental variables' definition

Variables                          Origin                                         Definition
Myopic Loss Aversion             Experiment                              Difference degree of MLA
 Treatment effect                                       Investment under Frequent - Investment Under Infrequent
 MLA Trader                                   Dummy value = 1 if (Investment under Frequent - Investment Under Infrequent)> 0
 Myopic Neutral Trader                        Dummy value = 1 if (Investment under Frequent - Investment Under Infrequent)= 0

Age                               Survey                              Age of the participants in years
 Age group                        Survey                            Dummy variable equals 1 if Age > 35

Above-median capital endowment    Survey                   Dummy variable equals 1 if Capital level > 100000 taka

Income                            Survey                   Current monthly income of the participants in 1000 taka

High Income                       Survey                               Belong to the top quartile income

Gender                            Survey                       Gender of the participants (1=Male, 0 = Female)

Master degree                     Survey          The education level of the participants (1=Having a master degree, 0=Not)

Trading starting year              Survey                        The year the participant joined stock market
Risk aversion                    Experiment            Index computed by the crossover level risk-sensitivity approach.
                                                 Crossover point = winning probability which subjects are willing to take risk.

Ambiguity avoidance              Experiment         Index computed by the crossover level ambiguity-sensitivity approach.




                                                            38
                                                              Table A.2. Summary of financial index variables' definition
     Variables                                      Data sources                  Definition                                                                                            Data Frequency
                                                                                                                                                                                     (1)a             (2)b

     Number of transactions                         Transactions data             Number of purchases and sales                                                                      Average values   Daily

     Trades volume                                  Transactions data             Volume of purchases and sales (in million taka)                                                    Average values

     Market trades volume                           Transactions data             Volume of purchases and sales divided by market volume                                             Average values

     Buy-sale ratio                                 Transaction data              Number of purchases divided by number of total trades                                              Average values   Daily

     Buy-sale volume ratio (percentage)             Transaction data              Volume of purchases divided by total trading volumes                                               Average values   Daily

     Portfolio value                                Portfolio data                Portfolio value at every business day for entire period (in million taka)                          Average values   Daily

     Portfolio positions                            Portfolio data                Number of holdings at every business day for entire period                                         Average values   Daily

     Big industry                                   Portfolio data                Dummy variable indicating the dominant stock is bank and institution, ceramic, engineer industry

     Stock variety                                  Portfolio data                Number of different stocks (variety) in the portfolio                                              Average values Daily
                                                    Portfolio data                Weighted-average beta of the portfolio                                                             Average values Daily
39




     DSE Index                                      Market data                   Percentage daily change in Dhaka Stock Exchange                                                                     Daily

     Volatility 1y                                  Portfolio+Market data         One-year market gain or loss position                                                                               Daily

     Volatility 1w                                  Portfolio+Market data         One-week market gain or loss position
         Notes:
         Each financial index is derived either from the transaction data, portfolio data, or the market data.
     a   Data in Column (1) is used in Table IX, measuring the indices by averaging all the trading activities by each trader.
     b   Data in Column (2) is used in Table X, using trading activities at daily level.
Table A.3. The differences between two treatments in Supplementary Games

                                  Panel A - Supplementary Game Task 1
                          Average investment (SD)                     Treatment Effect
                   Treatment F       Treatment I       Total      Difference      Z-statistics
Round 1-3             161.03             181.3         170.3        -20.07          -1.761*
                      (117.2)           (118.3)       (118.1)
Observations            182               159
                                  Panel B - Supplementary Game Task 2
                          Average investment (SD)                     Treatment Effect
                   Treatment F       Treatment I       Total      Difference      Z-statistics
Round 1-3              180.1            197.22        189.12        -17.12          0.0719
                      (134.0)           (142.5)       (124.1)
Observations            151               168
Notes: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports the raw data summary (mean and standard deviation) and Mann-Whitney
    test for differences in investment level in the supplementary games of Task 1 (Panel A) and
    Task 2 (Panel B).
    The first three columns present the average investment level in the first row and standard
    deviation in parentheses. Average investment is the mean of investment across all 9 rounds
    of investment. The last two columns reports the average difference treatment effect (I¯  ¯1 )
                                                                                          1 -F
    and Mann-Whitney z-stats for the difference between two Tasks.
a   All investment levels are in unit of experiment. One unit of experiment equals 100 taka.




                                                40
            Table A.4. Panel regression result (Task 2) - MLA

                                      Dependent variable: Investment amount
                                          (1)                (2)
                                      Simple Tobitb   Random-effect Tobitb
Treatment Fa                             -6.16***             -7.99
                                           (2.39)             (6.83)
Constant                                 83.6***             89.7***
                                           (3.93)             (11.2)
Task 1 Payment                             Yes                  Yes
Subject Random Effects                     No                   Yes
Time Effects                               No                   Yes
Observations                               3087                3087
Notes:      p < 0.1,      p < 0.05,      p < 0.01
    Notes:
    This table reports the panel regression result of investment level on the dummy
    variable of treatment allocation. Dependent variable is the amount of invest-
    ment in each decision round in Task 2.
a   Treatment F indicates the participant received Frequent feedback.
b   The Tobit regressions are censored at 0. Bootstrap Standard errors in parenthe-
    ses. Both models control for the payment received in Task 1.




                                             41
                               Figure A.1. Plots for Equations (2) and (3)

Notes: This figure compare and contrast the value function of loss-averse agents on repeated evaluation of single
lottery versus joint evaluation of multiple lotteries.




                                                       42
Figure A.2. Heterogeneity in within-subject myopia




                       43
                  Appendix B             Experimental Instructions

General instructions for subjects - English version
   Welcome to our experimental study of decision-making. The experiment will last about 2 hours.
The instructions for the experiment are simple, and if you follow them carefully, you can earn a
considerable amount of money. All the money you earn is yours to keep, and will be paid to you,
privately and in cash, immediately after the experiment or on an agreed date later. The experiment
will consist of 4 tasks. After each task has been finished, the instructions for the next task will be
distributed to you. When everyone is seated, we will go through the instructions of task 1 of the
experiment. After that, you will have the opportunity to study the instructions on your own, and to
ask questions. If you have a question, please raise your hand, and I will come to your table. Please
do not talk or communicate with the other participants during the experiment. These apply to all
tasks. Are there any questions about what has been said until now?


A     Task 4 (Myopic loss aversion)
   General instruction for both treatments
   The experiment will consist of two parts. The instructions for the second part will be distributed
to you after the first part has been finished. Before we start the experiment, however, you will be
asked to pick one envelope from this pile. In the envelope you will find your Response Sheet. This
form will be used to register your decisions and earnings.

A.1    Task 4: Myopic loss aversion Instructions for Treatment F

   Part 1
   Part 1 consists of 9 successive rounds. In each round you will start with an amount of 100 units
(1 unit=10 taka). You must decide which part of this amount (between 0 units and 100 units) you
wish to bet in the following lottery: "You have a two-thirds chance (67%) to lose the amount you
bet and a one-third (33%) to win two-and-a-half times the amount you bet." You are requested
to record your choice on your response sheet. Suppose you decide to bet an amount of X units
(0 <= 100 <= 100) in the lottery. Then, you must fill in the amount X in the column headed
Amount in lottery, in the row with the number of the present round. Whether you win or lose in the
lottery depends on your personal win colour. This colour is indicated on top of your response sheet.

                                                 44
Your win colour can be red, blue, or white, and is the same for all 9 rounds. In any round, you win
in the lottery if your win colour matches the round colour that will be drawn by an enumerator, and
you lose if your win colour does not match the round colour.
    The round colour is determined as follows. After you have recorded your bet in the lottery
for the round, the enumerator, in a random manner, pick one colour from a cup containing three
colours: red, blue, and white. The colour drawn is the round colour for that round. If the round
colour matches your win colour you win in the lottery; otherwise, you lose. Since there are three
colours one of which matches your win colour the chance of winning in the lottery is one-third
(33%) and the chance of losing is two-thirds (67%).
    Hence your earnings in the lottery are determined as follows. If you have decided to put an
amount of X units in the lottery, then your earnings in the lottery for the round are equal to ­X if
the round colour does not match your win colour (you lose the amount bet) and equal to +2.5X if
the round colour matches your win colour (you win two-and-a-half times the amount bet).
    The round colour will be shown to you by the enumerator. You are requested to record this
colour in the column Round colours, under win or lose, depending on whether the round colour
does or does not match your win colour. Also you are requested to record your earnings in the
lottery in the column Earnings in lottery. Your total earnings for the round are equal to 100 units
(your starting amount) plus your earnings in the lottery. These earnings are recorded in the column
Total earnings, in the row of the corresponding round. Each time we will come by to check your
response sheet for errors in calculation.
    After that, you are requested to record your choice for the next round. Again you start with an
amount of 100 units, a part of which you can bet in the lottery. The same procedure as described
above determines your earnings for this round. It is noted that your private win colour remains
the same, but that for each round, a new round colour is drawn by the enumerator. All subsequent
rounds will also proceed in the same manner. After the last round has been completed, your
earnings in all rounds will be summed. This amount determines your total earnings for part 1 of
the task. Then, the instructions for part 2 will be announced.
    Part 2
    Part 2 is almost identical to part 1, but differs in two respect. First, part 2 consists of three
rounds (instead of 9 rounds). Second, in part 2 you do not get any additional starting amount from
us. You play with the money you have earned in part 1. To that purpose, we first decide your
earnings in part 1 by three. The resulting amount is your starting amount S for each of the three


                                                 45
rounds. Again you are asked which part of this amount (between 0 and S) you wish to bet in the
lottery. "You have a two-thirds chance (67%) to lose the amount you bet and a one-third (33%) to
win two-and-a-half times the amount you bet."
   You are asked to record your choice on the response sheet. If you decide to bet an amount of X
units (0 <= X <= S), then you must fill in the amount X under Amount in lottery.
   Your private win colour is the same as in part 1 and can be found on top of your response sheet.
After you have recorded your bet for the present round, the enumerator will again, in a random
manner, pick one colour from a cup containing three colours: red, blue, and white. The colour
drawn is the round colour. If this round colour matches your win colour, you win in the lottery,
otherwise you lose.
   If you have decided to bet an amount X in the lottery, then your earnings in the lottery are equal
to ­X if the round colour does not match your win colour (you lose the amount bet for the round)
and equal to +2.5X if the round colour does match your win colour (you win two-and-a-half times
the amount bet for the round).
   You are again requested to record the round colour and your earnings in the lottery on the
response sheet. Your total earnings for the round are equal to your starting amount S plus your
earnings in the lottery. You are asked to record these on your response sheet. We will come by to
check your form for errors.
   After that you are requested to make your choice for the next round. Again you can choose to
bet part of your staring amount in the lottery. The same procedure as described above determines
your earnings. Round 3 will proceed in the same manner. After that, your earnings in the three
rounds will be added. This amount determines your total earnings in parts 1 and 2 of the task.

A.2   Task 4: Myopic loss aversion Instructions for Treatment I

   Part 1 consists of 9 successive rounds. In each round you will start with an amount of 100 units
(1 unit=10 taka). You must decide which part of this amount (between 0 units and 100 units) you
wish to bet in the following lottery: "You have a two-thirds chance (67%) to lose the amount you
bet and a one-third (33%) to win two-and-a-half times the amount you bet."
   You are requested to record your choice on your response sheet. Suppose you decide to bet an
amount of X units (0 <= 100 <= 100) in the lottery. Then, you must fill in the amount X in the
column headed Amount in lottery, in the row with the number of the present round. Please note
that you fix your choice for the next three rounds. Thus, if you decide to bet an amount X in the

                                                 46
lottery for round 1, then you also bet an amount X in the lottery for rounds 2 and 3.
   Whether you win or lose in the lottery depends on your personal win colour. This colour is
indicated on top of your response sheet. Your win colour can be red, blue, or white, and is the
same for all 9 rounds. In any round, you win in the lottery if your win colour matches the round
colour that will be drawn by an enumerator, and you lose if your win colour does not match the
round colour.
   The round colour is determined as follows. After you have recorded your bet in the lottery
for the round, the enumerator, in a random manner, pick one colour from a cup containing three
colours: red, blue, and white. The colour drawn is the round colour for that round. If the round
colour matches your win colour you win in the lottery; otherwise, you lose. Since there are three
colours one of which matches your win colour the chance of winning in the lottery is one-third
(33%) and the chance of losing is two-thirds (67%).
   Hence your earnings in the lottery for the three rounds are determined as follows. If you have
decided to put an amount of X units in the lottery, then your earnings in the lottery for the three
rounds are equal to ­X for each round colour that does not match your win colour (you lose
the amount bet) and equal to +2.5X for each round colour that matches your win colour (you
win two-and-a-half times the amount bet). The three round colours will be shown to you by the
enumerator. You are requested to record these colours in the column Round colours, under win or
lose, depending on whether the round colour does or does not match your win colour. Also you
are requested to record your earnings in the lottery in the column Earnings in lottery. Your total
earnings for the three rounds are equal to 300 units (three times your starting amount) plus your
earnings in the lottery. These earnings are recorded in the column Total earnings, in the row of
the corresponding rounds. Each time we will come by to check your response sheet for errors in
calculation.
   After that, you are requested to record your choice for the next three rounds. For each of the
three rounds you again start with an amount of 100 units, a part of which you can bet in the lottery.
The same procedure as described above determines your earnings for these three rounds. It is
noted that your private win colour remains the same, but that for each round, a new round colour is
drawn by the enumerator. The subsequent three rounds (7-9) will also proceed in the same manner.
After the last round has been completed, your earnings in all rounds will be summed. This amount
determines your total earnings for part 1 of the task. Then, the instructions for part 2 will be
announced.


                                                 47
    Part 2 Part 2 is almost identical to part 1, but differs in two respect. First, part 2 consists of
three rounds (instead of 9 rounds). Second, in part 2 you do not get any additional starting amount
from us. You play with the money you have earned in part 1. To that purpose, we first decide your
earnings in part 1 by three. The resulting amount is your starting amount S for each of the three
rounds. Again you are asked which part of this amount (between 0 and S) you wish to bet in the
lottery. "You have a two-thirds chance (67%) to lose the amount you bet and a one-third (33%) to
win two-and-a-half times the amount you bet."
    You are asked to record your choice on the response sheet. If you decide to bet an amount of
X units (0 <= X <= S), then you must fill in the amount X under Amount in lottery. Again you
fix your choice for the next three rounds. Thus, if you decide to bet an amount X in the lottery for
round 1, then you also bet an amount X in the lottery for rounds 2 and 3. Your private win colour
is the same as in part 1 and can be found on top of your response sheet. After you have recorded
your bet for the present round, the enumerator will again, in a random manner, pick one colour
from a cup containing three colours: red, blue, and white. The colour drawn is the round colour. If
this round colour matches your win colour, you win in the lottery, otherwise you lose.
    If you have decided to bet an amount X in the lottery, then your earnings in the lottery are
equal to ­X for each round colour that does not match your win colour (you lose the amount bet
for the round) and equal to +2.5X for each round colour that matches your win colour (you win
two-and-a-half times the amount bet for the round).
    You are again requested to record the round colours and your earnings in the lottery on the
response sheet. Your total earnings for the three rounds are equal to three times your starting
amount S, plus your earnings in the lottery. You are asked to record these on your response sheet.
We will come by to check your form for errors.
    After that you are requested to make your choice for the next round. Again you can choose to
bet part of your staring amount in the lottery. The same procedure as described above determines
your earnings. Round 3 will proceed in the same manner. After that, your earnings in the three
rounds will be added. This amount determines your total earnings in parts 1 and 2 of the task.




                                                 48
