                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     NORMALIZING COMMUNITY MASK-WEARING:
                   A CLUSTER RANDOMIZED TRIAL IN BANGLADESH

                                          Jason Abaluck
                                         Laura H Kwong
                                        Ashley Styczynski
                                         Ashraful Haque
                                       Md. Alamgir Kabir
                                       Ellen Bates-Jefferys
                                         Emily Crawford
                                      Jade Benjamin-Chung
                                        Salim Benhachmi
                                          Shabib Raihan
                                        Shadman Rahman
                                           Neeti Zaman
                                          Peter J. Winch
                                      Md. Maqsud Hossain
                                      Hasan Mahmud Reza
                                         Stephen P. Luby
                                     Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak

                                        Working Paper 28734
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w28734


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2021

This project was funded with a grant from Givewell. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jason Abaluck, Laura H Kwong, Ashley Styczynski, Ashraful Haque, Md. Alamgir Kabir,
Ellen Bates-Jefferys, Emily Crawford, Jade Benjamin-Chung, Salim Benhachmi, Shabib Raihan, Shadman
Rahman, Neeti Zaman, Peter J. Winch, Md. Maqsud Hossain, Hasan Mahmud Reza, Stephen P. Luby,
and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
Normalizing Community Mask-Wearing: A Cluster Randomized Trial in Bangladesh
Jason Abaluck, Laura H Kwong, Ashley Styczynski, Ashraful Haque, Md. Alamgir Kabir, Ellen
Bates-Jefferys, Emily Crawford, Jade Benjamin-Chung, Salim Benhachmi, Shabib Raihan,
Shadman Rahman, Neeti Zaman, Peter J. Winch, Md. Maqsud Hossain, Hasan Mahmud Reza,
Stephen P. Luby, and Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
NBER Working Paper No. 28734
April 2021
JEL No. I12,I14,I15

                                          ABSTRACT

A randomized-trial of community-level mask promotion in rural Bangladesh during COVID-19
shows that the intervention tripled mask usage and is a cost-effective means of promoting public
health.

Jason Abaluck                                    Ellen Bates-Jefferys
Yale School of Management                        Innovations for Poverty Action
Box 208200                                       Evanston, IL 60208
New Haven, CT 06520-8200                         Ebates-jefferys@poverty-action.org
and NBER
jason.abaluck@yale.edu                           Emily Crawford
                                                 Yale School of Management
Laura H Kwong                                    Yale University
Woods Institute for the Environment              New Haven, CT 06520-8200
Stanford University                              emily.crawford@yale.edu
Palo Alto, CA 94305
lakwong@stanford.edu                             Jade Benjamin-Chung
                                                 Department of Epidemiology &
Ashley Styczynski                                Population Health
Division of Infectious Diseases                  Stanford University
and Geographic Medicine                          jadebc@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94034                              Salim Benhachmi
astyczyn@stanford.edu                            Yale University
                                                 New Haven, CT 06511
Ashraful Haque                                   salim.benhachmi@yale.edu
Innovations for Poverty Action Bangladesh
Dhaka, Bangladesh                                Shabib Raihan
mahaque@poverty-action.org                       Innovations for Poverty Action Bangladesh
                                                 Dhaka, Bangladesh
Md. Alamgir Kabir                                sraihan@poverty-action.org
Innovations for Poverty Action Bangladesh
Dhaka, Bangladesh                                Shadman Rahman
Evanston, IL 60208                               Innovations for Poverty Action Bangladesh
mdkabir@poverty-action.org                       Dhaka, Bangladesh
                                                 srahman3@poverty-action.org
Neeti Zaman
Innovations for Poverty Action Bangladesh
Dhaka, Bangladesh
nzaman@poverty-action.org

Peter J. Winch
Division of Social and Behavioral
Interventions
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health
Baltimore, MD 21205
pwinch@jhu.edu

Md. Maqsud Hossain
North South University
Dhaka, Bangladesh
muhammad.maqsud@northsouth.edu

Hasan Mahmud Reza
North South University
Dhaka, Bangladesh
hasan.reza@northsouth.edu

Stephen P. Luby
Division of Infectious Diseases and
Geographic Medicine
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA 94034
sluby@stanford.edu

Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
Box 208200
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
ahmed.mobarak@yale.edu
                                          Abstract

Background: A growing body of scientific evidence suggests that face masks can slow the

spread of COVID-19 and save lives, but mask usage remains low across many parts of the

world, and strategies to increase mask usage remain untested and unclear.

Methods: We conducted a cluster-randomized trial of community-level mask promotion in ru-

ral Bangladesh involving 341,830 adults in 600 villages. We employed a series of strategies to

promote mask usage, including free household distribution of surgical or cloth masks, distribu-

tion and promotion at markets and mosques, mask advocacy by Imams during Friday prayers,

role modeling by local leaders, promoters periodically monitoring passers-by and reminding

people to put on masks, village police accompanying those mask promoters, providing mon-

etary rewards or certificates to villages if mask-wearing rate improves, public signaling of

mask-wearing via signage, text message reminders, messaging emphasizing either altruistic

or self-protection motives for mask-wearing, and extracting verbal commitments from house-

holds. The primary objective was to assess which of these interventions would increase proper

(covering nose and mouth) wearing of face masks, and secondarily, whether mask promotion

unintentionally creates moral hazard and decreases social distancing. This analysis is part of

larger study evaluating the effect of mask-wearing on transmission of SARS-CoV-2.

Results: There were 64,937 households in the intervention group and 64,183 households in

the control group; study recruitment has ended. In the control group, proper mask-wearing

was practiced by 13% of those observed across the study period. Free distribution of masks

along with role modeling by community leaders produced only small increases in mask usage

during pilot interventions. Adding periodic monitoring by mask promoters to remind people in

streets and public places to put on the masks we provided increased proper mask-wearing by

29.0 percentage points (95% CI: 26.7% - 31.3%). This tripling of mask usage was sustained

over all 10 weeks of surveillance, which includes a period after intervention activities ended.

Physical distancing, measured as the fraction of individuals at least one arm's length apart,

also increased by 5.2 percentage points (95% CI: 4.2%-6.3%). Beyond the core intervention

package comprised of free distribution and promotion at households/mosques/markets, leader

endorsements plus periodic monitoring and reminders, several elements had no additional ef-

                                              2
fect on mask wearing, including: text reminders, public signage commitments, monetary or

non-monetary incentives, altruistic messaging or verbal commitments, or village police ac-

companying the mask promoters (the last not cross-randomized, but assessed in panel data).

No adverse events were reported during the study period.

Conclusions: Our intervention demonstrates a scalable and cost-effective method to promote

mask adoption and save lives, and identifies a precise combination of intervention activities

that were necessary. Comparisons between pilots shows that free mask distribution alone is

not sufficient to increase mask-wearing, but adding periodic monitoring in public places to

remind people to wear the distributed masks had large effects on behavior. The absence of any

further effect of the village police suggests that the operative mechanism is not any threat of

formal legal sanctions, but shame and people's aversion to a light informal social sanction. The

persistence of effects for 10 weeks and after the end of the active intervention period, as well as

increases in physical distancing, all point to changes in social norms as a key driver of behavior

change. Our cross-randomizations suggest that improved mask-wearing norms can be achieved

without incentives that require costly monitoring, that aesthetic design choices and colors can

influence mask-wearing, and that surgical masks with a substantially higher filtration efficiency

can be a cost-effective alternative to cloth masks (1/3 the cost) and are equally or more likely

to be worn. Implementing these interventions ­ including distribution of free masks, and the

information campaign, reminders, encouragement ­ cost $2.30-$3.75 per villager, or between

$8 and $13 per person adopting a mask. Combined with existing estimates of the efficacy of

masks in preventing COVID-19 deaths, this implies that the intervention cost $28,000-$66,000

per life saved. Beyond reducing the transmission of COVID-19, mask distribution is likely to

be a cost-effective strategy to prevent future respiratory disease outbreaks.

Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04630054 Funding: GiveWell




                                                3
1    Introduction

As of March 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic has taken the lives of more than 2.8 million people.
A growing body of scientific evidence suggests that face masks can slow the spread of the disease
and save lives [1]. Laboratory studies of influenza and other coronaviruses establish the potential
efficacy of face masks as a means of source control, blocking particles emitted by infected indi-
viduals [2]. Since a substantial share of coronavirus transmission stems from asymptomatic or
presymptomatic individuals, the efficacy of masks for source control suggests benefits from uni-
versal mask-wearing rather than mask-wearing among only those with symptoms [3]. Random-
ized trials conducted in hospitals also provide evidence that surgical masks can protect the wearer
against respiratory diseases. While evidence from community mask-wearing is inconclusive, this
is largely attributable to low compliance rates in these studies [4]. A number of observational
studies suggest that masks are effective at slowing community spread of COVID-19. For exam-
ple, countries with mask mandates or mask-wearing norms have had lower infection rates [3, 5],
states which mandate mask use subsequently experience declines in case growth rates [6], and
model simulations indicate that mask mandates reduce the weekly growth of cases by at least 10%,
preventing 19-47% of deaths [7]. As a result of this growing body of evidence, over 40% of the
world's population live in countries where mask-wearing is mandated in public areas, and another
40% live in countries where universal mask norms prevail absent a legal mandate [8].
    Despite this evidence, theoretical and practical concerns regarding mask adoption remain. The
World Health Organization declined to recommend mask adoption until June 2020, citing, in part,
concerns that masks would create a false sense of security [9]. Critics of face mask use argued
that those who wore masks would engage in compensating behaviors, such as failing to physically
distance from others, resulting in a net increase in transmission [10]. A second major concern was
that universal mask wearing would lead to hoarding of medical masks, making them unavailable
for healthcare workers. The US Surgeon General explicitly discouraged mask-wearing early in the
pandemic on these grounds [11].
    In many countries, mask use has become politicized, with mask use seen as signalling affil-

                                                4
iation with a broader set of political views. This raises questions about how exactly to increase
community-wide mask-wearing: is it sufficient to increase accessibility, or correct misinformation
and counter anti-mask attitudes (perhaps with encouragement from leaders and role models), or
does this need to be supplemented by informal social sanctions, or even threats of legal punish-
ment?
   These questions are especially pressing in lower income countries where governments may
lack adequate resources to enforce mask mandates. In Bangladesh, a quarter of those observed
in public areas in June 2020 wore masks, and only a fifth wore masks properly (covering both
the nose and mouth), despite a nationwide mask mandate in effect at the time. While vaccines
may constrain the spread of COVID-19 in the long-term, it is unlikely that a substantial fraction
of the population in low- and middle-income countries will have access to vaccines before the end
of 2021 [12]. Uncovering scalable and cost-effective means of promoting mask-wearing, as well
as measuring the impact of these interventions on proper, consistent mask-wearing and physical
distancing behavior, is thus of first-order policy importance, especially for developing countries.
   We employ a series of strategies over multiple rounds of piloting and surveillance to identify
the core elements that are necessary for large-scale mask adoption. The iterative research process
made clear that mask distribution, coupled with information provision and even role-modeling is
unlikely to be sufficient to generate consistent mask-wearing. Adding active mask promotion and
periodic monitoring on top of distribution, information, and role-modeling produced much larger
increases in mask-wearing.
   The main intervention package we ultimately settled on ­ and test using a cluster-randomized
controlled trial covering 341,830 adults in 600 villages in rural Bangladesh ­ combined mask
distribution with encouragement to wear masks at households, mosques, markets, and other public
places, communication about the value of mask-wearing, periodic monitoring and reminders, and
role-modeling by public officials and community leaders. The selection of elements in this package
was informed by both our pilot results and research in public health, psychology [13, 14, 15],
economics [16, 17, 18], marketing [19, 20, 21], and other social sciences [22] on product promotion


                                                 5
and dissemination strategies.
    Entire villages were selected to receive that intervention package or serve as controls. The
clustered village-level randomization was important for two reasons. First, unlike technologies
with primarily private benefits, mask adoption is likely to yield especially large benefits at the
community-level. Second, mask adoption by some may influence mask adoption by others because
mask-wearing is immediately visible to other members of the community [23].1
    The intervention we report here is part of a larger study designed to evaluate the impact of mask
wearing on COVID-19 transmission (ClinicalTrials ID NCT04630054). In this paper we report on
the first-stage outcome: the effect of the intervention on the prevalence of mask-wearing.2
    Mask-wearing was assessed through direct observation in public locations including mosques,
markets, the main entrance roads to villages, and tea-stalls. Surveillance staff noted whether resi-
dents were wearing any mask or face covering, whether the mask was one distributed by our project
(and if so, the color), and whether the mask was worn over both the mouth and nose. The mask
distribution and promotion was conducted by the Bangladeshi NGO GreenVoice, a grassroots orga-
nization with a network of volunteers across the country. Household surveys and surveillance were
performed independently by Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA). To minimize the likelihood that
village residents would perceive that their mask-wearing behavior was being observed, surveillance
staff were separate from mask promoters and wore no identifying apparel. The Bangladesh Direc-
torate General of Health Services under the Ministry of Health, North-South University in Dhaka,
and Aspire to Innovate (a2i), an information and data-focused organization within the Bangladesh
government, partnered in the study design and discussions and reviewed protocols.
    Our full intervention was designed to last 8 weeks in each village (with 10 weeks of surveil-
lance). The intervention started in different villages at different times, rolling out over a 6-week
period in 7 batches (with control and intervention villages paired within each batch). Given the
    1 This design was also necessary to properly assess the full impact of masks on infections, including preventing

transmission of the virus. Individual-level randomization would identify only whether masks protect wearers.
    2 Results for the second-stage outcome, symptomatic seropositivity, will not be available until the serosurveys are

completed in June. To predict the cost-per-life-saved from our mask distribution now, we combine the effect of our
interventions on mask take-up with current best estimates available from the literature on the efficacy of masks in
reducing disease transmission. This prediction will be made more precise once the serosurveys are completed.


                                                          6
time-sensitivity of the subject matter, in this paper we report results from observation conducted
during the first 10 weeks of the trial, providing between 4 and 10 weeks of surveillance data for
each village. Our study design and results are immediately relevant for Bangladesh's plans for
larger-scale distribution of 80 million masks across all rural areas. In fact, we have started devising
specific plans with a consortium of government, NGO, and development partners in Bangladesh to
scale up the strategies that appear most effective. Results are also relevant for mask dissemination
and promotion campaigns planned in other countries. The intervention package that proves effec-
tive in our trial would be feasible to implement in a similar fashion throughout South Asia and
in other world regions. Beyond masks, the dissemination strategies we employ could be applied
to encourage the adoption of other health behaviors and technologies that citizens in low-income
countries have also resisted adopting, including water purification technologies [24], sanitation
[23, 25], deworming pills [26], cleaner-burning cookstoves [27], and agricultural technologies
[28, 29].



2     Background and Context

Bangladesh is a densely populated country with 165 million inhabitants. A serosurvey conducted
in July 2020 found 45% of Dhaka residents had antibodies against SARS-CoV-2. This suggests
a 0.55% case detection rate based on reported cases, implying that the true infection rate may be
two orders of magnitude higher than reported [30, 31]. By January 21, 2021, there were 529,687
reported COVID-19 cases in Bangladesh.3 The number of daily cases has surged seven-fold be-
tween January 21 and March 21 2021 to reach 3500 per day, nearing the June 2020 peak in the
country.
    Between April and June 2020, our team and others conducted several surveys in Bangladesh to
quantify mask-wearing behavior. The evolution of mask use over time in Bangladesh is discussed
    3 http://dashboard.dghs.gov.bd/webportal/pages/covid19.php.
                                                             Naively extrapolating the case detection rate in
Dhaka, up to 58% of the population may have been infected by January 21st, 2021. Similar estimates have been
observed in India [32, 33].




                                                        7
in greater detail in [34]. In Bangladesh, the government strongly recommended mask use in early
April 2020. This policy was initially accompanied by consistent public messaging, as well as
attempts by police and NGOs to confront those who were seen in public without masks. When
we surveyed respondents at the end of April 2020, over 80% self-reported wearing a mask and
97% self-reported owning a mask. Anecdotal reports from surveyors suggested that mask-use
was pervasive. The Bangladeshi government formally mandated mask use in late May 2020 and
threatened to fine those who did not comply, although enforcement was weak to non-existent,
especially in rural areas. Anecdotally, mask-wearing was substantially lower than indicated by our
self-reported surveys. To investigate, we conducted surveillance studies throughout public areas in
Bangladesh in two waves. The first wave of surveillance took place between May 21 and May 25,
2020 in 1,441 places in 52 districts. About 51% out of more than 152,000 individuals we observed
were wearing a mask. The second wave of surveillance was conducted between June 19 and June
22, 2020 in the same 1,441 locations, and we found that mask wearing dropped to 26%, with 20%
wearing masks that covered their mouth and nose. These observations, coupled with the increasing
case load, motivated the interventions we implemented to increase mask use.



3     Interventions and Data Collection

3.1    Sampling frame and strategy

Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA) Bangladesh selected 1,000 rural and peri-urban unions out
of 4,500 unions in Bangladesh as a sampling frame, using data on population and infrastructure.
We excluded Dhaka district, due to high initial seropositivity, and three hill districts, due to the
logistical challenges in accessing the region. We also dropped remote coastal districts where popu-
lation density is low. The final sampling frame of 1000 unions were located in 40 different districts
(zillas) (out of 64) and 144 sub-district (upazilas) (out of 485).
    We used a pairwise randomization to select 300 intervention and 300 control unions within the
same upazila/sub-district. This randomization procedure, described in detail in Appendix B, was

                                                  8
designed to pair unions that were similar in terms of COVID-19 case data (which was limited),
population size, and population density. Each union consists of roughly 80,000 people, or around
80 villages. In each union, we selected a single village. To do so, we identified the largest market
and the village within which the market is located and demarcated this territory as the intervention
unit (during this scoping process, surveyors were blinded to whether the union was an intervention
or control union). We ensured that no two markets/villages were within 2 km of each other to
minimize the risk of spillover effects. Within each village, adults from every household were
eligible to participate in the study.
   The intervention was rolled out in waves, with between 14 and 59 village-pairs grouped in each
wave based on geographic proximity. Paired control and treatment villages were always included
in the same wave. The first wave was rolled out on 17-18 November 2020 and the last wave was
rolled out on 5-6 January 2021. In this paper, we report results from 10 weeks of observation in
wave 1, 4 weeks of observation in the last wave 7, and an intermediate number for other waves.
   IPA staff travelled to many villages that had low mask uptake in the first five weeks of the study
and found that in these villages local leaders were not very engaged in supporting mask promotion.
Hence, we retrained mask promotion staff part-way through the intervention to work more closely
with local leaders and set specific milestones for that partnership.


3.2    Intervention Materials and Activities

Our entire intervention, including the masks, did not require any unusual or specialized skills
or equipment; it was designed to be easily adopted by other NGOs or government agencies and
required minimal monitoring.
   In focus groups conducted prior to the study, participants said they preferred cloth over surgical
masks because they perceived surgical masks to be single-use only and cloth masks to be more
durable. Focus group participants also provided feedback on different cloth masks designs and
sizes. Both types of masks were manufactured in Bangladesh. The cloth mask had an exterior
layer of 100% non-woven polypropylene (70 grams/square meter [gsm]), two interior layers of


                                                  9
60% cotton / 40% polyester interlocking knit (190 gsm), an elastic loop that goes around the head
above and below the ears, and a nose bridge. The surgical mask had three layers of 100% non-
woven polypropylene (the exterior and interiors are spunbond and the middle layer is meltblown),
elastic ear loops, and a nose bridge. The filtration efficiency was 37% (standard deviation [SD] =
6%) for the cloth masks, and 95% (SD = 1%) for the surgical masks (manuscript forthcoming).4
The filtration efficiency of the surgical masks after washing them 10 times with bar soap and
water was 76% (manuscript forthcoming). Surgical masks were outfitted with a sticker that had
a logo of a mask with an outline of the Bangladeshi flag and a phrase in Bengali that noted the
mask could be washed and reused. The project masks were woven by and procured from local
Bangladeshi garment factories within 6 weeks after ordering. The relatively large scale of our bulk
order allowed us to negotiate mask prices of $0.50 per cloth mask and $0.13 per surgical mask.
    To emphasize the importance of mask-wearing, we prepared a brief video of notable public
figures discussing why, how, and when to wear a mask. The video was shown to each house-
hold during the mask distribution visit and featured the Honorable Prime Minister of Bangladesh
Sheikh Hasina, the head of the Imam Training Academy, and the national cricket star Shakib Al
Hasan. During the distribution visit, households also received a brochure based on WHO materials
depicting proper mask-wearing.
    We implemented a basic set of interventions in all treatment villages, and cross-randomize
additional intervention elements in randomly chosen subsets of treatment villages to investigate
whether those have any additional impact on mask usage. The basic intervention package consists
of five main elements:

   1. One-time mask distribution and promotion at households

   2. Mask distribution in markets on 3-6 days per week
    4 The filtration efficiency test was conducted using a Fluke 985 particle counter that has a volumetric sampling

rate of 2.83 liters per minute. The measurement was taken of particles 0.3­0.5 µm in diameter flowing through the
material with a face velocity of 8.5 cm/s. In our internal testing, we found that cloth masks with a external layers made
of Pellon 931 polyester fusible interface ironed onto interlocking knit with a middle layer of interlocking knit could
achieve a 60% filtration efficiency. Upon discussions with the manufacturers, we learned that those materials could
not be procured. Using materials that were available, the highest filtration efficiency possible was 37%.


                                                          10
   3. Mask distribution at mosques on three Fridays during the first four weeks of the intervention

   4. Mask promotion in public spaces and markets where non-mask wearers were encouraged to
      wear masks (weekly or biweekly)

   5. Role-modeling and advocacy by local leaders, including imams discussing the importance
      of mask-wearing at Friday prayers using a scripted speech provided by the research team

Details on each of these elements can be found in the intervention protocol, available at https://osf.io/vzdh6/.


3.3    Cross-randomization of behavior change communication and incentives

Village-level Cross-randomizations       Our intervention had four village-level cross-randomizations.
All intervention villages were assigned to either the treatment or the control group of each of these
four randomizations. These village-level randomizations were:

   1. Randomization of treated villages to either cloth or surgical masks.

   2. Randomization of treated villages to no incentive, monetary incentive of 190 USD, or non-
      monetary incentive. We announced that the monetary reward or the certificate would be
      awarded if village-level mask wearing among adults exceeded 75% 8-weeks after the inter-
      vention started.

   3. Randomization of treated villages to public commitment (providing households signage and
      asking them to place signage on doors that declares they are a mask-wearing household),
      or not. The signage was meant to encourage formation of social norms through public sig-
      nalling.

   4. Randomization of treated villages to 0% or 100% of households receiving twice-weekly text
      message reminders about the importance of mask wearing.




                                                  11
Household-level Cross-randomizations We had three household-level cross-randomizations.
In any one village, only one of these household randomizations was operative. Recall that our data
collection protocols relied on passive observation at the village-level, which implied that we can-
not directly observe household-specific mask-wearing behavior. We therefore varied the color of
the masks distributed to the household based on its cross-randomization status. Surveillance staff
recorded the color of masks worn by community members, which allowed us to infer the effect of
the household-level randomization. In order to avoid conflating the effect of the household-specific
treatment with the effect of the mask color, we also randomized which color corresponded to which
intervention status across villages (this way a specific color was not fully coincident with a specific
treatment). The household-level randomizations were:


   1. Households were randomized to receive messages emphasizing either altruism or self-protection.

   2. Households were randomized to receive twice-weekly text reminders or not. As mentioned
      above, the text message saturation was randomly varied to 0%, 50%, or 100% of all villagers
      receiving texts, and in the 50% villages, the specific households that received the texts was
      also random.

   3. Households were randomized to making a verbal commitment to be a mask-wearing house-
      hold (all adults in the household promise to wear a mask when they are outside and around
      other people) or not. This experiment was conducted in a third set of villages where there
      was no public signage commitment.


This randomization procedure is described in further detail in Appendix C. Participants, mask
promoters, and mask surveillance staff were not blinded as intervention materials were distinct.
The pre-specified analyses and sample exclusions were made by analysts blinded to the treatment
assignment. The intervention protocol, pre-specified analysis plan, and CONSORT checklist are
available at https://osf.io/vzdh6/.




                                                  12
Conceptual Basis for Chosen Interventions Our goal was to choose interventions that had a
reasonable chance of persuading rural Bangladeshis to wear masks. We consulted literature in
public health, development and behavioral economics, and marketing, to identify some of the most
promising strategies. An extensive literature identifies price and access as a key deterrent to adop-
tion of welfare-improving products, and especially of technologies that produce positive health
externalities, such as face masks [26, 16]. Household distribution of free face-masks therefore
formed the core part of our strategy. Inspired by large literature in marketing and economics on the
role of opinion leaders in new product diffusion, we additionally emphasized a partnership with
community leaders in mask distribution [20, 35].
    The additional village- and household-level interventions we experimented with were also in-
spired by insights from marketing, public health, development, and behavioral economics. For
example, masks are a visible good where social norms are expected to be important so we con-
sulted the literature documenting peer effects in product adoption [36, 37, 38]. We experimented
with incentives because it is unclear whether extrinsic rewards crowd out intrinsic motivation
[39, 40, 41]. We test whether soft commitment devices encourage targets to follow through with
actual behaviour change [42, 43], whether public displays can promote social norms [22], whether
an altruistic framing inspires people more or less than self-interest [44], whether social image con-
cerns and signaling can lead to higher compliance [45, 17], and whether regular reminders are a
useful tool to ensure adoption [18].


3.4       Surveillance Strategies

Mask-wearing and physical distancing were measured through direct observation. Surveillance
staff recorded the mask-wearing behavior of all adults observed during surveillance periods; ob-
servations were not limited to adults from enrolled households.5 We defined proper mask-wearing
   5 On December 30th (after 5 weeks of surveillance in wave 1), it was clarified that surveillance staff should only
record mask-wearing behavior of people who appear to be 18 years or older. Prior to this, some surveyors included
children (especially older children) in their counts. Since the same staff member conducted surveillance in paired
intervention and control villages, this change affected the treatment and control groups equally.




                                                         13
as wearing either a project mask or an alternative face-covering over the mouth and nose. Surveil-
lance staff recorded a person as practicing physical distancing if s/he was at least one arm's length
away from the nearest person. This is consistent with the WHO guideline that defines physical dis-
tancing as one meter of separation.6 For the sake of assessing risk compensation, this assumes that
all nearby people are from different households. Surveillance was conducted using a standard pro-
tocol that suggested when surveillance staff should observe the mask use and physical distancing
practices of community members; surveillance staff were encouraged to adjust their locations and
timing across days to observe as many people as possible. Direct surveillance was conducted at
baseline and then once per week on weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 after the intervention. Each village
was observed on two alternating days of the week. Across all villages, observations took place on
all seven days of the week, with observation in 150 villages occurring on Friday to over-sample
days when mosques were most crowded. Observations generally took place from 9am to 7pm.


3.5    Piloting Interventions

IPA implemented two pilots ­ Pilot 1 from July 22 to 31 and Pilot 2 from August 13 to 26, 2020.
The objective of the pilots was to mimic some of the major aspects of the main experiment to
identify implementation challenges. Each of the pilots was conducted in 10 unions that were not
part of the project areas. We describe these pilots in more detail below, as we use the difference
between the pilots to better understand which elements of our full intervention were essential. The
same sizes in our pilots were large enough for reasonably precise statistical inference.
    We also conducted focus group discussions and in-depth interviews with village residents,
community leaders, religious leaders, and political leaders to elicit opinions on how to maximize
the effectiveness of the intervention.
   6 https://www.who.int/westernpacific/emergencies/covid-19/information/physical-distancing.   Accessed January,
30 2021.




                                                       14
4     Results

Our analysis follows our pre-registered analysis plan (ClinicalTrials ID NCT04630054) except
where indicated. Our pre-registered plan called for an 8-week intervention (with 10 weeks of
surveillance). We are here reporting results from 4-10 weeks of surveillance data in each village
due to the urgency of the question and the clarity of our findings. Our primary outcome is the
proportion of individuals observed to be properly wearing masks. The study overall was powered
around the outcome of symptomatic seropositivity, which requires much larger sample sizes to
identify precisely. As a result, we are highly over-powered to identify the effects of treatment on
mask wearing.


4.1    Balance

While our stratification procedure should have achieved balance with respect to variables observed
at the time of randomization, we assessed the balance of these variables two months after interven-
tion assignment but prior to the start of our intervention. This assessment was not pre-registered.
For each characteristic, we report the results of a t-test comparing the two groups. This t-test
parallels our primary specification. For the balance tests, we replaced the dependent variable of
mask-wearing with several baseline characteristics, and used analytic weights proportional to the
number of adults recorded in the baseline household survey as well as heteroskedasticity robust
standard errors. We also report a bottom-line F-test of the joint significance of any intervention-
control differences.
    In Table A1 we present summary statistics for the villages in our sample separately for control
and intervention villages, including number of households, baseline mask wearing (assessed via
observation), and baseline respiratory symptoms reported. Of the four variables we tested, only
one was significantly different between the control and intervention groups at the 10% level and
the F-test failed to reject balance.




                                                15
4.2    Primary Analyses

Mask-Wearing          The first column of Table 1 reports coefficients from a regression of mask wear-
ing on a constant, an intervention indicator (based on the assigned groups), baseline mask wear-
ing, the baseline symptom rate, and indicators for each control-intervention pair.7 Mask-wearing
in intervention villages increased by 29.0 percentage points. If we omit all covariates (except the
fixed effects necessary due to our stratification procedure), our point-estimate is identical. These
estimates are quite precise, with standard errors of about 1 percentage point. Considering only
surveillance conducted when no mask distribution was taking place, we measure a 28.1 percentage
point increase in mask use relative to a baseline level of 13.3 percent.
   We also run this analysis separately in mosques, markets, and other locations such as tea stalls,
the entrance of restaurants, and the main road in the village. The increase in mask use was largest
in mosques (37.6 percentage points), while in all other locations it was 25-29 percentage points.


Physical Distancing Contrary to concerns that mask-wearing would promote risk compensation,
we find that our intervention increases distancing behavior. In Table 2, we report identical speci-
fications to Table 1, but with physical distancing as the dependent variable. Evidently, protective
behaviors like mask-wearing and social-distancing are complements rather than substitutes: en-
dorsing mask-wearing and informing people about its importance encourages rural Bangladeshis
to take the pandemic threat more seriously and engage in another form of self-protection.
   While we find increases in physical distancing of 5.2 percentage points pooling across all lo-
cations, there was substantial heterogeneity across locations. In markets, individuals become sub-
stantially more likely to physically distance (7.4 percentage points). In mosques, we observed no
change. Group prayer rituals are completely inelastic: there was no physical distancing practiced
in any mosque, in either treatment or control villages.
  7 More   details of our statistical methods and standard error construction are available in Appendix D




                                                          16
                            Table 1: Surveilled Rates of Proper Mask Wearing
                                           Full        No Active        Mosques          Markets         Other
                                                       Promotion                                        Locations
                                              No Baseline Controls
 Intervention Coefficient               0.290***        0.281***        0.376***        0.290***         0.253***
                                         (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.016)         (0.012)          (0.012)

 Average Mask Wearing Rate                0.133           0.133            0.123           0.120           0.146
 in Paired Control Villages§

                                             With Baseline Controls
 Intervention Coefficient               0.290***        0.280***        0.376***        0.289***         0.253***
                                         (0.012)         (0.012)         (0.017)         (0.012)          (0.012)

 N Villages                                572             572              570             570             568

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
All regressions also include an indicator for each control-intervention pair. The regressions "with baseline controls"
include controls for baseline rates of mask wearing and baseline symptom rates.
Baseline Symptom Rate is defined as the rate of surveyed individuals in a village who report symptoms coinciding
with the WHO-definition of a probable COVID-19 case. This is defined as any of the following:
(a) fever and cough;
(b) any three of the following (fever, cough, general weakness/fatigue, headache, muscle aches, sore throat, coryza
[nasal congestion or runny nose], dyspnoea [shortness of breath or difficulty breathing], anorexia [loss of
appetite]/nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, altered mental status;
(c) anosmia [loss of smell] and ageusia [loss of taste].
We assume that (1) all reported symptoms were acute onset, (2) all people live or work in an area with high risk of
transmission of virus and (3) all people have been a contact of a probable or confirmed case of COVID-19 or are
linked to a COVID-19 cluster.
§We report the mean rate of proper mask wearing among the control villages after the baseline observation. This is
not equivalent to the coefficient on the constant due to the inclusion of the pair indicators as controls.
"Other Locations" include the Tea Stall, at the entrance of the restaurant as patrons enter, and the main road to enter
the village.
The analysis excludes 14 villages and their village-pairs in the full sample, 15 villages and their pairs in the mosque
and market sub-samples, and 16 villages and their pairs in the other location sub-sample because the observation data
has not yet been submitted by our surveyors.




                                                          17
                              Table 2: Surveilled Rates of Physical Distancing
                                         Full         No Active        Mosques           Markets         Other
                                                      Promotion                                         Locations
                                              No Baseline Controls
 Intervention Coefficient             0.052***         0.057***           0.000         0.074***         0.070***
                                       (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.000)         (0.007)          (0.006)

 Average Distancing Rate                0.241            0.253            0.000           0.291            0.311
 in Paired Control Villages§

                                             With Baseline Controls
 Intervention Coefficient             0.052***         0.058***           0.000         0.075***         0.071***
                                       (0.005)          (0.005)          (0.000)         (0.007)          (0.006)

 N villages                              572              572              570             570              568

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
All regressions also include an indicator for each control-intervention pair. The regressions "with baseline controls"
include controls for baseline rates of social distancing and baseline symptom rates.
Baseline Symptom Rate is defined as the rate of surveyed individuals in a village who report symptoms coinciding
with the WHO-definition of a probable COVID-19 case. This is defined as any of the following:
(a) fever and cough;
(b) any three of the following (fever, cough, general weakness/fatigue, headache, muscle aches, sore throat, coryza
[nasal congestion or runny nose], dyspnoea [shortness of breath or difficulty breathing], anorexia [loss of
appetite]/nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, altered mental status;
(c) anosmia [loss of smell] and ageusia [loss of taste].
We assume that (1) all reported symptoms were acute onset, (2) all people live or work in an area with high risk of
transmission of virus and (3) all people have been a contact of a probable or confirmed case of COVID-19 or are
linked to a COVID-19 cluster.
§We report the mean rate of physical distancing among the control villages after the baseline observation. This is not
equivalent to the coefficient on the constant due to the inclusion of the pair indicators as controls.
"Other Locations" include the Tea Stall, at the entrance of the restaurant as patrons enter, and the main road to enter
the village.
The analysis excludes 14 villages and their village-pairs in the full sample, 15 villages and their pairs in the mosque
and market sub-samples, and 16 villages and their pairs in the other location sub-sample because the observation data
has not yet been submitted by our surveyors.




                                                          18
5     Mechanisms

Our intervention combines multiple distinct elements: we provide people with free masks; we
provide information about why mask-wearing is important; we conduct mask promotion in the
form of monitors encouraging people to wear masks and stopping non-mask-wearing individuals
on roads and public places to remind them about the importance of masks; we partner with local
public officials to encourage mask-wearing at mosques and markets; and in some villages, we
provide a variety of reminders and commitment devices as well as incentives for village leaders.
In this section, we attempt to decompose which elements were most critical to increase mask
use. We first report results from several cross-randomizations, and then we report non-randomized
evidence based on changes over time as our intervention details changed between the rounds of
piloting, launch of the full project, and thereafter.


5.1    Village-level Cross-randomizations

Results from the same regression specification as our primary analysis, adding indicators for each
village-level cross-randomization are reported in Figure 1 and Table A7. None of the village-level
cross-randomizations had any statistically significant impact on mask-wearing behavior, beyond
our basic intervention package. These null effects are fairly precise (with standard errors ranging
from 2.6-3.5 percentage points). Text message reminders, incentives for village-leaders, or explicit
commitment signals explain little of the mask increase we document.


5.2    Household-level Cross-randomizations

We analyzed the effects of household-specific randomized treatments (e.g. verbal commitments
or not) by regressing the probability of wearing a mask color corresponding to the treatment on
indicators for each household-level randomization, as well as controls for color and surgical masks
(recall that the mask-color corresponding to treatment varied across villages).
    Results of the household-level cross-randomizations are reported in Figure 2 and Table A8.


                                                   19
                              Figure 1: Village-Level Cross Randomizations




The figures corresponds to the regressions in A7, upper panel, among the full surveillance data.
Villages were assigned to the treatment or control arms of one of the following four village-level randomizations:
Texts: 0% or 100% of households in a village receive text reminders on the importance of mask wearing;
Incentives: Villages either received no incentive, a certificate, or a monetary reward for meeting a mask-wearing
threshold,
Public Signage: All or none of the households in a village are asked to publicly declare they are a mask wearing
households;
Mask Type: Villages receive either a cloth or surgical mask.
For a more detailed description of the village-level cross randomizations, see Section 3.3.




                                                         20
Once again, we saw no significant effects of any of the household-level cross-randomizations:
compared to self-protection messaging alone, altruistic messaging had no greater impact on mask-
wearing, and twice-weekly text messages and a verbal commitment had no significant effects.
Surgical masks were perhaps slightly more likely than cloth masks to be worn, although the differ-
ence is significant at only the 10% level and we saw no significant difference in the village-level
randomization of surgical vs. cloth masks.
   We did see an impact of mask color on mask adoption. In villages where surgical masks were
distributed, blue surgical masks were 2.9 percentage points more likely than green surgical masks
to be observed. In villages where cloth masks were distributed, violet masks were 5.8 percentage
points more likely than red masks to be observed.


5.3   Mask Promotion

As noted above, we ran two pilots prior to launching the full project. Both pilots were conducted
in Naogaon and Joypurhat districts, but in different unions. While the unions were not selected at
random, there was no systematic difference in the selection process between the two pilots. In both
cases, unions were selected based on convenience and proximity to existing Greenvoice personnel.
   Both pilots included elements 1, 2, 3, and 5 enumerated in Section 3.2: masks were distributed
at households, markets, and mosques, and there was role-modeling and advocacy by local leaders,
including Imams. The second pilot added to these elements explicit mask promotion: mask pro-
moters patrolled public areas a few times a week and asked those not wearing masks to put on a
mask. The full intervention also included mask promotion.
   The comparison between the two pilots is thus instructive about the impact of active mask
promotion. This comparison is shown in Table A5. The difference is striking. The first pilot
increased mask-use by 10.9 percentage points (insignificantly different from zero). The second
pilot, which included mask promotion, increased mask-use by 28.4 percentage points, comparable
to the 29.0 percentage points we see several months later in our full intervention. The presence of
mask promotion appears to be crucial for the success of our intervention.


                                                21
                            Figure 2: Household-Level Cross Randomizations




The figure corresponds to the regression presented in Table A8.
Villages were assigned to the treatment or control arms of one of the following four village-level randomizations:
Texts: 0%, 50% of 100% of households in a village receieve text reminders on the importance of mask wearing;
Messaging: Households receive messaging emphasizing the altruistic or self-protective benefits of mask wearing;
Verbal Commitment: Households were asked to verbally commit to mask wearing;
Mask Colors: Surgical masks distributed to households were blue or green. Cloth masks distributed to households
were violet or red.
For a more detailed description of the household-level cross-randomizations, see Section 3.3.




                                                        22
5.4   Police Enforcement

Our intervention did not vary the likelihood that individuals would face explicit legal sanction if
they do not wear masks. During the period of our intervention, mask-wearing was legally required
in public areas in Bangladesh, but there was little formal enforcement of this norm.
   This raises the question of whether our intervention encouraged mask-use due to the social
sanction associated with being asked to wear a mask or due to a perceived increase in the threat
of legal sanction. In some villages in our intervention, we actively sought the involvement of
Chawkidar, or village police, to assist our mask promoters. While the Chawkidar did not arrest
people who refused to wear mask, their presence may have suggested an increased likelihood of
formal punishment. The involvement of Chawkidar was a later addition, so in all such villages, we
have several weeks of surveillance prior to Chawkidar involvement. In Table A6, we run a panel
regression of mask-wearing in each village-week on a post-Chawkidar dummy variable, as well as
fixed effects for calendar weeks and weeks since the start of the intervention (in the second column,
we repeat the same specification using only the 215 villages where Chawkidar were involved in
mask promotion). In both specifications, we find no evidence that the threat of formal sanction by
the presence of Chawkidar increased mask-wearing, beyond the effect produced by our ordinary
mask promoters. This suggests that the implicit social sanction from the mask promoter, or the
awkwardness or embarrassment of that conversation was the key mechanism at play in increasing
mask usage.


5.5   Persistence of Effects Over Time

In Table A2, we report estimates of our primary specification separately by week of surveillance.
In the top panel, we include all villages with surveillance at each respective week. There are fewer
villages for each successive week because of the staged roll-out. In the bottom panel, we report
the same regression in each week, but only for the 30 villages for which we have at least 10 weeks
of data. Week 10 is especially interesting, as it is two weeks after the end of mask promotion.
   We find no evidence that the impact of the intervention attenuates over time. In the 30 villages

                                                 23
for which we have 10 weeks of surveillance, the point estimates are slightly smaller in week 10
(24.1 percentage points) than week 1 (27.2 percentage points), although this difference is not sta-
tistically significant. This is consistent with social norms around mask-wearing taking hold, where
adoption by some in the community has a demonstration effect encouraging subsequent adoption
by others. If mask usage was driven by a "novelty factor" associated with the our mask promotion
campaign, we would have instead expected some attenuation over the course of the 8 weeks of
intervention. The point estimates of the impact of intervention by week for the panel of 30 villages
for which we have data in all weeks are plotted in Figure A2.


5.6    Subgroup Analyses

We also considered how the impact of our intervention differed between subgroups. In Table
A4, we conducted our main analyses on both mask-wearing and physical distancing separately
by gender, as well as by whether baseline mask-wearing was above or below the median. In the
gender results, we drop surveillance observations for mosques where only men are observed (hence
the lower average increases due to the intervention). We found that the intervention increased
mask-wearing more for men than for women. This may be due to our mask promoters being
predominantly men, although we do not have the variation to test this.
    We also found a larger increase in mask usage in villages with below-median baseline mask-
wearing (where mask wearing increased from 8.5 percent to 43.4 percent after the intervention),
than those with above-median initial mask-wearing (where the increase was from 17.6 percent to
42.5 percent after the intervention).



6     Cost-Benefit Calculations

In Appendix E, we calculated that after subtracting surveillance costs, our intervention cost $12.36
for each person induced to regularly wear a cloth mask and $8.56 for each person to regularly
wear a surgical mask. In Table 3, we report estimates of the implied cost per life saved under


                                                24
different assumptions about the effectiveness of masks.8 The 1- month rows show the dollars per
life saved during a month of our intervention, while the 4-month rows show the dollars per life
saved extrapolating four months out; notably, we do not assume continued mask wearing beyond
one month. Rather, infections prevented during the one month of the intervention propagate into
infections prevented in future months. We estimate that after four months, the interventions we
conducted cost between $28,000 and $66,000 per life saved, depending on mask effectiveness.
Importantly, this does not account for reductions of morbidity associated with hospitalization or
other complications of COVID-19. For context, [46] estimate that the value of a statistical life
is $205,000 in Bangladesh, implying that our intervention was 4-10 times more cost-effective
than what the typical Bangladeshi would be willing to pay to reduce mortality risk. This cost-
effectiveness calculation was not pre-specified.
    While we did not directly assess harms in this study, there could be opportunity costs re-
sulting from discomfort with increased mask-wearing, adverse health effects such as dermatitis
or headaches, or impaired communication. Additionally, disposable surgical masks, even when
re-used, can have negative environmental impacts through the generation of non-degradable mi-
croplastic material. No adverse events were reported during the study period.



7     Discussion

We present results from a cluster-randomized controlled trial of a scalable intervention designed
to increase mask-wearing. Our estimates suggest that mask-wearing increased by 29.0 percentage
points, corresponding to an estimated 50,947 additional adults wearing masks in intervention vil-
lages. Combining mask distribution, role-modeling and active mask promotion ­ rather than mask
distribution and role-modeling alone ­ seems critical to achieving the full effect. The effects of
our intervention on mask-wearing persist even after active mask promotion was discontinued. The
estimated cost per life saved of the intervention after four months was $28,000-$66,000 taking into
    8 Manyof the assumptions we made about infection fatality rates and other parameters, and citations justifying
those assumptions, are detailed in Table A3


                                                       25
                           Table 3: Estimates of Cost per Life Saved (Dollars)
 Mask Effectiveness               Intervention                      Cloth                        Surgical
 30% Effectiveness
 1 month                            266,392                       335,068                        232,054
 4 months                            66,598                        83,767                        58,013

 50% Effectiveness
 1 month                            159,830                       201,035                        124,315
 4 months                            39,955                        50,256                        34,805

 70% Effectiveness
 1 month                            114,168                       143,601                        99,452
 4 months                            28,542                        35,900                        24,863

The table reports the estimated dollar cost per life-saved of our intervention under different assumptions about the
effectiveness of masks in preventing COVID, after 1 and 4 months. These numbers are computed by multiplying the
cost per mask adopter computed in Appendix E by the number needed to treat computed in Table A3.



account the estimated mortality impact, but not reductions in morbidity. This is between 4 and 10
times lower than estimates of the value of a statistical life in Bangladesh [46], and therefore a `very
good buy' for policymakers. Even then, we think that many cost elements can be brought down
further in any `at-scale implmentation'. This is because some of our information campaigns and
promotion activities had to be individualized for the purposes of conducting a trial with a control
group, whereas at scale the government could use mass media and social media based dissemina-
tion strategies more cost-effectively.
    While critics of mask mandates suggest that mask-wearing may result in people engaging in
riskier behavior, we found no evidence of risk compensation due to increased mask-wearing. In
fact, we found that our intervention increased the likelihood of physical distancing, presumably
because individuals participating in the intervention took the threat of COVID-19 more seriously.
These findings should be interpreted with caution, as these behavioral responses may be context-
dependent. For example, it is possible that our specific interventions induced more physical dis-
tancing in Bangladesh, where mask promotion is taken to signal the seriousness of the threat, but
that mask promotion would have opposite effects in regions where it is viewed as political over-


                                                         26
reach. Our results demonstrate that in this one context, the behavioral response to masks enhances
the health benefits generated by the intervention.
   We found evidence that aesthetics matter, even for a decision of this nature with potentially
serious health consequences. In our specific setting, we found that blue masks were preferred to
green and violet to red. This was in contrast to our expectations that green and red masks would be
more popular because they are the national colors. Specific colors are likely context and culturally
dependent, but they highlight the fact that aesthetic taste was important for mask-wearing. In
designing effective mask promotion policies, it may be prudent to first host focus group sessions
to evaluate preferences, or to offer a variety of masks of different colors and designs to increase
take-up.
   One limitation in this study was that due to the distinct appearance of project-associated masks
and elevated mask-wearing in intervention villages, it was impossible to blind surveillance staff
to study arm assignment. Even though surveillance staff were plain-clothed and were instructed
to remain discreet, community members may have recognized that they were being observed and
changed their behavior. Although control villages were at least 2 km from intervention villages,
adults from control villages may have come to intervention villages to receive masks, reducing the
apparent impact of the intervention.
   Our results suggest a cocktail of core elements essential to promote mask-adoption: mask dis-
tribution and role-modeling, combined with mask promotion, leads to large and sustained increases
in mask use. Our results also highlight many factors that appear inessential: we find no evidence
that public commitments, village-level incentives, text messages, altruistic messaging, or verbal
commitments change mask-wearing behavior. These results do not necessarily imply that these
approaches are not worth trying in other contexts: for example, the cost of sending texts was mini-
mal, and perhaps an alternative implementation of these strategies would prove effective. What our
results do suggest is that an effective intervention is possible without these enhancements. Some
of these enhancements could be costly to implement, such as the village-level incentive. Assigning
performance-based incentives requires monitoring, which can be expensive and cumbersome for


                                                 27
the government bureaucracy, even if the value of the incentive itself is small. The RCT results
teach us that such a costly element can be safely avoided in Bangladesh.
    Additionally, we found evidence that surgical masks were as likely to be adopted as sturdier-
appearing cloth masks (perhaps slightly more likely). This is an important finding because surgi-
cal masks have higher filtration efficiency than cloth masks and can be purchased for as little as
$0.07 per mask in Bangladesh.9 In initial project development discussions with officials from the
Bangladesh Directorate General of Health Services and public health experts in the country, we
were warned that surgical masks would likely prove to be unpopular or ineffective because they
were viewed as a disposable, lower-quality, cheaper product among the population. While we dis-
tributed 40% more surgical masks, presumably because they were more frequently disposed of, we
nonetheless find that the surgical mask treatment arm was the more cost-effective strategy. In Ta-
ble 3, we report that an intervention consisting only of surgical masks would cost between $25,000
and $58,000 per life saved. At scale, this efficiency could be further improved. For example, if
the information about washability on our mask sticker could be conveyed through other means, the
cost of our surgical masks would be almost halved.
    Even if our intervention turns out to be only 20% as effective in other parts of the world, it
would be an extremely cost-efficient means of improving public health both in the current pan-
demic and in future respiratory disease outbreaks. Further, the product promotion strategies we
tested may be more generally useful to overcome the stubborn resistance we have experienced
in our efforts to promote other health and welfare-improving products and behaviors, including
vaccines, toilets, stoves, weather insurance, new agricultural techniques, and rational-response be-
haviors like migration [47].




   9 The surgical masks we procured cost $0.13 instead of $0.07 due to the inclusion of a sticker on the mask with a

written message that indicated the mask was washable and reusable.


                                                        28
References

 [1] J. Howard, et al., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, e2014564118
     (2021).

 [2] N. H. Leung, et al., Nature Medicine 26, 676 (2020).

 [3] J. Abaluck, et al., SSRN (2020).

 [4] C. R. MacIntyre, A. A. Chughtai, The bmj 350, h694 (2015).

 [5] C. T. Leffler, et al., American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 103, 2400 (2020).

 [6] W. Lyu, G. L. Wehby, Health Affairs 39, 1419 (2020).

 [7] V. Chernozhukov, H. Kasaha, P. Schrimpf, Journal of Econometrics 220, 23 (2021).

 [8] H. Ludwig, W. Keating, P. Zdimal, P. Navratil, P. Hausenblass, What countries require masks
     in public or recommend masks? (2020). Accessed on 4 Jan 2021.

 [9] T. A. Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media briefing on
     COVID-19 - 5 June 2020 (2020). Publisher: WHO.

[10] L. Brosseau, M. Sietsema, Commentary: Masks-for-all for COVID-19 not based on sound
     data (2020). Publisher: Center for Infectious Disease Research and Practice (CIRDRAP).
     University of Minnesota.

[11] N. Ibrahim, Did the US Surgeon General Recommend the Public Not Wear Masks?

[12] A. Mullard, How COVID vaccines are being divvied up around the world (2020).

[13] D. Kahneman, D. T. Miller, Psychological review 93, 136 (1986).

[14] J. Jordan, E. Yoeli, D. Rand (2020).

[15] R. B. Cialdini, N. J. Goldstein, Annu. Rev. Psychol. 55, 591 (2004).


                                               29
[16] Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), The price is wrong: Charging small fees dramatically
     reduces access to important products for the poor, Tech. rep. (2011). Publisher: Innovations
     for Poverty Action.

[17] A. Karing, Social signaling and childhood immunization: A field experiment in Sierra Leone,
     Tech. rep. (2018). Publisher: Innovations for Poverty Action.

[18] D. Karlan, M. McConnell, S. Mullainathan, J. Zinman, Management Science 62, 3393 (2016).

[19] N. J. Goldstein, R. B. Cialdini, V. Griskevicius, Journal of consumer Research 35, 472 (2008).

[20] G. Miller, A. M. Mobarak, Marketing Science 34 (2014).

[21] P. Manchanda, Y. Xie, N. Youn, Marketing Science 27, 961 (2008).

[22] C. Bicchieri, Norms in the wild: How to diagnose, measure, and change social norms (Oxford
     University Press, 2016).

[23] R. Guiteras, J. Levinsohn, A. M. Mobarak, Science 348, 903 (2015).

[24] N. Ashraf, J. Berry, J. M. Shapiro, American Economic Review 100, 2383 (2010).

[25] S. R. Patil, et al., PLOS Medicine 11, e1001709 (2014).

[26] M. Kremer, E. Miguel, Quarterly Journal of Economics 122, 1007 (2007).

[27] A. M. Mobarak, P. Dwivedi, R. Bailis, L. Hildemann, G. Miller, Proceedings of the National
     Academy of Sciences 109, 10815 (2012).

[28] E. Duflo, M. Kremer, J. Robinson, American Economic Review 101, 2350 (2011).

[29] A. BenYishay, A. M. Mobarak, The Review of Economic Studies 86, 976 (2018).

[30] ICDDR,B, The IEDCR and partners share insights on the prevalence, seroprevalence and
     genomic epidemiology of COVID-19 in Dhaka city (2020).



                                                30
[31] Coronavirus COVID-19 dashboard, 2020 (2021). Publisher: Government of Bangladesh Di-
     rectorate General of Health Services.

[32] A. Malani, et al., The Lancet Global Health 9, E110 (2020).

[33] M. Mohanan, A. Malani, K. Krishnan, A. Acharya, medRxiv (2020).

[34] J. Abaluck, A. M. Mobarak, Getting all Bangladeshis to wear masks (2020). Publisher:
     WhiteBoard Magazine.

[35] P. S. Van Eck, W. Jager, P. S. Leeflang, Journal of Product Innovation Management 28, 187
     (2011).

[36] E. Oster, R. Thornton, Journal of the European Economic Association 10, 1263 (2012).

[37] H. Allcott, Journal of public Economics 95, 1082 (2011).

[38] R. Guiteras, J. Levinsohn, A. M. Mobarak, Demand estimation with strategic complementar-
     ities: Sanitation in Bangladesh (2019). Publisher: CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP13498.

[39] N. Ashraf, O. Bandiera, K. Jack, Journal of Public Economics 120, 1 (2014).

[40] R. Chetty, E. Saez, L. Sandor, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 169 (2014).

[41] D. Ariely, A. Bracha, S. Meier, American Economic Review 99, 544 (2009).

[42] G. Bryan, D. Karlan, S. Nelson, Annual Review of Economics 2, 671 (2010).

[43] J. Luoto, D. Levine, J. Albert, S. Luby, Journal of Development Economics 110, 13 (2014).

[44] N. Ashraf, O. Bandiera, E. Davenport, S. S. Lee, American Economic Review 110, 1355
     (2020).

[45] L. Bursztyn, R. Jensen, Annual Review of Economics 9, 131 (2017).

[46] W. K. Viscusi, C. J. Masterman, Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 8, 226 (2017).

[47] G. Bryan, S. Chowdhury, A. M. Mobarak, Econometrica 82, 1671 (2014).

                                               31
8    Conflict of Interest

The funder had no role in the study design, interpretation of results, or decision to publish.



9    Research Ethics Approvals

Our study protocols were reviewed and approved by the Yale University Institutional Review Board
(Protocol ID: 2000028482), and by the Bangladesh Medical Research Council National Research
Ethics Committee (IRB registration number: 330 26 08 2020). We also received separate admin-
istrative approval from the Bangladesh Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Study protocols
and plans were also discussed with public health experts at the International Centre for Diarrhoeal
Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b) and a2i, an innovation agency within the Bangladesh gov-
ernment (https://a2i.gov.bd/), prior to implementation.



10     Acknowledgements

Thanks to Givewell for their generous funding, Dr. Sabrina Flora, additional director general
of the Directorate General of Health Services in Bangladesh, James Snowden and Karen Levy
for ongoing support and encouragement. Thanks to WHO Chief Scientist Soumya Swaminathan
for her encouragement to conduct this trial. Thanks to Anir Chowdhury, policy advisor to the
Bangladesh government and Dr. Shams El Arifeen of icddr,b for establishing connections with the
Bangladesh Directorate General of Health Services in the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Thanks to Asif Saleh, Executive Director of BRAC, for help with implementation. Thanks also to
Bhavani Prathap Kasina and Stacey Daves-Ohlin for their advice and assistance, Tom Schmidt for
help in shipping, Arnab Bhattacharya of the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research and Shailabh
Kumar of Stanford University for conducting filtration efficiency testing of the study masks and
evaluation of the impact of washing on surgical mask performance, Yasser Choudhury from Katex
for assistance with the surgical masks, Anisur Rahman from Standard Group for assistance with


                                                 32
the cloth masks, GreenVoice, and many employees at IPA Bangladesh for assistance throughout
this project.




                                            33
A     List of Supplementary Materials
Fig. A1. Schematic of Cross-Randomizations
Fig. A2. Persistence of Mask Wearing
Table A1. Balance Tests
Table A2. Persistence of Mask Wearing
Table A3. Calculation of Number Needed to Treat
Table A4. Subgroup Analyses
Table A5. Pilot Analyses
Table A6. Chawkidar Intervention
Table A7. Village-Level Cross Randomizations
Table A8. Household-Level Cross Randomizations
Pairwise Randomization Procedure
Cross-Randomization Procedure
Statistical Analyses
Intervention Cost and Benefit Estimates
Stage 2: Impact of Mask Use on COVID-19




                                               34
                                                                               Figure A1: Schematic of Cross-Randomizations



                                  Randomizations
                                  V1    Cloth                     Surgical                                      1 village
                                  V2    Signage                   No signage                                                                         Colors                         Household-level randomization color assignments
                                  V3    No incentive              Monetary incentive       Certificate                                                                                         Default Treatment Extra masks handed out
                                  V4    0% texts                  100% texts                                                                         Cloth masks                     Village 1
                                                                                                                                                                                     Village 2
                                  H1       Altruism
                                  H2       0% texts               50% texts                100% texts                                                Surigcal masks                    Village 3                            50% of each color
                                  H3       Verbal commitment                                                                                                                           Village 4                            50% of each color

                                Village-level Randomization - Mask Type
                                Cloth: 0.33 (100 Villages)

                                Village-level Randomization - Public Commitment
                                Signage: 0.5 (50 V)                                                                                 No signage: 0.5 (50 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Incentive
                                No incentive 0.25        Monetary incentive 0.25 Certificate: 0.5                                   No incentive: 0.25             Monetary incentive 0.25 Certificate: 0.5
                                (13 V)                   (12 V)                  (25 V)                                             (13 V)                         (12 V)                  (25 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Texts
                                                                                                                                            100%
                                                                                                                                    0% texts: 0.33 texts: 0.66 0% texts: 0.33 texts: 0.660%
                                                                                                                                                                       100%               (8V)
                                                                                                                                                                                             texts: 0.33       100% texts: 0.66
                                                                                                                                    (4V)     (9V)                  (4V)     (8V)               (8V)            (17V)
                                                                                 NA
                                Household-level Randomization
                                (3V)   (2V) (5V)    (3V)   (3V)   (2V) (5V)    (2V) (8V)                 (4V)       (7V)    (5V)    (1V) (3v) (2V)   (7V)          (2V) (2V) (1V)   (7V)       (3V)    (5V)    (6V)       (11V)




                                Village-level Randomization - Mask Type
                                Surgical (100 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Public Commitment




35
                                Signage: 0.5 (100 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Incentive
                                No incentive: 0.25 (25 V)                          Monetary incentive: 0.25 (25 V)                  Certificate: 0.5 (50 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Texts

                                                                                                                                   NA
                                Household-level Randomization
                                (10V)             (2V) (11V)                   (2V) (8V)                 (4V)       (7V)    (5V)    (18V)                                      (10V)                   (13V)                      (8V)




                                Village-level Randomization - Mask Type
                                Surgical (100 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Public Commitment
                                No signage: 0.5 (100 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Incentive
                                No incentive: 0.25 (25 V)                          Monetary incentive: 0.25 (25 V)                  Certificate: 0.5 (50 V)

                                Village-level Randomization - Texts
                                0% texts: 0.33 100% texts: 0.66                    0% texts: 0.33        100% texts: 0.66           0% texts: 0.33                        100% texts: 0.66
                                (8V)            (17V)                              (8V)                  (17V)                      (17V)                                   (33V)

                                Household-level Randomization
                                (5V)    (3V) (5V)     (12V)                        (4V)        (4V)      (4V)     (13V)             (7V)             (10V)                  (10V)                     (23V)




     Notes: Each box represents one village and each color represents a village-level or household-level randomization. Different tones of the same hue represent
     different possible realizations for each randomization. The "Colors" box in the upper right exemplifies the color of masks used to denote households that received
     the default or intervention condition of the household-level randomization.
                                                                      Figure A2: Persistence of Mask Wearing

                                                                                                            Effect of Intervention
         Proportion Surveilled Properly Wearing a Mask




                                                         .5                                                          End of Intervention


                                                         .4


                                                         .3


                                                         .2


                                                         .1


                                                         0
                                                              1   2      3      4      5        6       7        8         9      10
                                                                                Week Relative to Baseline


The figure corresponds to the regressions presented in Table A2, second panel. We present the effect of the
intervention separately across weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, and 10 after the baseline observation with 95% confidence intervals.
The analysis is run across a panel of 30 villages with observation through the entirety of the study. Week 10
observation occurs after mask promotions have ceased.




                                                                                       36
                                           Table A1: Balance Tests
 Coefficient                      Influenza-like WHO-Defined                Baseline Mask           Number of
                                      Illness         Probable              Wearing Rate            Households
                                                     COVID-19
                                               Summary Statistics
 Intervention                          0.008                  0.027               0.123                  227

 Control                               0.009                  0.025               0.125                  224

                                                  Balance Tests
 Intervention Coefficient            ­0.001*                0.001                 0.001                 2.723
                                     (0.001)               (0.002)               (0.005)               (3.962)

 N villages                             572                   572                  572                   572
 F                                                           1.84
 Joint-Test Prob > F                                        0.1014

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
We define influenza-like illness as fever and cough.
We classify a WHO-Defined Probable COVID-19 case as any of the following
(a) fever and cough;
(b) three or more of the following symptoms (fever, cough, general weakness/fatigue, headache, myalgia, sore throat,
coryza, dyspnea, anorexia/nausea/vomiting, diarrhea, altered mental status);
(c) loss of taste or smell.
The baseline rate of mask wearing was measured through observation over a 1 week period, defined as the rate of
those observed who wear a mask or face covering that covers the nose and mouth.
Household count was assessed in a scoping visit prior to the intervention.
The analysis excludes 14 villages and their village-pairs in the full sample, because the observation data has not yet
been submitted by our surveyors.




                                                         37
                                   Table A2: Persistence of Mask Wearing
                                        Week from Baseline Observation
                                       1             2              4              6             8             10
                                                    Batches 1-7
 Intervention Coefficient         0.303***      0.289***       0.301***       0.290***      0.256***       0.241***
                                   (0.015)       (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.018)       (0.023)        (0.069)

 N villages                          498            498           496            436            196            30
                              Batches 1-3 (At Least 10 Weeks of Observation)
 Intervention Coefficient         0.272***      0.304***       0.284***       0.271***      0.215***       0.241***
                                   (0.066)       (0.048)        (0.061)        (0.063)       (0.043)        (0.069)

 N villages                           30            30             30             30             30            30

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
All regressions also include an indicator for each control-intervention pair. The regressions "with baseline controls"
include controls for baseline rates of mask wearing and baseline symptom rates.
Baseline Symptom Rate is defined as the rate of surveyed individuals in a village who report symptoms coinciding
with the WHO-definition of a probable COVID-19 case. This is defined as any of the following:
(a) fever and cough;
(b) any three of the following (fever, cough, general weakness/fatigue, headache, muscle aches, sore throat, coryza
[nasal congestion or runny nose], dyspnoea [shortness of breath or difficulty breathing], anorexia [loss of
appetite]/nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, altered mental status;
(c) anosmia [loss of smell] and ageusia [loss of taste].
We assume that (1) all reported symptoms were acute onset, (2) all people live or work in an area with high risk of
transmission of virus and (3) all people have been a contact of a probable or confirmed case of COVID-19 or are
linked to a COVID-19 cluster.
"Other Locations" include the Tea Stall, at the entrance of the restaurant as patrons enter, and the main road to enter
the village.
This analysis was limited to villages within the first 3 batches (between November 15, 2020 and X), and estimates
separate intervention effects for 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 weeks after baseline observation.
The second panel estimates the same effect, but only among a consistent group of 30 villages that have at least 10
weeks of observation. The 10th week of observation occurs after all active promotion of mask wearing has ceased.




                                                          38
                            Table A3: Calculation of Number Needed to Treat


 Mask Effectiveness      Bangladesh      Anticipated Estimated Anticipated Projected                 ARR          NNT
 & Duration of Use       Population       Rate of     IFR for   Deaths       Deaths
                          (2020)*        Serocon-    Bangladesh            Given Mask
                                          versions                          Effective-
                                                                               ness
 30 % Effectiveness
 1 month                 164,689,383        0.058       0.00212       20,250         14,175       3.69E-05       27,109
 4 months                164,689,383        0.232       0.00212       81,001         56,701       1.48E-04        6,777

 50 % Effectiveness
 1 month                 164,689,383        0.058       0.00212       20,250         10,125       6.15E-05       16,265
 4 months                164,689,383        0.232       0.00212       81,001         40,500       2.46E-04        4,066

 70 % Effectiveness
 1 month                 164,689,383        0.058       0.00212       20,250          6,075        8.6E-05       11,618
 4 months                164,689,383        0.232       0.00212       81,001         24,300        3.4E-04        2,905

IFR = Infection Fatality Rate; ARR = Absolute Risk Reduction; NNT = Number Needed to Treat;
* worldometers.info
To determine the impact of the intervention in reducing mortality from COVID-19, we first identified some key
parameters. We determined the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection based on a prior seroprevalence study conducted in
Dhaka. COVID-19 was first introduced into Bangladesh in March 2020 with widespread community transmission
observed in urban centers by April. 45% of the population in Dhaka had been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 by the end of
July 2020 (1). When compared with reported cases in Dhaka for the same time period, this translates into a case
detection rate of 0.55% (2). The number of reported cases has been relatively steady in Bangladesh since the onset of
the pandemic. If we extrapolate a 0.55% case detection rate to the entire country, we estimate that up to 58% of the
population of Bangladesh may have been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 by the end of January 2021. This translates to a
seroconversion rate of approximately 5.8% per month.
The estimated infection fatality rate (IFR) for Bangladesh, accounting for population structure, is 0.212% (3). We can
use this and the estimated number of seroconversions per month to calculate the anticipated deaths per month from
COVID-19. We can then estimate the reduction in deaths for each month following the intervention. We can convert
this to the number needed to treat (NNT) during the intervention to prevent one death for each month after the
intervention by taking the inverse of the absolute risk reduction (ARR) across a range of estimates of mask
effectiveness for reducing COVID-19 (4-9).
References 1. https://www.icddrb.org/quick-links/press-releases?id=97task=view 2.
http://dashboard.dghs.gov.bd/webportal/pages/covid19.php 3. O'Driscoll, M., Ribeiro Dos Santos, G., Wang, L. et al.
Age-specific mortality and immunity patterns of SARS-CoV-2. Nature (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2918-0 4. Chernozhukov V, Kasahara H, Schrimpf P. Causal impact of masks,
policies, behavior on early COVID-19 pandemic in the US. J Econometrics. 2021;220(1):23-62.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304407620303468?via5. Worby C, Chang H. Face mask use in
the general population and optimal resource allocation during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature Communications.
2020;11. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-17922-x 6. Eikenberry SE, et al. To mask or not to mask:
Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic. Infectious Disease
Modeling. 2020;5:293-308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.04.001 7. Chu D, et al. Physical distancing, face
masks, and eye protection to prevent person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet. 2020;395(10242):1973-87. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31142-9 8.
Doung-Ngern P, Suphanchaimat R, Panjangampatthana A, et al. Case-Control Study of Use of Personal Protective
Measures and Risk for Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 Infection, Thailand. Emerg Infect Dis.
2020;26(11).10.3201/eid2611.203003. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32931726 9. Payne DC,
Smith-Jeffcoat SE, Nowak G, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Infections and Serologic Responses from a Sample of U.S. Navy
Service Members ­ USS Theodore Roosevelt, April 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
                                                           39
2020;69(23):714-721.10.15585/mmwr.mm6923e4. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32525850
                                         Table A4: Subgroup Analyses
                                   Female Only            Male Only          Above Median          Below Median
                                               No Baseline Controls
 Intervention Coefficient            0.225***              0.272***             0.249***              0.349***
                                      (0.014)               (0.013)              (0.019)               (0.022)

 Average Control Mask                  0.310                   0.116               0.176                 0.085
 Wearing Rate§
                                              With Baseline Controls
 Intervention Coefficient            0.224***              0.272***             0.250***              0.353***
                                      (0.014)               (0.013)              (0.019)               (0.021)

 N villages                             568                    568                  200                   202

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
All regressions also include an indicator for each control-intervention pair. The baseline control regressions include
controls for baseline rates of mask wearing and baseline symptom rates. For the gender subgroup analyses, the
baseline symptom rate and baseline mask wearing rate was defined across all individuals, not just those among
females and males, respectively.
Baseline Symptom Rate is defined as the rate of surveyed individuals in a village who report symptoms coinciding
with the WHO-definition of a probable COVID-19 case. This is defined as any of the following:
(a) fever and cough;
(b) any three of the following (fever, cough, general weakness/fatigue, headache, muscle aches, sore throat, coryza
[nasal congestion or runny nose], dyspnoea [shortness of breath or difficulty breathing], anorexia [loss of
appetite]/nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, altered mental status;
(c) anosmia [loss of smell] and ageusia [loss of taste].
We assume that (1) all reported symptoms were acute onset, (2) all people live or work in an area with high risk of
transmission of virus and (3) all people have been a contact of a probable or confirmed case of COVID-19 or are
linked to a COVID-19 cluster.
The sex-specific subgroup samples excludes 2 unions because of lack of data. The above-median and below-median
samples includes 85 singleton observations which were dropped.




                                                          40
                                              Table A5: Pilot Analyses
                                   Main Intervention                     Pilot 1                        Pilot 2
                                                No Baseline Controls
 Intervention Effect                     0.290***                        0.109                         0.284
                                          (0.012)                   [-0.161, 0.320]                [0.081, 0.408]

 Average Control Mask                     0.1329                          0.129                          0.095
 Wearing Rate§
                                               With Baseline Controls
 Intervention Effect                     0.290***                        0.096                         0.341
                                          (0.012)                   [-0.126, 0.315]                [0.135, 0.509]

 N villages                                 572                             10                             10

Standard errors are in parentheses. Confidence intervals are in brackets, computed using wild bootstrap.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
The first column reports the results of our main intervention; equivalent to the results in Table 1, using full
surveillance data.
§We report the mean rate of mask wearing among the control villages after the baseline observation. This is not
equivalent to the coefficient on the constant due to the inclusion of the pair indicators as controls.




                                        Table A6: Chawkidar Intervention
                                            All Treatment Villages       All Villages that Ever Had
                                                                          Chawkidar Intervention
 Post-Chawkidar Intervention                             0.011                                     0.026
 Coefficient                                            (0.016)                                   (0.034)

 N village-surveillance weeks                            1,325                                      953

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
All regressions include an indicator for each village, week of observation, and calendar week.




                                                            41
                               Table A7: Village-Level Cross Randomizations
 Coefficient                       Full           No Active           Mosques           Markets            Other
                                                  Promotion                                               Locations
                                                 No Baseline Controls
 Mask Type (Surgical)              0.025             0.025             0.056              0.015             0.017
                                  (0.026)           (0.025)           (0.036)            (0.027)           (0.025)
 Commitment w/ Signage            ­0.008            ­0.005            ­0.016             ­0.006            ­0.006
                                  (0.026)           (0.026)           (0.034)            (0.027)           (0.026)
 Incentive Type
    Monetary                      ­0.021            ­0.023             0.012             ­0.032            ­0.026
                                  (0.035)           (0.034)           (0.046)            (0.035)           (0.036)
     Certificate                   0.009             0.007             0.028              0.010            ­0.001
                                  (0.032)           (0.032)           (0.041)            (0.032)           (0.033)
 100% Text                        ­0.028            ­0.023            ­0.043             ­0.023            ­0.017
                                  (0.026)           (0.025)           (0.033)            (0.027)           (0.026)

                                                With Baseline Controls
 Mask Type (Surgical)              0.025             0.024             0.055              0.014             0.018
                                  (0.026)           (0.025)           (0.035)            (0.027)           (0.025)
 Commitment w/ Signage            ­0.005            ­0.001            ­0.018             ­0.003            ­0.003
                                  (0.026)           (0.026)           (0.034)            (0.027)           (0.026)
 Incentive Type
    Monetary                      ­0.020            ­0.023             0.012             ­0.031            ­0.026
                                  (0.034)           (0.034)           (0.045)            (0.034)           (0.036)
     Certificate                   0.013             0.010             0.032              0.013             0.002
                                  (0.031)           (0.031)           (0.040)            (0.031)           (0.032)
 100% Text                        ­0.026            ­0.021            ­0.037             ­0.022            ­0.017
                                  (0.026)           (0.025)           (0.033)            (0.027)           (0.026)

 N villages                         286               286                285               285               284

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
The baseline control regressions include controls for baseline rates of mask wearing and baseline symptom rates.
Baseline Symptom Rate is defined as the rate of surveyed individuals in a village who report symptoms coinciding
with the WHO-definition of a probable COVID-19 case. This is defined as any of the following:
(a) fever and cough;
(b) any three of the following (fever, cough, general weakness/fatigue, headache, muscle aches, sore throat, coryza
[nasal congestion or runny nose], dyspnoea [shortness of breath or difficulty breathing], anorexia [loss of
appetite]/nausea/vomiting, diarrhoea, altered mental status;
(c) anosmia [loss of smell] and ageusia [loss of taste].
We assume that (1) all reported symptoms were acute onset, (2) all people live or work in an area with high risk of
transmission of virus and (3) all people have been a contact of a probable or confirmed case of COVID-19 or are
linked to a COVID-19 cluster.
"Other Locations" include the Tea Stall, at the entrance of the restaurant as patrons enter, and the main road to enter
the village.
The analysis excludes 14 villages in the full sample, 15 villages in the mosque and market sub-samples, and 16
villages in the other location sub-sample because the observation data has not yet been submitted by our surveyors.




                                                            42
                           Table A8: Household-Level Cross Randomizations
                         Coefficient                         Full
                         Household-Level Text Randomization
                           50% of Households in Village     ­0.050
                                                            (0.032)

                            100% of Households in Village                  ­0.053
                                                                           (0.033)

                         Altruistic Messages                               ­0.026
                                                                           (0.026)

                         Verbal Commitment                                 ­0.023
                                                                           (0.025)

                         Mask Type (Surgical)                              0.034*
                                                                           (0.020)

                         Mask Color
                           Blue                                            0.029*
                                                                           (0.016)

                             Violet                                        0.058***
                                                                           (0.018)

                         N villages                                        286

Standard errors are in parentheses.
*** Significant at the 1 percent level. ** Significant at the 5 percent level. * Significant at the 10 percent level.
Surgical masks distributed to households were blue or green. Cloth masks distributed to households were violet or
red.
The analysis excludes 14 villages and their pairs because the observation data has not yet been submitted by our
surveyors.




                                                          43
B      Pairwise Randomization Procedure

Villages were assigned to strata as follows:

    1. We began with 1,000 villages in 1,000 separate unions to ensure sufficient geographic dis-
       tance to prevent spillovers (Bangladesh is divided into about 4,600 separate unions).

    2. We collected these unions into "Units", defined as the intersection of upazila x (above/below)
       median population x case trajectory, where above/below median population was a 0-1 indi-
       cator for whether the union had above-median population for that upazila and case trajectory
       takes the values -1, 0, 1 depending on whether the cases per 1,000 are decreasing, flat or
       increasing. We assessed cases per person using data provided to us from the Bangladeshi
       government for the periods June 27th-July 10th and July 11th-July 24th, 2020.

    3. If a unit contained an odd number of unions, we randomly dropped one union.

    4. We then sort unions by "cases per person" based on the July 11th-July 24th data, and create
       pairs of unions. We randomly kept 300 such pairs.

    5. We randomly assigned one union in each pair to be the intervention union.

    6. We then tested for balance with respect to cases, cases per population, and density.

    7. Finally, we repeated this entire procedure 50 times, selecting the seed that minimized the
       maximum of the absolute value of the balance tests with respect to case trajectory and cases
       per person.



C      Cross-Randomization Procedure

Unions were assigned to village-level cross-randomizations as follows:

    1. We began with the 300 union-pairs (600 villages total) identified in the pairwise randomiza-
       tion procedure, and limited to only the villages in the intervention group.

                                                 44
  2. Using a random number generator, we ordered the villages, and assigned the first 1/3 of the
     intervention villages to be distributed cloth masks and 2/3 to be distributed surgical masks.

  3. Within the mask-type randomization, we randomly reordered the unions, then assigned the
     first 1/2 of villages to hang signage on their door as a visual commitment to mask-wearing,
     and 1/2 of villages to not have signage on their door.

  4. Within the previous two randomizations, we randomly assigned 1/4 of villages to receive no
     incentive, 1/4 to receive a monetary award, and 1/2 to receive a certificate incentive. If there
     was an odd-number of villages within this randomization, then we broke the difference by
     rounding the number of villages in the randomization to the nearest whole number.

  5. In villages without signage, we randomly ordered the villages and assigned the first 2/3 to
     receive texts encouraging mask-wearing, and the remaining 1/3 receive no such messages. If
     the number of villages was not divisible by thirds, then we broke the difference by rounding
     the number of villages to the nearest whole number.

Unions were assigned to household-level cross-randomizations using the following procedure.
Note that each village may have only one household-level randomization.

  1. In villages with the signage randomization, we assigned 2/3 of villages to receive messages
     emphasizing the self-protection benefits of masks, and the remaining 1/3 to receive altruistic
     messages about the benefits of mask wearing in addition to the self-protection messages. If
     the number of villages was not divisible by thirds, we broke the difference by rounding to
     the nearest whole number.

  2. In villages with the signage randomization and no household-level altruism randomization
     (and by definition, no village-level text message randomization), we assigned 1/4 of villages
     to receive no household-level text-message randomization, 1/2 of villages to have 50% of
     their households receive text-message reminders, and the remaining 1/4 of villages to have
     100% of their households receive texts.

                                                45
    3. In villages without the signage randomization, we assigned 2/3 of villages to receive mes-
       sages emphasizing the self-protection benefits of masks, and the remaining 1/3 to receive
       messages emphasizing the altruistic reasons to wear masks in addition to the self-protection
       messages.

    4. In the villages without the signage randomization and no household-level altruism random-
       ization, we asked households to make a verbal commitment to be a mask-wearing household.



D      Statistical Analysis

This section describes details of our statistical analyses.


Mask-Wearing         We created a data set with an observation for each village j. We defined proper
mask use as anyone wearing either a project mask or an alternative face-covering that covered their
mouth and nose. We considered two definitions of the proportion of observed individuals wearing
masks ( p j ). In our primary specification, we defined p j using all observed adults. In a secondary
specification, we considered adults observed only in locations where we there was not simultaneous
mask distribution. The purpose of this second specification was to investigate separately whether
the intervention increased mask-wearing in places where we did not have promoters on site.
    Our goal was to estimate the impact of the intervention on the probability of mask-wearing, de-
fined as 1 = Ex [E ( p j |T j = 1, x j ) - E ( p j |T j = 0, x j )] where T j is an indicator for whether a village
was treated and x j is a vector of the village-level covariates, including the prevalence of baseline
mask-wearing in each village (constructed analogously to p j ), baseline respiratory symptom rates,
and indicators for each pair of villages from our pairwise stratification method.
    We estimated this equation at the village-level with an ordinary least squares regression, us-
ing analytic weights proportional to the number of observed individuals (the denominator of p j )
and heteroskedastic-robust standard errors. In this specification, the dependent variable is p j , the
independent variable of interest was T j , and controls were included for the x j covariates.


                                                        46
Physical Distancing Using analogous methods, we estimated the impact of the intervention on
the probability that wearing a mask influenced physical distancing (being within one arm's length
of any other person at the time of observation).


D.1      Estimating Effects of Village-level Cross-randomizations

We analyze all four village level cross-randomizations jointly via a linear regression:


                               E ( p j |T j , x j , Dk ) =  T j +  Dk k + x j                        (1)
                                                              k


where Dk = 1 if the village has been assigned to the intervention group of the village-level cross-
randomization denoted by letter k, and 0 otherwise. This specification is otherwise identical to our
estimating equation for the impact of intervention on mask-wearing, with the addition of the Dk
terms.


D.2      Estimating Effects of Household-level Cross-randomizations

To evaluate the effect of household-level cross-randomizations, we constructed a regression with an
observation for each village where we ask whether masks of the color representing the treatment
were more commonplace than masks of the color representing the control. In each village, we
computed  j , the difference in the fraction of individuals wearing treatment mask colors vs. control
mask colors. We alternated across villages which color corresponds to intervention, so we can
control directly for whether specific colors are more popular (denote these by d jc ; d jc = 1 if treated
masks in village j are color c). We index the various household randomizations by m. Our estimate
for each household randomization will be 0m , given by:


                               E ( j |d jc ) = 0m +  c d jc + surgical j                             (2)
                                                       c




                                                     47
0m tells us how much more likely individuals are to wear masks of the treated color than masks
of the control color. surgical j is, as its name implies, a dummy for whether surgical masks were
distributed in village j. We estimate this equation at the village-level by ordinary least squares,
using analytic weights proportional to the number of observed individuals (the denominator of  j )
and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors.



E     Intervention Cost and Benefit Estimates

The average person-day of staff time in our intervention cost $20 of wages plus $0.50 of communi-
cation costs. All management salaries, benefits, support, internal monitoring, and equipment costs
$71,696. We exclude these from the below calculation as they will vary from setting to setting. As
reported in the main text, we estimate that we induced 51,125 people to regularly wear masks, or
172 people per intervention village.


Costs per village The main fixed costs of the intervention (as opposed to costs that vary over
days):

    · Masks for initial household distribution (3 masks per household), ($0.13 per surgical mask
         and $0.50 per cloth masks), 370,643 cloth masks, and 924,849 surgical masks

    · Staffing for initial household distribution (4 person-days per village)

    · 1 person-day of training per village

    · PPE for staff: $70 per village

    · Media costs: $100 per village

    · Other transportation and materials costs: $30 per village

This amounts to fixed costs of: $302.50 per village for non-mask materials, $275.10 worth of cloth
masks per village, and $88.90 of surgical masks per village. We estimate that we induced 594 x

                                                 48
29% = 172 people per village to wear masks, which amounts to $3.36 per adult induced to wear a
mask in cloth mask villages, and $2.28 per adult in surgical mask villages.


Costs per village-day of intervention    The main costs paid per day of the intervention:

    · 1,295,492 masks distributed over an average of 29 days per village. Of these, there were
      370,643 cloth masks distributed (129 cloth masks per day per village) and 924,849 surgical
      masks distributed (160 surgical masks per day per village).

    · 14 person-days per week per village in week 1, 8 person-days per week per village in week
      2, 6 person-days per village in weeks 3, 4 and 5, and 4 person-days per week per village
      thereafter.

Over the first four weeks of our intervention, this amounts to mask supply costs of $64.50 per
village-day for cloth masks and $20.8 per village-day for surgical masks. The promotion costs
were $23 per village-day. Dividing by the number of people induced to wear masks per village
(172), we obtain costs of $0.51 per person-day in cloth mask villages and $0.25 per person-day in
surgical mask villages.
   In Table A3, we compute the benefits of mask-wearing in terms of reductions in mortality risk
as a function of duration of mask-wearing and mask-effectiveness. Based on the anticipated rate
of seroconversions and estimates of the number of infections and deaths per seroconversions, we
estimate the absolute reduction in deaths and thus the number needed to treat to avert one death.
   For the one-month of the intervention, the number needed to treat to prevent one death ranges
from 11,618 to 27,109. Our estimates above suggest that the total cost of our intervention per
person induced to wear a mask for a month was: $3.36 + $0.51 x 30 = $18.66 in cloth mask
villages and $2.28 + $0.25 x 30 = $9.78 in surgical mask villages. Depending on the estimate, this
translates to between $144,000 and $355,000 per life saved in cloth mask villages, and between
$99,000 and $232,000 per life saved in surgical mask villages.
   However, these estimates improve substantially as we extend the duration of our window to
consider the next several months after the intervention. Even assuming that no one continues to

                                                49
wear masks after the intervention, the intervention will become increasingly cost-effective as the
infections prevented in the first month fail to propagate into future infections. This reduces the
number needed to treat to prevent one death by a factor of 4, and improves the cost effectiveness
accordingly. After a 4-month window, the cost-effectiveness of the intervention for cloth masks
was between $36,000 and $88,750 per life saved, and for surgical masks was between $24,750 and
$58,000 per life saved.




                                               50
F     Impact of Mask Use on COVID-19

F.1    Methods

Sample size calculation Sample size calculations were based on the primary outcome of symp-
tomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections. We anticipated that we could directly survey up to 500 people
per village per wave across 600 villages, or 300,000 people. We solved for the clinically detectable
effect size (delta) as a function of number of individuals per intervention arm (m = 150,000), the
desired significance level (5%), the desired power level (80%), the expected rates of respiratory
symptoms in the intervention and control groups, the number of individuals per cluster (n = 500),
and the intracluster correlation (rho = 0.0022) using the following equation10 :


     = ((Z1- /2 + Z1- )             ((P1  (1 - P1 ) + P2  (1 - P2 )))       (1 + (  n -  )))/   (m)   (3)


We estimated the intracluster coefficient using our baseline data of respiratory symptoms from a
nation-wide telephone and variation across districts in our survey, typically between 50 and 150
surveyed members per upazila. These power calculations are conservative because they ignore the
possibility of controlling for baseline rates from our initial survey and of stratifying, both of which
could lead to substantial increases in power.
    The below table demonstrates the minimum detectable effect under different assumptions about
the fraction of the population infected with SARS-CoV-2 over our sample period. The first column
gives possible (true) SARS-CoV-2 infection rates in the population. The second column gives the
resulting rates of respiratory disease we expect to observe in our survey assuming 2% rates with
no COVID and that 50% of COVID patients are symptomatic. Column 3 reports the minimum
detectable effect as an absolute reduction in respiratory symptoms, and Column 4 the implied
effectiveness of masks in reducing respiratory disease, computed by dividing column 3 by column
2. Column 5 computes a "per mask" detectable effect assuming that we increase mask use by 30%
  10 See   equation 5 from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4521133/




                                                       51
                               Table A9: Sample Size Calculation Parameters
 Cumulative COVID-19 Incidence                  Resp           Detectable      Total Impact     Impact Per
                                               Disease          Effect          of Masks         Mask (30
                                                                                                percentage
                                                                                                   point
                                                                                                 increase)
   5%                                           4.50%            0.0033           7.34%           24.47%
   10%                                          7.00%            0.0041           5.81%           19.37%
   15%                                          9.50%            0.0047           4.92%           16.40%
   20%                                         12.00%            0.0052           4.31%           14.37%



(column 4 divided by 0.3).


Blood sample collection We collected capillary blood samples on a cohort of 7,500 randomly-
selected participants at baseline and endline. We additionally collected blood samples from partic-
ipants who reported symptoms consistent with the WHO COVID-19 case definition for suspected
or probable cases during the study period.11 Blood samples were obtained by puncture with a
20-Gauge safety lancet to the third or fourth digit. 500 microliters of blood were collected into Mi-
crotainer® capillary blood collection serum separator tubes (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, Cat 365967).
Blood samples were transported on ice and stored at -20°C until testing.


SARS-CoV-2 testing            Blood samples were tested for the presence of IgG antibodies against
SARS-CoV-2 using the SCoV-2 DetectTM IgG ELISA kit (InBios, Seattle, Washington, Cat COVE-
G). This assay detects IgG antibodies against the spike protein subunit (S1) of SARS-CoV-2. The
assays were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, serum samples were
diluted 1:100 with sample dilution buffer. 50 microliters of diluted specimens were added to the
SCoV-2 antigen-coated microtiter strip plates. After one hour of incubation at 37°C, the plate was
washed six times with wash buffer, and conjugate solution was added to each well. The plate
  11 WHO        COVID-19          Case    Definition     https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-
SurveillanceC aseD e f inition - 2020.2



                                                        52
was incubated for another 30 minutes at 37°C and washed six times with wash buffer. 75 mi-
croliters of liquid TMB substrate were added to all wells followed by 20 minutes of incubation
in the dark at room temperature before the reaction was stopped. The absorbance was read on a
microplate reader at 450nm (GloMax® Microplate Reader, Promega Corporation, Madison, WI,
Cat GM3000). After calibration according to positive, negative, and cut-off controls, the immuno-
logical status ratio (ISR) was calculated as the ratio of optical density divided by the cut-off value.
Samples were considered positive if the ISR value was determined to be at least 1.1. Samples with
an ISR value 0.9 or below were considered negative. Samples with equivocal ISR values were
retested in duplicate, and resulting ISR values were averaged.
    We tested x% of samples collected from individuals who reported COVID-like symptoms dur-
ing the intervention period from both intervention and control groups (estimated 15,000 blood
samples). In addition, all endline blood samples from the cohort of 7,500 were tested. For any of
these individuals with positive endline results for IgG antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, the base-
line blood samples were also tested (estimated 7,500 endline, 3,750 baseline blood samples).


Analysis     Our primary outcome is symptomatic seropositivity, defined as reporting symptoms
consistent with COVID-19 during the study period and a positive endline SARS-CoV-2 IgG anti-
body test. We will construct a dataset with an observation for each surveyed household (i indexes
households and j villages). In each village, define Yi j = 1 if the highest risk individual in each
household is 1) reporting either a. dry cough and fever and b. either fatigue, lack of taste/smell or
shortness of breath in the last month at either the fifth week or ninth week telephone survey and
2) are seropositive in our blood test at endline. If either of these conditions fail to hold, Yi j = 0.
To assess seropositivity, we will test all individuals who are symptomatic in either our 5-week or
9-week household survey.
    Our goal will be to estimate the impact of the intervention on seropositivity, defined as: 0 =
Ex [E (Yi j |T j = 1, x j ) - E (Yi j |T j = 0, x j )] where T j is an indicator for whether a village was treated
and x j are village-level covariates including baseline mask-use in each village (constructed as de-



                                                       53
scribed below) and baseline respiratory symptom based on reported symptoms, as well as indica-
tors for each pair of villages from our pairwise stratification method. In an auxiliary specification,
we will also include fixed effects for each observation staff member.
    We will estimate this parameter using a generalized linear model with a normal family (and
identity link), clustering at the village-level.12 The dependent variable is Yi j , the independent
variable of interest is T j , and controls will be included for the x j covariates.
    To estimate the overall impact of masks on seroconversions, we have chosen a random cohort
of 7,500 individuals from which we collected blood at baseline. The results of baseline antibody
testing in this cohort will allow us to estimate baseline symptomatic seropositivity. By differencing
the seropositivity rate among symptomatic individuals at baseline and endline, we can compute
symptomatic seroconversions. We can determine the fraction of seroconversions prevented by
dividing 0 by the overall rate of symptomatic seroconversions.




  12 Hardin,   James W and Hilbe, Joseph, Generalized linear models and extensions, Stata press,2007.


                                                          54
