                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE GROWING IMPORTANCE OF DECISION-MAKING ON THE JOB

                                        David J. Deming

                                      Working Paper 28733
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28733


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




Thanks to Daron Acemoglu, Hunt Allcott, Isaiah Andrews, David Autor, Peter Blair, Raj Chetty,
David Lagakos, Todd Schoellman, and seminar participants at the Ottawa Applied Micro Lab,
Miami University of Ohio, George Mason University, University of Nebraska and Harvard
University for helpful comments. I also thank Bledi Taska and the staff at Burning Glass
Technologies for generously sharing their data. All errors are my own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by David J. Deming. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Growing Importance of Decision-Making on the Job
David J. Deming
NBER Working Paper No. 28733
April 2021
JEL No. I26,J23,J24,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

Machines increasingly replace people in routine job tasks. The remaining tasks require workers to
make open-ended decisions and to have "soft" skills such as problem-solving, critical thinking
and adaptability. This paper documents growing demand for decision-making and explores the
consequences for life-cycle earnings. Career earnings growth in the U.S. more than doubled
between 1960 and 2017, and the age of peak earnings increased from the late 30s to the mid-50s.
I show that a substantial share of this shift is explained by increased employment in decision-
intensive occupations, which have longer and more gradual periods of earnings growth. To
understand these patterns, I develop a model that nests decision-making in a standard human
capital framework. Workers predict the output of uncertain, context-dependent actions.
Experience reduces prediction error, improving a worker's ability to adapt using data from
similar decisions they have made in the past. Experience takes longer to accumulate in high
variance, non-routine jobs. I test the predictions of the model using data from the three waves of
the NLS. Life-cycle wage growth in decision-intensive occupations has increased over time, and
it has increased relatively more for highly-skilled workers.


David J. Deming
Harvard Kennedy School
Malcolm Wiener Center for Social Policy
79 JFK St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard Kennedy School
and also NBER
david_deming@harvard.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28733
1       Introduction

A growing body of work in economics studies the impact of automation on jobs, with an
emphasis on the technological replacement of routine job tasks (Autor et al. 2003, Acemoglu
and Restrepo 2019). Machines increasingly substitute for humans in physical, mechanical,
and information processing tasks that are predictable enough to be scripted ahead of time
(Autor et al. 2002, Chin et al. 2006, Bartel et al. 2007, Autor 2015).1 The remaining job tasks
are increasingly open-ended and require workers to make decisions and adapt to unforeseen
circumstances, which explains why employers consistently rate problem-solving and critical
thinking as the most essential needs among new hires (e.g. Dessein and Santos 2006, NACE
2020).
    The rising importance of decision-making can be seen in the rapid growth of management
jobs in the U.S. over the last half-century. Figure 1 shows that the total wage bill paid to
management and management-related occupations in the U.S. has more than doubled since
1960, from 15 percent to 32 percent.2 This trend incorporates both increasing employment
growth and rising relative wages, is more pronounced in the private sector and in high-growth
industries, and is not driven by growth in top-end executive pay.3
    Figure 2 shows the rising importance of decision-making across the entire U.S. economy,
using job vacancy data to directly measure employer skill demands. I combine data from
Atalay et al. (2020) and from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT), covering the 1960-2000
    1
      Autor et al. (2003) define routine tasks as those requiring "methodical repetition of an unwavering
procedure" that "can be exhaustively specified with programmed instructions and performed by machines."
    2
      Figure 1 computes the product of labor supply-weighted employment shares and inflation-adjusted
annual wage and salary incomes by occupation and year using data from the 1960-2000 U.S. Census, the 2006-
2018 American Community Survey, and the 1968-2020 Annual Social and Economic Supplement (ASEC)
of the Current Population Survey. I define management and management-related occupations using the
"occ1990dd" crosswalk developed by Autor and Dorn (2013) and extended by Deming (2017). The definition
includes management, management support (occ1990dd codes 4 through 37), and supervisors of frontline
workers in other fields. The results are similar with stricter definitions of management jobs, but less consistent
over time due to differences in occupation coding over time.
    3
      The private sector management wage bill increased from 16 percent in 1960 to 35 percent in 2017
across all industries, and from 19 percent to 43 percent for business services and finance, insurance and real
estate. The results in Figure 1 are almost identical when I exclude the occupation code for CEOs and other
executives, and when I use median rather than mean wages.



                                                        1
and 2007-2019 periods respectively, and I use the actual text of job ads to form a consistent
definition of decision-making over time.4 To ensure representativeness, I weight the job ad
data by the actual distribution of occupations in each year.5
    Figure 2 shows that the share of all jobs requiring decision-making increased from 6
percent in 1960 to 34 percent in 2018, with nearly half of the increase occuring just since
2007. The grey lines show the same trend but controlling for occupation fixed effects, which
diminishes the impact only slightly, implying that most of the shift toward decision-making
is occurring within rather than between occupations. Excluding management occupations
diminishes the growth in Figure 2 only slightly, suggesting that growing demand for worker
decision-making is an economy-wide phenomenon.
    This paper documents growing demand for decision-making and explores the conse-
quences for returns to skills and life-cycle wage growth. I develop a model that nests worker
decision-making into a standard human capital framework. In the model, task output is
uncertain and depends on a set of background variables (or "context"), which the worker ob-
serves imperfectly. Workers decide what to do by predicting the outcome of an action using
data from their past experiences. Experience is valuable because data quantity and quality
reduce prediction error, which allows workers to better adapt their actions to context. Firms
endogenously choose the level of worker autonomy to balance the gains from adaptation
against the losses from prediction error, as in Dessein and Santos (2006) and Bartling et al.
    4
       Atalay et al. (2020) collect the text of classified ads placed in the New York Times, the Wall Street
Journal, and the Boston Globe and map them to work activities from the Occupational Information Network
(O*NET) data, among other measures. I use their mapping to the three O*NET work activities Making De-
cisions and Solving Problems, Developing Objectives and Strategies, and Planning and Prioritizing Work,
which includes key words and phrases such as "decision-making', "problem-solving", "diagnosing", "judg-
ment", "strategize", "planning", "prioritizing", "goals", and others. See the appendix to Atalay et al. (2020)
for a complete list. BGT classify vacancy text into thousands of unique job skills, and I use job skills (and
related strings) with the key words and phrases above to create a consistent definition over time.
     5
       Atalay et al. (2020) map their data to both Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) codes and Census
occupation codes, and they provide a crosswalk between them. To reduce classification error from narrowly
defined occupations (some of which only exist in certain years of the data), I aggregate occupations to the 3
digit SOC level using occupation crosswalks and compute weights using Census and American Community
Survey (ACS) data to make the job vacancy data represenative of the actual occupation distribution in each
year. I then apply a moving average to the weights so that classified ad data from 1965 is weighted 50/50
between the 1960 and 1970 Censuses (for example), and finally I compute a 5-year moving average of the
share of ads requiring decision-making in order to reduce yearly noise.


                                                      2
(2012).
   The model delivers several testable predictions. Firms relying more on worker decision-
making will have higher experience requirements and demand higher levels of worker skill.
I verify this prediction using detailed job vacancy data from BGT, which includes firm
identifiers and detailed measures of skill demands.
   In the model, a worker's decision-making skill has three important components. The
first is data quantity. More data reduces prediction error, but at a decreasing rate, and so
the return to work experience should be positive and concave. The second component is
variance, or the difficulty of the prediction problem. If the output of an action is invariant
to context, then there is nothing to predict and the model collapses to a standard human
capital framework. Low prediction variance formalizes the concept of a routine task. The
model implies that learning occurs faster in routine occupations, because higher task variance
makes prediction more difficult. Empirically, life-cycle wage growth should persist longer and
be more gradual in non-routine, decision-intensive occupations.
   Using data from the Census and ACS and multiple waves of the National Longitudinal
Surveys (NLS), I show that relative employment growth of decision-intensive occupations
has shifted U.S. age-earnings profiles outward substantially over the last half-century. In
1960, earnings of full-time workers peaked in the late 30s, compared to the mid-50s today,
and the magnitude of life-cycle earnings growth has more than doubled over this period.
Comparing this to the cross-country variation documented by Lagakos et al. (2018) reveals
that life-cycle earnings growth in the U.S. in 1960 was similar to less developed countries
such as Mexico today.
   I find that wage growth after age 35 is substantially greater for workers in decision-
intensive occupations. I then perform a decomposition which shows that rapid relative em-
ployment growth in these occupations can explain nearly half of the outward shift in age-
earnings profiles since 1980 and nearly all since 2000, net of other demographic changes.
Importantly, this pattern of growing relative returns to decision-intensive jobs holds within


                                              3
gender, race and education groups, and does not replicate when I use other measures of job
tasks such as the "nonroutine analytic" task intensity measure used by Autor et al. (2003).
Taken together, this evidence shows that an economy-wide shift toward decision-intensive
occupations has had substantial impacts on patterns of life-cycle wage growth in the U.S.
   The third component of decision-making skill is data quality. In the model, the worker
must use data from their own experiences to make inferences about a larger population of
potential outcomes. Their ability to make good decisions will suffer if their own experiences
are not representative of the current context, or if they exhibit behavioral biases such as
excessive risk aversion or inference on winners (Tversky and Kahneman 1973, Thaler 1988,
Rabin and Thaler 2001, Andrews et al. 2019).
   Since a large body of evidence shows that cognitive ability improves learning in new
environments and reduces behavioral biases and decision errors, the model predicts that
ability, decision intensity and work experience will be complements (e.g. Nelson and Phelps
1966, Dohmen et al. 2010, Rustichini 2015, Gill and Prowse 2016). I find strong support
for this prediction using individual data on cognitive ability and occupation and earnings
trajectories from multiple waves of the NLSY. I also show that excessive risk aversion is
penalized relatively more in decision-intensive jobs. Finally, I find that the returns to working
in decision-intensive occupations have grown over time, and have grown more for high ability
workers.
   This paper makes three main contributions. First, I add to the large literature on techno-
logical replacement of routine work by focusing on the growing importance of decision-making
in unstructured work environments. Autor et al. (2003), Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) and
others show how automation increasingly replaces people in predictable tasks, but also that
automated systems are "brittle" and lack flexibility (Autor 2015). This paper develops a
framework for understanding how the shift away from routine work has affected returns
to skills and life-cycle earnings growth. The finding that returns to experience are greater
in decision-intensive occupations connects to a literature on firm structure and knowledge


                                               4
hierarchies, where human capital is occupation-specific and worker autonomy is important
for wage determination (e.g. Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg 2006, Kambourov and Manovskii
2009, Gathmann and Schönberg 2010, Bartling et al. 2012, Bayer and Kuhn 2019). It is also
consistent with Lise and Postel-Vinay (2020) and Stinebrickner et al. (2019), who find much
flatter wage growth for workers performing manual tasks compared to cognitive tasks.
   The model yields insights about the likely impact of machine learning and artificial
intelligence, which are fundamentally prediction technologies (Agrawal et al. 2018). These
technologies will be more effective substitutes for human labor as data quality increases, and
their impact is potentially larger in occupations where work experience has previously been
more important. This paper connects to a growing literature on the economics of data, which
emphasizes the value of data as an input into prediction that reduces firm uncertainty but
has diminishing returns (Veldkamp and Chung 2019, Farboodi and Veldkamp 2021).
   This paper also contributes to our understanding of how human capital increases earn-
ings. Going back to Mincer (1958) and Becker (1962), a standard approach assumes that
human capital augments effective units of labor in a production function, so that workers
with more schooling or higher ability can produce more output per hour. This paper is re-
lated to an older literature showing that human capital can increase allocative efficiency,
especially in agriculture, where educated farmers are more likely to adopt new technologies
(e.g. Welch 1970, Huffman 1974, 1977, Ram 1980, Foster and Rosenzweig 1995, Yang 2004).
The model nests the standard productive human capital model as a special case, and inte-
grates productive and allocative human capital together into a unified framework. Finally,
it explains how behavioral decision-making errors affect worker productivity and connects
to the idea of Nelson and Phelps (1966) that human capital improves one's ability to adapt
to change.
   I am aware of only a few economics papers that focus on decision-making as a skill.
Currie and MacLeod (2017) show that doctors vary not only in procedural skill but also
in their ability to correctly diagnose individual patients' suitability for different medical


                                              5
procedures. Chan Jr et al. (2019) and Chandra and Staiger (2020) develop frameworks
where expert decisions incorporate diagnostic skill, beliefs about treatment effectiveness,
and preferences. Goldfarb and Xiao (2011) and Hortaçsu et al. (2019) find that education
and other proxies for skill improve managerial decision-making. There is a large literature
in psychology on the determinants of effective decision-making, including some evidence
that general intelligence and numeracy in particular predict effective decision-making among
those who are not domain experts (e.g. Baron 2000, Stanovich and West 2000, Cokely et al.
2018)
    The third contribution of this paper is to the macroeconomics literature on educational
investment and life-cycle wage growth. It is well-known that educated workers have steeper
age-earnings profiles, yet the role of occupations is less well understood (Murphy and Welch
1990, Lemieux 2006, Guvenen et al. 2015)6 The model provides a microfoundation for the
learning-by-doing (LBD) model in macroeconomics and helps explain why on-the-job learn-
ing and thus wage growth might differ across occupations and countries (Chang et al. 2002,
Hendricks 2013, Manuelli and Seshadri 2014, Blandin 2018, Lagakos et al. 2018). Jobs that
allow for more worker decision-making facilitate human capital accumulation on the job,
which has important implications for wage subsidy policies and for optimal taxation over
the life-cycle (Heckman et al. 2002, Stantcheva 2015, Blandin and Peterman 2019).
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 develops a model of worker decision-
making on the job and generates testable predictions. Section 3 presents the main empirical
results. Section 4 discusses implications of the model for technological change and automa-
tion, educational investment and economic growth. Section 5 concludes.
   6
     Lagakos et al. (2018) find that educational attainment explains about one-third of cross-country differ-
ences in age-earnings profiles, and that manual occupations have flatter age-earnings profiles than cognitive
occupations. These results complement a series of papers showing that fluctuations in the growth of the
supply of college graduates can explain cohort differences in age-earnings profiles (e.g. Freeman 1979, Welch
1979, Katz and Murphy 1992).




                                                     6
2       Model

In the classic formulation of Becker (1962), schooling, training and other forms of human
capital increase labor productivity, which translates into higher wages when workers are
factors in a production function that takes capital and labor as inputs. But unlike machines,
individual workers have autonomy and can decide what to do. In fact, the ability to adapt
to unforeseen circumstances is one reason a firm might choose to employ labor rather than
capital. Machines can increasingly be programmed to do any one thing better than a person,
but people are more flexible. Highly paid workers are valuable not only because they know
how to do, but also because they know what to do.
    What is the value of human capital for decision-making? Decisions are choices over a set
of potential actions. Workers make choices by predicting the likely outcome of each action
and choosing the one with the highest expected output. In this sense, predictions are inputs
into decision-making, and predictions require data (Agrawal et al. 2019b). When workers
make predictions, they use data from past experiences on the job, schooling, peer influences,
and other sources. Thus experience is a form of human capital when it helps workers make
better decisions. I formalize these insights with a simple model of worker decision-making.
    In a standard human capital model, worker skill takes a simple factor-augmenting form,
with the output of a worker from task j increasing in some measure of skill  (such as
cognitive ability or education) times lj , the quantity of labor supplied. Skills are then applied
to job tasks to produce output.7 In this setup, the optimal choice of tasks is determined by
workers' skills and by the production technology. Human capital is productive in the sense
that it augments effective units of labor.
    Consider a simple extension of the standard model, where the output of task j is uncertain
and depends on a vector of background variables Xj :
    7
     In Acemoglu and Autor (2011), output for task j is yj = j lj , where yj specifies the production level
or output of task[ j , and total
                             ] output arises from a production function that maps tasks into a final good,
                  1
such as Y = exp 0 ln yj dj .




                                                    7
                                      j =  (Xj ) , j = 1, ..., N                                    (1)

   The function  (Xj ) contains all N possible mappings between the vector of background
variables Xj and output for task j . A doctor deciding whether to perform surgery must
consider not only the success of her past surgeries, but also a particular patient's risk factors,
the quality of the surgical equipment, the skill of her coworkers, and other data. Equation
(1) could be modified so that productivity varies across workers by some constant term (e.g.
Ai ij ), but I omit any consideration of individual differences and focus on a representative
worker.


2.1    Decision-making as a prediction problem

Facing this uncertainty, workers must decide what to do by predicting the output of each
potential action. I draw a distinction between tasks and actions. In models such as Acemoglu
and Autor (2011), tasks are units of work that can be specified ex ante. For example, the
tasks associated with the job "machinist" include calculating dimensions or tolerances using
instruments, measuring and examining completed units to check for defects and ensure con-
formance to specifications, and machining parts to specifications using tools such as lathes,
milling machines, shapers, and grinders.8
   Actions, on the other hand, are responsive to the local environment. In the course of
performing a task, unforeseen things can happen, and workers adjust on the fly. Machinists
must make judgments about exactly why a mechanical instrument is malfunctioning and
what should be done. The job of nurse includes answering patients' calls and determining how
to assist them, which cannot easily be specified in advance. For managers, entire categories of
job tasks are highly open-ended and rely on worker adaptation (e.g. "Direct and coordinate
activities of businesses and departments", "Direct administrative activities related to making
   8
     See O*NET data for a complete listing. As discussed in Acemoglu and Autor (2011), tasks are in some
sense infinitely divisible and indeed their model assumes a continuum of tasks are combined to produce
output. The key distinction is that they can be specified ex ante.

                                                   8
products or providing services").
    More formally, assume that there are many possible actions for each workplace task.
Each of the actions has the same average output for any particular worker, but the exact
ordering depends on Xj . For example, sales workers may differ predictably in their ability
to close deals, but their choices about how to convince any particular customer to buy a
product depend on the local context Xj in ways that the firm does not observe and that
cannot be specified in advance. This is similar in spirit to Dessein and Santos (2006), where
actions must be adapted to a local information shock that is observed by the worker but not
foreseeable ahead of time.9
    Workers choose an action by observing the background variables, predicting the ordering
of actions, and selecting the one with the highest output in that context. This could be a
sales worker deciding how to pitch a particular buyer, or a health worker deciding which
treatment will work best given a patient's symptoms and underlying risk factors. A worker
who has observed all N cases and the resulting mapping between Xj and j can choose the
                                                                                        N
best action in any situation. Denote this "population" average value of j over all N as j .
    Workers have limited experience and information, and never observe all N cases. Instead
they possess a sample of data that is drawn from their own experience. Define the worker's
sample as {Xj , j  Dn }, where Dn is a size subset of N . The worker predicts their output
                                                        n 10
as the average value of j over the sample, which I call j :

                                                  N
                                         1         j =1 Sj j
                                     n
                                     j =       j = N                                                      (2)
                                         n j D       j =1 Sj
                                                   n


    where Sj is an indicator function that is equal to one for data that is part of the worker's
sample, e.g. Sj = 1 for j  Dn and Sj = 0 otherwise. Sj captures the idea that workers
bring different experiences to the job. These experiences are inputs into decision-making,
    9
      In Dessein and Santos (2006), the payoff to an action is determined by a quadratic loss function
( N      )2
 j -  where  is a common variance shock that only the worker can observe. Here, the worker's ability
                                                                                            n
to adapt to the local information shock is determined by the quality of their prediction j    .
   10
      Meng et al. (2018) develops a similar approach to understanding the role of sample selection in problems
requiring "big data", with an application to the 2016 presidential election.


                                                       9
and so workers with the same productive human capital could make different predictions
about their own output in any particular context. For example, two attorneys representing
the same client might have different views about the likelihood of success at trial based on
their experiences with the judge, past cases with similar characteristics, or their training in
law school.
   Workers improve their output by successfully adapting their actions to the local context.
I assume that output from task j is equal to the worker's productive human capital - the
                                                                ( n      )
                                                                        N 2
"population" average output jN
                               - minus a quadratic loss function j   - j    which repre-
sents prediction error, or the losses from imperfect adaptation to Xj . The marginal product
for workers performing J tasks is:

                                  J [
                                         ( n     )]
                                               N 2
                                     jN
                                        - j  - j    lj                                     (3)
                                  j =1

                                                J
   where lj is labor supplied to action j and      j =1 lj   = 1 for each worker.
   Note that the task-based version of the standard human capital model is just equation
                                            n   N
(3) when there is no prediction error (e.g. j = j ). Thus the model nests productive and
allocative human capital together in a single framework (e.g. Nelson and Phelps 1966, Welch
1970). The worker's output depends on their productive human capital j , but also how well
they can minimize prediction error by adapting their actions to Xj using data from past
experiences.


2.2    The firm's problem

Workers vary in their productive capacity for each task and also in their decision-making
skill. Knowing this, firms will choose how much to rely on worker decision-making. I assume
that each firm chooses an organizational form that grants workers more or less autonomy,
following Dessein and Santos (2006). For simplicity, I further assume that there are only two
types of tasks -  (Xj ), and 0 , where the latter are constants that do not depend on Xj and


                                              10
                             ( n   N
                                     )
thus have no prediction error j  = j   .
    In a competitive labor market, the marginal profit from employing a worker is:


                                  [ N          ]  ( n     )
                                                        N 2
                                   j + (1 - ) 0 -  j  - j                                                  (4)

    where the parameter   [0, 1] measures the labor supply-weighted share of all tasks
that depend on worker decision-making. Firms choose  to maximize profits, which amounts
to trading off the relative gains from each task type against the costs of imperfect worker
adaptation. As   1, workers have more autonomy on the job but also make more errors.
When  = 0, equation (3) collapses to the standard model where actions and output are
fully deterministic.11 Firms will not rely on worker decision-making unless there is a gain
                    N
from doing so, e.g. j > 0 . Thus in equilibrium job tasks that require worker discretion
will have higher productive value than job tasks where output is deterministic.
    Equation (4) considers labor as the only factor of production, but in Section 4 I consider
a simple extension where 0 type tasks can be performed by machines.


2.3     The components of prediction error

From equation (2) above, the worker's prediction error can be rewritten as:12


                                        EJ (SJ J )             CovJ (SJ J )
                         n
                         j - j
                             N
                               =                   - EJ (J ) =                                             (5)
                                         EJ (SJ )                EJ (SJ )
                                                                                                            n
   Because SJ is just an indicator variable defined over the sample subset n, EJ (SJ ) =                    N
                    (      )
                  n
and V arJ (SJ ) = N   1- N
                         n
                             , and we can rewrite equation (5) as:
   11
      An important question is whether the firm also possesses information about local context. In principle,
firms can possess more information than workers, but in that case they will choose  = 0 and just tell workers
what to do. Formally, we can define the firm's information sample as {Xj , j  dn }, where dn is a size subset
of Dn , which itself is a subset of N .
   12
      The set of potential outputs {1 , ...., N } can be viewed as the support of a random variable J , with
random index J defined over {1, ...., N }. If J is uniformly distributed, EJ (J ) = j
                                                                                    N
                                                                                      . Likewise for the subset
n, EE
    J (SJ J )
      J (SJ )
                n
              = j . Equation (5) follows because CovJ (SJ J ) = EJ (SJ J ) - EJ (SJ )EJ (J ) for a Bernoulli
random variable, and EJ and CovJ are taken over a uniform distribution on J  {1, ...., N }. '



                                                      11
                                         (             )
                                              N -n
                            n
                            j - j
                                N
                                  =                           corr (S, )                           (6)
                                                n

   Taking the squared expectation of equation (6) yields:

                                              (            )
                            [ n     ]
                                  N 2             N -n                [    ]
                          ES  j - j   =                         2
                                                                   E S 2S,                         (7)
                                                    n

    Equations (6) and (7) show that prediction error has three components.13 The first term
                                       ( -n )
is data quantity, reflected by the term Nn    . As n  N , prediction error decreases, although
with diminishing returns. Empirically, we can think of n as increasing with work experience.
Workers make decisions by considering the outcomes of similar decisions they made in the
past.
                   2
   The second term   is variance, which captures the difficulty of the prediction problem. If
j is invariant to background variables Xj , the worker's prediction problem resolves instantly.
                                                        2
When the output of an action is always the same we have   = 0, which reduces prediction
error to zero and collapses equation (3) to the standard human capital model.
                                 2
   Jobs have different values of   . In some occupations, the work environment is highly
regulated and predictable. These are routine jobs, following the task literature in labor
economics (Autor et al. 2003, Acemoglu and Autor 2011). In other jobs, tasks are open-
ended and workers are given the freedom to adapt their actions to background variables
                          2
Xj . Empirically, I treat   as the occupation-level variance associated with a bundle of
job tasks, while  is a firm-level parameter that identifies the amount of decision-making
autonomy granted to workers both within and across occupations.
                                            2
   We might also expect to see variation in   within jobs over time. The economics liter-
ature shows that skill-biased technological change alters job tasks in ways that grant work-
ers more autonomy, perhaps because humans are more flexible than machines (Caroli and
  13
    I focus on a static decision problem and abstract away from dynamic learning considerations such as
experimentation and explore/exploit dynamics over time (e.g. Bolton and Faure-Grimaud 2009, Caplin and
Dean 2015, Gopnik 2020).



                                                  12
Van Reenen 2001, Autor et al. 2002, ?, Bartel et al. 2007, Bloom and Van Reenen 2011).
    The third term of equation (7) is data quality, which is determined by the sample selection
mechanism Sj . Recall that Sj defines the worker's past experiences, in the sense that it is an
indicator variable equal to one for the size n subset of the j 's that are in their sample. If the
worker's sample is representative of the population mapping between context and output,
                        n                                  N
then corr (S, ) = 0 and j will be an unbiased predictor of j In that case, prediction
error quickly approaches zero as sample size increases.14
    Yet poor data quality reduces the gains from work experience. As shown by the third term
                                                     [   ]
of equation (7), prediction error is increasing in ES 2S, , the squared correlation between

the worker's sample selection mechanism S and the 's and associated Xj 's they use for
prediction.
    There are at least two explanations for poor data quality. The first is non-representativeness.
For example, suppose N indexes the set of tasks undertaken in the job of "economist", and
we have samples n representing economists who work in university positions, or in banks,
or in private sector firms. Past experiences (or "data") from one context Xj might be an
imperfect guide to decision-making in other contexts, which would limit the gains from ex-
perience. This is consistent with evidence that human capital only partly transfers across
jobs and employers (e.g. Kambourov and Manovskii 2009, Gathmann and Schönberg 2010,
Pavan 2011, Robinson 2018). Experience might also include differences in education, social
networks, and family background.
    The second determinant of data quality is behavioral biases. Workers might overempha-
size the outcomes of successful decisions, a form of inference on winners that would induce
a positive correlation between S and  (e.g. Thaler 1988, Andrews et al. 2019). Excessive
risk aversion would lead workers to repeatedly choose the "safe" action over time, inducing
   14
        Random sampling ensures representativeness. If the worker's sample is drawn
                                                                                    randomly, then prediction
                                                                                       -n
error from equation (6) is equal to the standard error of the estimate     n
                                                                             times N  N -1 , a finite population
correction factor that accounts for the fact that the sample is drawn without replacement. Plugging this into
                    (             )2 (        ) 2                                               2
                             N -n          -n                                                 
equation (7) yields   
                       n
                             N -1    = Nn          N 1  -1 , which is approximately equal to n as N becomes
large.


                                                      13
a negative correlation between S and  (Rabin and Thaler 2001). More broadly, behav-
ioral biases such as anchoring, availability, base rate neglect, correlation neglect and others
can all be thought as methods of data selection that introduce sample selection bias and
hinder decision-making (e.g. Tversky and Kahneman 1973, Benjamin et al. 2019, Enke and
Zimmermann 2019, Enke 2020).
   Cognitive skill, or intelligence, can be interpreted broadly as the ability to acquire and
interpret higher quality data for decision-making. Psychologists, economists, and computer
scientists all define intelligence similarly as the ability to learn and adapt to change, or as
the efficiency of skill acquisition (Nelson and Phelps 1966, Sternberg 2013, Chollet 2019,
Sternberg 2021). Interpreted through the lens of the model, the ability to learn more from
                                                       [     ]
the past would be captured by the data quality term ES 2 S, .

   Many studies also highlight the role of cognitive ability in reducing biases and decision
errors. Intelligence is positively correlated with patience, willingness to take calculated risks,
and social awareness, all attributes that should improve decision-making (Burks et al. 2009,
Oechssler et al. 2009, Rustichini 2015). People with higher measured cognitive skills learn
games of strategy faster and make better decisions over time (Burnham et al. 2009, Bayer
and Renou 2016, Gill and Prowse 2016). Dohmen et al. (2010) find that low cognitive ability
is associated with higher risk aversion and increased impatience in a large, representative
sample of German adults. Similarly, Benjamin et al. (2013) find a positive correlation be-
tween academic achievement and both risk neutrality and patience. Frederick (2005) shows
that "cognitive reflection" ­ the ability to resist an intuitive answer and activate conscious
cognition ­ is correlated with cognitive ability and risk preferences and predicts avoidance
of behavioral decision errors.


2.4    Empirical Predictions

The model yields four testable predictions:

   1. Jobs with more experience requirements will also require more decision-making, and

                                               14
        firms that rely more on decision-making will seek to hire more experienced, higher-skilled
        workers. Equation (4) shows that firms will rely more on worker decision-making as pre-
        diction error decreases, which predicts a firm-level relationship between the autonomy
        granted to workers and experience and skill requirements.15 We should also expect to
        see a positive correlation between decision-making and work experience requirements
        at the job level. I test this prediction using job vacancy data that contain firm iden-
        tifiers, occupation codes and job titles, and direct measures of education, experience
        and skill requirements.

   2. The return to work experience is positive and concave. Equation (7) shows that predic-
        tion error always decreases as workers acquire more data, but at a decreasing rate.16
        This is consistent with the well-known empirical finding that age-earnings profiles
        are concave across many different countries and periods of time (e.g. Murphy and
        Welch 1990, Heckman et al. 2003, Lagakos et al. 2018). In the classic Ben-Porath
        (1967) model, concave age-earnings profiles are due to depreciation of human capital
        investments made earlier in life. In macroeconomic models of learning-by-doing (LBD),
        learning and earning are complements rather than substitutes, and so the concavity of
        age-earnings profiles derives from an assumption that human capital accumulation de-
        clines with experience (e.g. Shaw 1989, Imai and Keane 2004, Hendricks 2013, Blandin
        2018). This model provides a different explanation for why earnings continue to in-
        crease throughout the life-cycle, which is that accumulated experience increases human
        capital in decision-making.17
   15
                      [( N (7) into
       Plugging equation         ) ((equation
                                           ) (4)  and [taking the derivative of the firm's marginal profit with
                                                            ])]
                                        -n
respect to  yields j         - 0 - N n          2
                                                   ES 2  S,    , which suggests that the three terms in equation
(7) decrease as  increases.                                                                      ( 2     [    ])
    16                                                                                        N
       Plugging in equation (7), the derivative of equation (4) with respect to n is n         2   ES 2    S, ,
which  ( is 2always
                 [ 2 positive
                      ])      and decreasing in n. The second derivative of equation (4) with respect to n is
-2 n
    N
    3         ES   S,   , which is always negative and increasing in n.
    17
       Most calibrations of the Ben-Porath model find almost no depreciation and a human capital accumula-
tion function that is close to linear, which implies that learning-by-doing must be important (Heckman et al.
1998, Hendricks 2013, Manuelli and Seshadri 2014). The finding of no human capital depreciation is incon-
sistent with Deming and Noray (2020), which shows evidence of skill obsolescence in technology-intensive
careers.


                                                      15
    3. The return to work experience is less concave in decision-intensive occupations. Plug-
                                                           2
         ging equation (7) into equation (4) shows that as   increases, the return to work
         experience n becomes less concave.18 This is because higher-variance environments are
         harder to predict, which has the same effect as data reduction. Empirically, occupa-
         tions that require more decision-making should have longer and more gradual periods
         of earnings growth, reflecting the fact that each year of work experience effectively
         provides less data for prediction. I test this using cross-sectional and panel data on
         job characteristics and the age-earnings profiles of individual workers as they gain
         experience and move in and out of different occupations.

    4. Cognitive skill, work experience, and decision intensity are complements. The evidence
         on cognitive skill, learning and decision errors suggests that the selection bias term
            [   ]
         ES  2S, in equation (7) will be smaller for more skilled workers. The functional form

         of equation (7) thus implies that the labor market return to cognitive skill will be in-
         creasing in experience, and will increase faster in decision-intensive occupations. I test
         this using panel data from the NLS surveys where I can observe cognitive skill directly,
         and I estimate models of earnings growth that allow for within-worker complementar-
         ity between cognitive skill, decision intensity and work experience. I also show direct
         evidence that excessive risk aversion generates an earnings penalty that increases with
         work experience and is greater in decision-intensive occupations.



3        Results

3.1       Decision-making and work experience

The first prediction of the model is that firms requring more decision-making will seek to hire
more experienced and more highly skilled workers. I test this prediction using job vacancy
    18
     As shown in the previous footnote, the second derivative of equation (4) with respect to n is always
                               2
negative, and is increasing in   as well as n. This implies that the age-earnings profile becomes less concave
as the variance of task output increases.

                                                     16
data from Burning Glass Technologies (BGT), an employment analytics and labor market
information firm that scrapes job vacancy data from more than 40,000 online job boards
and company websites. BGT applies an algorithm to the raw scraped data that removes
duplicate postings and parses the data into a number of fields, including job title and six
digit Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) code, industry, employer name, location,
and education and work experience. BG translates key words and phrases from job ads into
a large number of unique skill requirements. I use an extract of BG data that cover the
2007-2019 period. Following Deming and Noray (2020), I exclude vacancies with missing
employers and employ a pruning algorithm to create unique employer IDs.19
    I construct a vacancy-level measure of decision-making intensity by creating an indicator
variable that is equal to one if the vacancy includes one of several key words or phrases that
relate to decision-making.20 The results are not sensitive to other reasonable choices such as
using only the word "decision" itself.
    Figure 3 presents scatterplots of the establishment (firm-by-MSA) level correlation be-
tween the share of vacancies requiring decision-making and experience (Panel A) and ed-
ucation (Panel B) requirements. I restrict the sample to establishments with 500 or more
vacancies over the entire period for ease of presentation. Panel A shows a strong positive cor-
relation ( = 0.59) between decision-making and average years of experience required. Panel
B shows a similarly strong relationship ( = 0.65) between decision-making and requiring
at least a bachelor's degree. Figure 3 shows that firms require higher levels of education and
experience in jobs that also require decision-making and problem solving.21
   19
      Several existing studies discuss the coverage of BG data and comparisons to other sources such as the
Job Openings and Labor Force Turnover (JOLTS) survey (Hershbein and Kahn 2018, Deming and Kahn
2018, Deming and Noray 2020). The algorithm eliminates common words and word fragments such as "Inc",
"LLC", and "Corp" from the firm name field.
   20
      BGT classify vacancy text into thousand of unique job skills, and I create the decision-making variable
using the key words and phrases "decision-making', "problem-solving", "diagnosing", "judgment", "strate-
gize", "planning", "prioritizing", "goals", and "project management" plus closely relate word stems. As
mentioned earlier, these closely map to three O*NET work activities associated with decision-making.
   21
      I also find positive correlations of around 0.35 between decision-making and education and experience
requirements when collapsing the data to occupation-by-establishment cells, where occupation is measured
by six digit SOC codes, suggesting that these relationships hold even with narrowly defined job categories.



                                                     17
    I also estimate a vacancy-level regression of the decision-making variable on indicators for
experience requirements, controlling for metropolitan statistical area (MSA), employer, and
occupation fixed effects. The results are in Figure 4. Jobs that require more work experience
are much more likely to also require decision-making. The decision-making share increases
from 22 percent at zero years of experience to 50 percent at five years of experience, and
then levels off. This finding holds even when controlling for establishment fixed effects (the
dashed line) and for six digit SOC-by-establishment fixed effects (the dotted line).22
    Bayer and Kuhn (2019) show that increases in complexity, autonomy and responsibility
- what they call job levels - explain a substantial share of within-occupation wage dispersion
as workers gain experience.23 Job levels are not directly measured in commonly used U.S.
data sources, but the results in Figure 4 are consistent with a job levels interpretation and
suggest that we should expect to find increases in decision intensity within occupations as
workers gain experience.
    I compare the decision-making variable from BGT data to publicly available data from the
Occupational Information Network (O*NET), a survey administered by the U.S. Department
of Labor to a random sample of U.S. workers in each occupation. I create a measure of
decision-making intensity in the O*NET data using a simple average of the three work
activities also used in Figure 2 - making decisions and solving problems, developing objectives
and strategies, and planning and prioritizing work. The labor supply-weighted occupation-
level correlation between the BGT and O*NET measures of decision-making intensity is
0.83.
    Appendix Figure A1 shows a scatterplot of the relationship between BG and O*NET
measures of decision intensity for each three digit SOC code. The three digit SOC codes
   22
      The results in Figure 4 also hold when substituting the actual job title for 6 digit SOC code and
controlling for job title-firm-MSA fixed effects.
   23
      Pierce (1999) and the appendix material in Bayer and Kuhn (2019) explore data on job levels collected
by the U.S. Department of Labor's National Compensation Survey (NCS). The NCS assigns job levels by
evaluating jobs in terms of required knowledge, job controls and complexity, personal contacts, and physical
environment. They find that wages rise with job level, even within occupation categories, and that variation
in average job level across occupations explains a substantial share of occupation wage premia.



                                                    18
with the highest decision intensity are all managerial occupations. Other than management,
the most decision-intensive occupation categories are business operations and financial spe-
cialists, and the lowest are entertainment attendants, food and beverage workers, and per-
sonal service workers. Non-retail sales, health technologists, and pilots are examples of jobs
that pay above-median wages but have relatively low decision intensity. Because the BGT
and O*NET data yield such similar results, I use the publicly available O*NET measures of
decision intensity in the analyses below to increase transparency and replicability.24
    Appendix Table A1 shows averages by 3 digit SOC code of decision intensity, the share
of workers with a bachelors degree, and mean wage and salary income, all measured as
of the 2018 ACS. While education, earnings and decision intensity are strongly correlated
across occupations, substantial variation remains. Occupations with below-average or average
decision-intensity but high levels of education and earnings include Business Operations
Specialists, Financial Specialists, Healthcare Practitioners (include doctors and dentists)
and Sales Representatives.


3.2     The outward shift in U.S. age-earnings profiles since 1960

I estimate age-earnings profiles using data from the 1960 to 2000 U.S. Census and the
2007­2018 American Community Surveys (ACS), extracted from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series (IPUMS) 1 percent samples (Ruggles et al. 2017). To maximize consistency
across years, I restrict the sample to workers age 20 to 59 who are not living in group
quarters and not enrolled in school. I harmonize occupation codes across sample years using
the "occ1990dd" classification system developed in Autor and Dorn (2013) and extended
by Deming (2017). The main outcome is the natural log of inflation-adjusted annual wage
   24
      An alternative approach would be to use an occupation-level measure of routineness, following the task
literature (e.g. Autor et al. 2003). The occupation-level correlation between decision-intensity and a direct
measure of routineness is -0.69, and the main results are similar if I substitute routineness for decision
intensity as a way of classifying occupations. I prefer decision intensity because it maps directly to the
conceptual framework above, and because manual and cognitive routineness are not easy to separate in
O*NET data. For example, the most relevant O*NET job characteristic for capturing routineness is "How
important is repeating the same physical activities or mental activities over and over, without stopping to
performing this job?", which mixes both concepts together.

                                                     19
and salary income, and all results use Census/ACS weights multiplied by the share of weeks
worked the previous year to make them nationally representative of the working population.
   The second prediction of the model is that the return to work experience is positive and
concave. This is consistent with a large body of evidence showing rapid early-career wage
growth (Topel 1991, Topel and Ward 1992, Neal 1999, Dustmann and Meghir 2005, Jeong
et al. 2015).
   Figure 5 shows how life-cycle earnings growth in the U.S. has changed over the past
sixty years. Following Lagakos et al. (2018), I group respondents in the 1960, 1980 and 2000
Censuses and the 2007-2009 and 2016-2018 ACS into five-year age bins and estimate log
earnings differences relative to the age 20-24 group, controlling for year fixed effects.
   Age-earnings profiles in the U.S. in 1960 are similar to what Lagakos et al. (2018) find for
Mexico over the 1990-2010 period. Earnings growth peaks at about 40 percent when workers
are in their late thirties and early forties. This peak is followed by a gradual decline of about
10 percentage points over the next twenty years of age. The 1980 profile is shifted upward,
with a peak around 50 percent, but is otherwise similar to 1960.
   By 2000, U.S. age earnings profiles had shifted outward dramatically, with a higher peak
that occurs much later in the life-cycle. In 2000, full-time workers age 50-54 earned about 90
percent more than full-time workers age 20-24. In 2017, earnings growth peaked at nearly
100 percent and workers age 55-59 were earning substantially more than workers in their
30s.
   The demographics of the U.S. workforce have changed substantially over the last half-
century, with higher rates of female labor force participation and pronounced growth in
educational attainment (e.g. Goldin et al. 2006, Blau and Kahn 2017). Appendix Figure A2
shows age-earnings profiles by decade, separately for high school graduates (Panel A) and
for workers with at least some college education (Panel B).
   Life-cycle wage growth is much greater overall for college-educated workers. Yet there
have been substantial increases in life-cycle wage growth since 1960 for both education


                                               20
groups, as well as a shift in the peak age of earnings from the early 40s to the mid-50s.
Appendix Figures A3 and A4 show splits by gender and race respectively. While the out-
ward shift in age-earnings profiles is more pronounced for men and for whites, the basic
pattern holds for all demographic groups.
    I adjust for demographic change more systematically with a non-parametric decomposi-
tion exercise that shifts only the occupation distribution across decades, holding other factors
constant. I collapse mean earnings in Census and ACS data into age-race-sex-education-
occupation cells and compute labor supply shares for each year. I then hold earnings con-
stant for each demographic group and year, but adjust the occupation weights to reflect the
composition of jobs in each decade.
    The results are in Figure 6. The solid lines show age-earnings profiles in 1960 and 2017,
using the true occupation distribution for each year. The dashed line shows how age-earnings
profiles would look if earnings by age, race, sex and education were held at their 1960 levels,
but occupations shifted to their 2017 frequencies for each cell. Life-cycle earnings look very
similar through age 35, but then start to diverge noticeably, with counterfactual earnings
about 15 to 20 percent higher after age 45. The dotted line shows the impact of holding
earnings by demographic group at their 1980 levels, and the dashed-dotted line shows the
same thing for 2000. Figure 6 shows that the shifting occupation distribution explains about
half of the outward shift in U.S. age earnings profiles between 1980 and 2017, and nearly all
of the change since 2000.25


3.3    Greater wage growth in decision-intensive occupations

Which occupations are responsible for the outward shift in U.S. age-earnings profiles? Figure
7 shows that life-cycle earnings growth after age 35 is much greater in decision-intensive
occupations. I regress log earnings on five-year age group by census year bins, controlling also
  25
     The inflation-adjusted earnings peak in 1960 was $40,338 and $65,641 in 2017, compared to $54,815 for
the 1980 simulated distribution and $65,370 for 2000. (54,815-40,338)/(65,641-40,338) = 57.2 percent and
(65,370-40,338)/(65,641-40,338) = 98.9 percent.



                                                   21
for year-sex-race-education interactions. I then estimate separate regressions for occupations
that are in the bottom and top quartiles of the O*NET decision intensity variable described
in Section 3.1. Panels A through D present results for 1960, 1980, 2000 and 2017 respectively.
   Across all decades, mid-career earnings growth is substantially higher in decision-intensive
occupations even after controlling for demographics. In 1960, workers in decision-intensive
occupations experienced more than 15 percentage points of cumulative wage growth after
age 35, compared to small declines in occupations where decision-making is less important.
This basic pattern holds all the way through 2017, where wage growth after age 35 is twice
as fast in decision-intensive occupations.
   Cross-sectional comparisons of age-earnings profiles have at least two potential sources of
bias. First, workers with higher potential earnings growth might sort into decision-intensive
occupations over the life-cycle. The second concern is that there might be differences by
cohort in potential earnings growth. For example, some of the outward shift in age-earnings
profiles since 1960 might be explained by improvements in childhood and adult health which
enable workers to remain more productive as they age.
   I address both of these sources of potential bias by studying individual age-earnings
profiles using longitudinal data from the 1966/67, 1979 and 1997 waves of the National
Longitudinal Surveys (NLS). The oldest NLS cohort follows men and women age 14-24 in
1966 and 1967 respectively. The NLSY-79 starts with a sample of youth ages 14 to 22 in 1979,
while the NLSY-97 starts with youth age 12­16 in 1997. The NLS surveyed women through
2003 but men only through 1981, at either annual or biannual intervals. The NLSY-79 was
collected annually from 1979 to 1993 and biannually through 2017, whereas the NLSY-97
was always biannual.
   Each survey collects detailed measures of pre-market skills, schooling experiences, occu-
pations and wages. The oldest NLS cohort combines information from a variety of different
aptitude and achievement tests into a standardized composite score.26 The NLSY-79 and
  26
     https://www.nlsinfo.org/content/cohorts/older-and-young-men/topical-guide/education/aptitude-
achievement-and-intelligence


                                                 22
NLSY-97 measure aptitude using the Armed Forces Qualifying Test (AFQT), and I adopt
the crosswalk developed by Altonji et al. (2012) to make the AFQT scores comparable across
surveys. I normalize the aptitude measures within each NLS survey, and I map occupation
codes from each survey to the "occ1990dd" crosswalk so that they are consistent across
waves.27 The main outcome is the real log hourly wage (in constant 2017 dollars), and I trim
values that are below 3 and above 200, following Altonji et al. (2012).
    Workers originally surveyed in the NLSY-79 are now in their mid to late 50s, making this
by far the longest panel of the three. Both the original NLS and the NLSY-97 only allow
me to track earnings through age 40, so I use the NLSY-79 as the main sample for these
analyses and compare differences across cohorts in Section 4.
    I first produce a parallel analysis to Figure 7, which estimates age-earnings profiles for
occupations in the bottom vs top quartile of decision intensity. I regress log wages on inter-
actions between age and the decision intensity of a worker's occupation, controlling for year,
occupation and individual fixed effects. This shows how an individual worker's earnings shift
when they switch into and out of decision-intensive occupations. The baseline model is:


                                       A
               ln (wageijt ) = 0 +          [a aijt + a (aijt  dijt )] + i + j + t + ijt                    (8)
                                        a

    where a indexes four-year age bins, i indexes individuals, j indexes occupations and t
indexes year. The decision intensity of an occupation (dijt ) is measured on a 0-10 scale with
5 being the decision intensity of the median (50th percentile) occupation in 2017.
    The results are in Figure 8. The figure plots implied values for occupations at the 25th
(solid line) and 75th (dashed line) percentiles of decision intensity, while the table below
shows the actual regression coefficients on age and age-by-decision intensity interactions.
Consistent with Figure 7, I find that no wage growth after age 40 for workers in 25th
percentile decision-intensive occupations. The coefficients imply that a 10 percentile increase
   27
      Altonji et al. (2012)construct a mapping of the AFQT score across NLSY waves that is designed to
account for differences in age-at-test, test format and other idiosyncracies. I take the raw scores from Altonji
et al. (2012) and normalize them to have mean zero and standard deviation one.


                                                      23
in occupation decision intensity increases wage growth by about 4 percentage points between
the ages of 35 and 55. All of the coefficients on the age-by-decision intensity interactions are
statistically significant at the less than one percent level, and they grow substantially with
time.
   Appendix Table A2 presents the age-by-decision intensity interactions for various sub-
samples of the NLSY79, including race, gender and education. Wage growth is substantially
greater in decision-intensive jobs for all of these demographic groups. Appendix Table A2
also presents results that divide the sample into professional, managerial and technical oc-
cupations versus all other occupations. The same pattern broadly holds in both subsamples,
although the absolute value of wage growth is substantially greater in higher-skilled occu-
pations. The table also shows that the main results are robust to controlling for employer
tenure in addition to the other terms in equation (8). Finally, I also presents results that
include interactions between age and nonroutine analytical (math) intensity, following Au-
tor et al. (2003) and Deming (2017). Including both sets of interactions does not change the
results in Figure 8 at all, and the interactions between age and mathematical intensity are
negative and not statistically significant. This suggests that decision-making, rather than
general analytical skills, is the key predictor of life-cycle wage growth.


3.4     Complementarity between cognitive skill, decision intensity,

        and work experience

The fourth prediction of the model is that cognitive skill, decision intensity, and work expe-
rience are complements. I test this using panel data from the NLSY-79, in a model similar
to equation (8) but adding interactions with cognitive skills:



                    A
ln (wageijt ) = 0 +   [a aijt + a (aijt  dijt ) + a (aijt  cogi ) + a (aijt  dijt  cogi )]+i +j +t +ijt
                     a
                                                                                            (9)

                                               24
   where cogi indexes the cognitive skill of worker i as measured by AFQT scores, and
the other terms are defined similarly to equation (8). Figure 9 plots the implied coefficients
for workers with low (-1 ) vs. high (+1 ) AFQT scores and in low (25th percentile) vs.
high (75th percentile) decision-intensity occupations. The solid and dashed lines show age-
earnings profiles for low and high decision-intensity jobs respectively, and the circles and
squares show results for workers with low vs. high AFQT scores respectively.
   There are three important takeaways from Figure 9. First, higher cognitive skill increases
earnings, with relatively greater impacts as workers age. A one standard deviation increase
in cognitive skill increases earnings by 5.3 percent at ages 24-27 and 8.2 percent at ages
56 to 59, and I can reject equality of the a coefficients at the less than one percent level.
Second, the relative returns to working in a decision-intensive occupation are small initially
but grow substantially over the life cycle, with greater convexity for high ability workers. A
ten percentile point increase in decision intensity increases earnings by 0.7 percent at ages
24-27 and 6.3 percent at ages 56-59, and again we can reject equality of the a coefficients
at the less than one percent level.
   Third, Figure 9 shows strong evidence of complementarity between cognitive skill, de-
cision intensity and work experience, confirming the fourth prediction of the model. High
ability workers in decision-intensive jobs pull farther away from other workers as they age.
All of the a coefficients on the three-way interaction term are statistically significant at the
less than one percent level, and we can reject that they are equal to each other at the less
than one percent level.
   Appendix Figures A5 through A8 present results that plot estimates of equation (9) by
gender and educational attainment. The patterns are stronger for men and for college atten-
dees, but I find evidence of complementarity in all four subgroups. The results in Figure 9 are
also robust to controlling for interactions with the mathematical intensity of occupations.
   Appendix Figure A9 presents results of models similar to equation (9), except replacing




                                              25
cognitive abiilty with a self-reported measure of risk tolerance.28 I find that higher risk
tolerance has little or no payoff in low decision jobs, but has a statistically significant return
in high decision jobs that grows with age.
    To construct formal statistical tests of the patterns shown in Figure 9, I estimate versions
of equation (9) using data from the NLSY79, but with linear interactions between age,
decision intensity, and cognitive ability. The results are in Table 1. Column 1 presents the
simplest model, with age and age interacted with AFQT score. Earnings grow 0.54 percent
faster per year for workers with one standard deviation higher cognitive ability. Column 2
includes two-way interactions between age, cognitive ability and the decision intensity of a
worker's occupation. The return to decision-intensive occupations increases by 0.14 percent
per year, and workers with higher cognitive ability earn relatively greater returns in these
jobs.
    Column 3 adds the three-way interaction between age, cognitive ability and decision-
intensity, and the interaction term is positive and statistically significant at the less than one
percent level. Column 4 repeats Column 3 but replaces cognitive ability with risk tolerance.
The three-way interaction is statistically significant at the less than one percent level. Column
5 shows that both measures have independent predictive power for earnings in ways that are
consistent with the predictions of the model. The three-way interaction terms for cognitive
ability and risk tolerance are both statistically significant at the less than one percent level,
and interestingly the individual correlation between the two measures is almost exactly zero.
   28
      The question asks NLSY respondents to "Rate yourself from 0 to 10, where 0 means `unwilling to take
any risks' and 10 means `fully prepared to take risks'." I estimate equation (9)replacing cognitive ability with
a categorical variable that is equal to 1 if respondents answer 0-3 (unwilling), 1 if they answer 4-6 (middle),
and 2 if they answer 7-10 (fully prepared),. Results are not sensitive to other groupings.




                                                      26
4     Implications

4.1    Technological Replacement of Routine Tasks

Figure 2 shows that the demand for decision-making began to increase rapidly in the 1990s,
right around the time that computers and information and communication technology (ICT)
made their way into the workplace. Several studies show that ICT increases the demand for
worker autonomy by producing large amounts of data and depending on workers to analyze
it and react, which decentralizes firm-level decision-making and increases the breadth of
workers' responsibilities (e.g. Lindbeck and Snower 2000, Bresnahan et al. 2002, Dessein
and Santos 2006). Autor et al. (2002) find that the use of automated check imaging in a
retail bank reorganized work, eliminating the routine job of check processing but increasing
the complexity and autonomy of jobs dealing with nonroutine exceptions such as repeated
customer overdrafts. Bartel et al. (2007) find that the introduction of computer numerically
controlled (CNC) machines in a valve manufacturing plant automated manual tasks related
to valve cutting and machining but increased firms' demand for workers who can problem-
solve and troubleshoot unforeseen issues.
    Recall that in the model in Section 2, firms choose the level of worker autonomy 
that maximizes profits, which suggests that they will hire workers to perform non-routine
tasks  (Xj ) only when the benefits relative to routine tasks 0 exceed the costs of worker
prediction error.
    Assume now that firms can choose to employ capital rather than labor, but that capital
can only perform 0 type tasks, where everything is scripted in advance and no adaptation
is necessary. Following Autor et al. (2003), assume further that the price of routine-replacing
computer capital is declining exogenously over time, which increases the productivity per unit
cost of capital in type 0 tasks. Under these assumptions, firms will optimally shift production
toward routine tasks overall, and these tasks will increasingly be done by machines. However,
a higher share of the total work performed by humans will be nonroutine, which will increase


                                              27
the relative returns to cognitive skills and work experience.29
    I test this implication of the model by comparing the returns to work experience, decision
intensity and cognitive skill across all three waves of the NLS. I estimate models like equation
(9) above, but in the pooled NLS data and adding interactions between the variables above
and indicators for each sample wave. To maintain consistency acros NLS waves I restrict the
sample to ages 20 to 40 only.
    The results are in Table 2. Column 1 shows that the economic return to working in
decision-intensive occupations has grown over time. A 10 percentile point increase in decision
intensity increased earnings by 2.2 percent for respondents in the 1966 NLS cohort, 3.1
percent in the NLSY79 cohort, and 5.7 percent in the NLSY97. Column 2 adds interactions
between decision intensity and age. The complementarity between age and decision intensity
is substantially greater in later waves, and we can reject equality of these coefficients at the
less than one percent level. Column 3 includes three-way interactions between age, cognitive
ability and NLS wave. The complementarity between age and cognitive ability is much
greater in later years, and again we can reject equality of these coefficients at the less than
one percent level.
    Column 4 adds four-way interactions between age, decision intensity, cognitive ability
and cohort. The three-way complementarity between age, decision intensity and cognitive
ability grows stronger with each wave. Although the difference between the NLSY79 and
NLSY97 is not statistically significant, we can reject the difference between the NLS 66 and
the other two at the 10 percent level (p = 0.083 and p = 0.063 for the NLSY79 and NLSY97
respectively). The coefficients imply that the difference in economic returns to decision-
   29
     Suppose there is a continuous distribution of labor productivity in type  (Xj ) tasks and of both labor
                                                                         L        K
and capital productivity in type 0 tasks, which we can denote as 0          and 0    respectively. Firms will
                                              K      L
employ capital for any particular task when 0 > 0 , which occurs for a growing share of tasks over time.
In aggregate, machines will perform a larger share of total tasks. However, any production function with
imperfect substitution across routine and non-routine task types will still include some type  (Xj ) tasks,
which can only be done by people. Thus a higher share of human tasks will be non-routine. This places a
greater premium on workers with higher levels of experience and cognitive ability, for the reasons outlined
in Section 2, and suggests that the magnitudes of the relationships predicted by the model will increase over
time.



                                                     28
intensive work are substantially greater in later cohorts, especially for workers with high
cognitive ability. The coefficients imply that the economic return to decision intensity for
high ability workers at age 40 increased from 22 percent for the 1966 cohort to 38 percent
for the 1997 cohort. Appendix Table A3 presents evidence that workers with high cognitive
ability are more likely to self-select into decision-intensive occupations over time.
   As pointed out by Autor (2015), machine learning and artificial intelligence differ from
other automation technologies because they "apply statistics and inductive reasoning to sup-
ply best-guess answers where formal procedural rules are unknown (Autor 2015). Agrawal
et al. (2018) model artificial intelligence as substituting for human prediction while comple-
menting human judgment. Business processes such as resume screening and demand forecast-
ing are prediction problems, and machines might make more accurate forecasts than their
human counterparts, although the net effect of machine prediction on jobs is theoretically
ambiguous (Agrawal et al. 2019a).
   The model provides some insights about how artificial intelligence could replace or alter
job tasks previously performed by people. For example, humans have capacity constraints
on the amount of data they can use to make predictions, which we could think of as a cap
on sample size n. Machine learning technologies, on the other hand, do not face the same
data processing constraints, and so all else equal they will make more accurate predictions.
   However, humans may have an advantage when not all of the relevant data are formally
codified. If people observe important decision-making context (Xj ) that is not formally col-
lected as data, they may outperform machines even after accounting for capacity constraints.
Since the magnitude of sample selection bias increases with data size, big data will still yield
poor predictions if it is non-representative or missing important features (Meng et al. 2018).
Overall, the increasing availability of big data and the falling cost of prediction suggests that
the value of work experience may decline relative to the ability to make good decisions by
minimizing sample selection bias.




                                               29
4.2    Education and Human Capital Development

Does education improve decision-making? Beginning with the Mincer equation, economists
mostly abstract away from decision-making and assume that education increases earnings
by improving job or task productivity directly (Mincer 1958, Becker 1962, Acemoglu and
Autor 2011). An older literature discusses the impact of education on allocative efficiency.
Welch (1970) argues that the return to education consists of two effects - the "worker effect",
which encompasses the impact of education on factor productivity, and an "allocative effect",
where education improves the "ability to acquire and decode information about costs and
productive characteristics of other inputs" (Welch 1970).
   Several studies have found that educated farmers are more likely to adopt productivity-
enhancing new technologies (Huffman 1974, 1977, Ram 1980, Yang 2004). Nelson and Phelps
(1966) hypothesize that education improves one's ability to adapt to change, and they distin-
guish between the impact of education on "the completely routinized job" compared to jobs
where more autonomy and innovation is required. This idea is closely related to the model's
conception of sample selection bias, where skilled workers are better able to learn the right
lessons from past experiences. There is also a large literature suggesting that more educated
managers are more strategically adept and make better decisions (Bloom and Van Reenen
2010, Goldfarb and Xiao 2011, Hortaçsu et al. 2019).
   To investigate the role of education, I estimate versions of equation (9) that replace
cognitive ability with years of completed education, as well as models that include both
sets of interactions. Appendix Table A4 presents results in the format of Table 1, replacing
cognitive ability with education. while Appendix Table A5 looks at changes in the return
to education by NLS wave following the format of Table 2. Finally, Appendix Table A6
examines the trend across cohorts in selection into decision-intensive occupations among
more educated workers. The bottom line is that almost all of the results I find for cognitive
ability also extend to years of completed education, suggesting that education may also
improve decision-making skill.


                                              30
    The relationship between education and decision-making has important implications for
skill development and curriculum design. Deming and Noray (2020) find that the earnings
premium for college graduates majoring in technology-intensive subjects diminishes with ex-
perience, mostly because other majors catch up rapidly. One possible explanation is that a
general liberal arts college curriculum teaches "soft" skills like problem-solving and critical
thinking that improve graduates' ability to make decisions and adapt to unfamiliar environ-
ments (NACE 2020). More generally, styles of teaching management such as the case method
are consistent with education improving the ability to make accurate predictions about the
future from data about the past.



5    Conclusion

This paper presents evidence of the growing importance of worker decision-making. Modern
jobs increasingly require workers to adapt to unforeseen circumstances and to solve abstract,
unscripted problems without employer oversight. As automation technology progresses, ma-
chines can increasingly perform any pre-scripted task better than a person, which leaves
non-routine, open-ended tasks as the domain of human labor.
    I formalize this insight with a simple model of decision-making on the job. The output of
a job task depends on a set of background variables, or "context", which are only imperfectly
observed. Workers predict the likely output of an action using a sample of data from their
past experiences. As workers gain experience, their predictions become more accurate, which
improves productivity as they are better able to adapt their actions to local context.
    The model predicts that the return to work experience will depend on the variability of
task output. In routine jobs, the mapping between context and output is easily predictable,
and thus work experience accumulates quickly and has limited value. Work experience takes
longer to accumulate in high-variance contexts, which implies a longer and more gradual
period of earnings growth in non-routine, decision-intensive occupations.



                                              31
   Using repeated cross-sections from the Census and ACS and panel data from three waves
of the NLS, I show that wage growth after age 35 is substantially greater in decision-intensive
occupations. Moreover, rapid relative employment growth in these occupations has shifted
the U.S. age-earnings profile noticeably outward over the last half-century. Life-cycle earnings
growth has more doubled since 1960, and the peak age of earnings has shifted from the late
30s to the mid-50s. A simple decomposition exercise that accounts for demographic change
and rising educational attainment shows that the shift toward decision-intensive occupations
explains half of the outward shift in age-earnings profiles since 1980 and nearly all since 2000.
   The model also reveals a connection between cognitive ability, behavioral biases, and the
quality of worker decision-making. I formalize decision quality as the ability to make unbiased
inferences from data samples based on past experiences. Since a large body of evidence shows
that cognitive ability improves decision-making by reducing behavioral biases, the model
predicts that cognitive ability, work experience, and the decision intensity of an occupation
will be complements. I find strong supporting evidence for this prediction using individual
data on ability and earnings trajectories from the NLSY.
   Finally, I show that the economic return to working in decision-intensive jobs and the
complementarity between cognitive ability and decision-making is increasing over time. This
can be explained by technological change. Machines replace humans in a growing variety of
job tasks, but only when the environment is perfectly predictable. Advancements in automa-
tion technology crowd humans out of routine tasks, and the remaining tasks are open-ended
and increasingly dependent on worker adaptation (Autor et al. 2003, Autor 2015, Acemoglu
and Restrepo 2018).
   The growing value of decision-making on the job has important implications for educa-
tion, skill development and economic growth. In a world where most predictable, routine job
tasks are performed by machines, the remaining work is increasingly open-ended. Education
and training for open-ended work will naturally be more abstract and will focus on teach-
ing people how to process information and make decisions. Workers who know what to do


                                               32
without being directly managed are valuable because they can adapt their actions to local
context (Dessein and Santos 2006). This micro-level increase in allocative efficiency may help
explain variation in the returns to education and life-cycle patterns of wage growth across
countries at different stages of economic development (Manuelli and Seshadri 2014, Lagakos
et al. 2018).



References

Acemoglu, D. and Autor, D.: 2011, Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
  ment and earnings, Handbook of labor economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, pp. 1043­1171. 2.1, 8,
  2.3, 4.2

Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P.: 2018, The race between man and machine: Implications
  of technology for growth, factor shares, and employment, American Economic Review
  108(6), 1488­1542. 1, 5

Acemoglu, D. and Restrepo, P.: 2019, Automation and new tasks: How technology displaces
  and reinstates labor, Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2), 3­30. 1

Agrawal, A., Gans, J. and Goldfarb, A.: 2018, Prediction machines: the simple economics of
  artificial intelligence, Harvard Business Press. 1, 4.1

Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S. and Goldfarb, A.: 2019a, Artificial intelligence: the ambiguous labor
  market impact of automating prediction, Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2), 31­50.
  4.1

Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S. and Goldfarb, A.: 2019b, Exploring the impact of artificial intelli-
  gence: Prediction versus judgment, Information Economics and Policy 47, 1­6. 2

Altonji, J. G., Bharadwaj, P. and Lange, F.: 2012, Changes in the characteristics of american




                                              33
  youth: Implications for adult outcomes, Journal of Labor Economics 30(4), 783­828. 3.3,
  27

Andrews, I., Kitagawa, T. and McCloskey, A.: 2019, Inference on winners, Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research. 1, 2.3

Atalay, E., Phongthiengtham, P., Sotelo, S. and Tannenbaum, D.: 2020, The evolution of
  work in the united states, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12(2), 1­34.
  1, 4, 5

Autor, D.: 2015, Why are there still so many jobs? the history and future of workplace
  automation, Journal of economic perspectives 29(3), 3­30. 1, 4.1, 5

Autor, D. and Dorn, D.: 2013, The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
  the us labor market, American Economic Review 103(5), 1553­97. 2, 3.2

Autor, D. H., Levy, F. and Murnane, R. J.: 2002, Upstairs, downstairs: Computers and skills
  on two floors of a large bank, ILR Review 55(3), 432­447. 1, 2.3, 4.1

Autor, D. H., Levy, F. and Murnane, R. J.: 2003, The skill content of recent technological
  change: An empirical exploration, The Quarterly journal of economics 118(4), 1279­1333.
  1, 2.3, 24, 3.3, 4.1, 5

Baron, J.: 2000, Thinking and deciding, Cambridge University Press. 1

Bartel, A., Ichniowski, C. and Shaw, K.: 2007, How does information technology affect pro-
  ductivity? plant-level comparisons of product innovation, process improvement, and worker
  skills, The quarterly journal of Economics 122(4), 1721­1758. 1, 2.3, 4.1

Bartling, B., Fehr, E. and Schmidt, K. M.: 2012, Screening, competition, and job design:
  Economic origins of good jobs, American Economic Review 102(2), 834­64. 1

Bayer, C. and Kuhn, M.: 2019, Which ladder to climb? decomposing life cycle wage dynamics.
  1, 3.1, 23

                                            34
Bayer, R.-C. and Renou, L.: 2016, Logical abilities and behavior in strategic-form games,
  Journal of Economic Psychology 56, 39­59. 2.3

Becker, G. S.: 1962, Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis, Journal of political
  economy 70(5, Part 2), 9­49. 1, 2, 4.2

Ben-Porath, Y.: 1967, The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings, Journal
  of political economy 75(4, Part 1), 352­365. 2

Benjamin, D., Bodoh-Creed, A. and Rabin, M.: 2019, Base-rate neglect: Foundations and
  implications, Technical report, working paper. 2.3

Benjamin, D. J., Brown, S. A. and Shapiro, J. M.: 2013, Who is `behavioral'? cognitive ability
  and anomalous preferences, Journal of the European Economic Association 11(6), 1231­
  1255. 2.3

Blandin, A.: 2018, Learning by doing and ben-porath: Life-cycle predictions and policy im-
  plications, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 90, 220­235. 1, 2

Blandin, A. and Peterman, W. B.: 2019, Taxing capital? the importance of how human
  capital is accumulated, European Economic Review 119, 482­508. 1

Blau, F. D. and Kahn, L. M.: 2017, The gender wage gap: Extent, trends, and explanations,
  Journal of economic literature 55(3), 789­865. 3.2

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J.: 2010, Why do management practices differ across firms and
  countries?, Journal of economic perspectives 24(1), 203­24. 4.2

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J.: 2011, Human resource management and productivity, Hand-
  book of labor economics, Vol. 4, Elsevier, pp. 1697­1767. 2.3

Bolton, P. and Faure-Grimaud, A.: 2009, Thinking ahead: the decision problem, The Review
  of Economic Studies 76(4), 1205­1238. 13


                                             35
Bresnahan, T. F., Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L. M.: 2002, Information technology, workplace
  organization, and the demand for skilled labor: Firm-level evidence, The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 117(1), 339­376. 4.1

Burks, S. V., Carpenter, J. P., Goette, L. and Rustichini, A.: 2009, Cognitive skills affect
  economic preferences, strategic behavior, and job attachment, Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences 106(19), 7745­7750. 2.3

Burnham, T. C., Cesarini, D., Johannesson, M., Lichtenstein, P. and Wallace, B.: 2009,
  Higher cognitive ability is associated with lower entries in a p-beauty contest, Journal of
  Economic Behavior & Organization 72(1), 171­175. 2.3

Caplin, A. and Dean, M.: 2015, Revealed preference, rational inattention, and costly infor-
  mation acquisition, American Economic Review 105(7), 2183­2203. 13

Caroli, E. and Van Reenen, J.: 2001, Skill-biased organizational change? evidence from
  a panel of british and french establishments, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  116(4), 1449­1492. 2.3

Chan Jr, D. C., Gentzkow, M. and Yu, C.: 2019, Selection with variation in diagnostic skill:
  Evidence from radiologists, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 1

Chandra, A. and Staiger, D. O.: 2020, Identifying sources of inefficiency in healthcare, The
  quarterly journal of economics 135(2), 785­843. 1

Chang, Y., Gomes, J. F. and Schorfheide, F.: 2002, Learning-by-doing as a propagation
  mechanism, American Economic Review 92(5), 1498­1520. 1

Chin, A., Juhn, C. and Thompson, P.: 2006, Technical change and the demand for skills
  during the second industrial revolution: evidence from the merchant marine, 1891­1912,
  The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3), 572­578. 1

Chollet, F.: 2019, On the measure of intelligence, arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547 . 2.3

                                             36
Cokely, E. T., Feltz, A., Ghazal, S., Allan, J., Petrova, D. and Garcia-Retamero, R.: 2018,
  Decision making skill: From intelligence to numeracy and expertise, Cambridge handbook
  of expertise and expert performance pp. 476­505. 1

Currie, J. and MacLeod, W. B.: 2017, Diagnosing expertise: Human capital, decision making,
  and performance among physicians, Journal of labor economics 35(1), 1­43. 1

Deming, D. J.: 2017, The growing importance of social skills in the labor market, The Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 132(4), 1593­1640. 2, 3.2, 3.3

Deming, D. J. and Noray, K.: 2020, Earnings dynamics, changing job skills, and stem careers,
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(4), 1965­2005. 17, 3.1, 19, 4.2

Deming, D. and Kahn, L. B.: 2018, Skill requirements across firms and labor markets: Evi-
  dence from job postings for professionals, Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1), S337­S369.
  19

Dessein, W. and Santos, T.: 2006, Adaptive organizations, Journal of Political Economy
  114(5), 956­995. 1, 2.1, 9, 2.2, 4.1, 5

Dohmen, T., Falk, A., Huffman, D. and Sunde, U.: 2010, Are risk aversion and impatience
  related to cognitive ability?, American Economic Review 100(3), 1238­60. 1, 2.3

Dustmann, C. and Meghir, C.: 2005, Wages, experience and seniority, The Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies 72(1), 77­108. 3.2

Enke, B.: 2020, What you see is all there is, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  135(3), 1363­1398. 2.3

Enke, B. and Zimmermann, F.: 2019, Correlation neglect in belief formation, The Review of
  Economic Studies 86(1), 313­332. 2.3

Farboodi, M. and Veldkamp, L.: 2021, A growth model of the data economy, Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research. 1

                                            37
Foster, A. D. and Rosenzweig, M. R.: 1995, Learning by doing and learning from oth-
  ers: Human capital and technical change in agriculture, Journal of political Economy
  103(6), 1176­1209. 1

Frederick, S.: 2005, Cognitive reflection and decision making, Journal of Economic perspec-
  tives 19(4), 25­42. 2.3

Freeman, R. B.: 1979, The effect of demographic factors on age-earnings profiles. 6

Garicano, L. and Rossi-Hansberg, E.: 2006, Organization and inequality in a knowledge
  economy, The Quarterly journal of economics 121(4), 1383­1435. 1

Gathmann, C. and Schönberg, U.: 2010, How general is human capital? a task-based ap-
  proach, Journal of Labor Economics 28(1), 1­49. 1, 2.3

Gill, D. and Prowse, V.: 2016, Cognitive ability, character skills, and learning to play equi-
  librium: A level-k analysis, Journal of Political Economy 124(6), 1619­1676. 1, 2.3

Goldfarb, A. and Xiao, M.: 2011, Who thinks about the competition? managerial ability and
  strategic entry in us local telephone markets, American Economic Review 101(7), 3130­61.
  1, 4.2

Goldin, C., Katz, L. F. and Kuziemko, I.: 2006, The homecoming of american college women:
  The reversal of the college gender gap, Journal of Economic perspectives 20(4), 133­156.
  3.2

Gopnik, A.: 2020, Childhood as a solution to explore­exploit tensions, Philosophical Trans-
  actions of the Royal Society B 375(1803), 20190502. 13

Guvenen, F., Karahan, F., Ozkan, S. and Song, J.: 2015, What do data on millions of
  us workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk?, Technical report, National Bureau of
  Economic Research. 1



                                             38
Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. J. and Todd, P. E.: 2003, Fifty years of mincer earnings regres-
  sions, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2

Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L. and Taber, C.: 1998, Explaining rising wage inequality: Explo-
  rations with a dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with heterogeneous
  agents, Review of economic dynamics 1(1), 1­58. 17

Heckman, J., Lochner, L. and Cossa, R.: 2002, Learning-by-doing vs. on-the-job training:
  Using variation induced by the eitc to distinguish between models of skill formation,
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 1

Hendricks, L.: 2013, The ben-porath model and age-wage profiles, Manuscript, University of
  North Carolina, Chapel Hill, January . 1, 2, 17

Hershbein, B. and Kahn, L. B.: 2018, Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technological
  change? evidence from vacancy postings, American Economic Review 108(7), 1737­72. 19

Hortaçsu, A., Luco, F., Puller, S. L. and Zhu, D.: 2019, Does strategic ability affect efficiency?
  evidence from electricity markets, American Economic Review 109(12), 4302­42. 1, 4.2

Huffman, W. E.: 1974, Decision making: The role of education, American Journal of Agri-
  cultural Economics 56(1), 85­97. 1, 4.2

Huffman, W. E.: 1977, Allocative efficiency: The role of human capital, The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics pp. 59­79. 1, 4.2

Imai, S. and Keane, M. P.: 2004, Intertemporal labor supply and human capital accumulation,
  International Economic Review 45(2), 601­641. 2

Jeong, H., Kim, Y. and Manovskii, I.: 2015, The price of experience, American Economic
  Review 105(2), 784­815. 3.2

Kambourov, G. and Manovskii, I.: 2009, Occupational specificity of human capital, Interna-
  tional Economic Review 50(1), 63­115. 1, 2.3

                                               39
Katz, L. F. and Murphy, K. M.: 1992, Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: supply and
  demand factors, The quarterly journal of economics 107(1), 35­78. 6

Lagakos, D., Moll, B., Porzio, T., Qian, N. and Schoellman, T.: 2018, Life cycle wage growth
  across countries, Journal of Political Economy 126(2), 797­849. 1, 6, 2, 3.2, 5

Lemieux, T.: 2006, The "mincer equation" thirty years after schooling, experience, and earn-
  ings, Jacob Mincer a pioneer of modern labor economics, Springer, pp. 127­145. 1

Lindbeck, A. and Snower, D. J.: 2000, Multitask learning and the reorganization of work:
  From tayloristic to holistic organization, Journal of labor economics 18(3), 353­376. 4.1

Lise, J. and Postel-Vinay, F.: 2020, Multidimensional skills, sorting, and human capital
  accumulation, American Economic Review 110(8), 2328­76. 1

Manuelli, R. E. and Seshadri, A.: 2014, Human capital and the wealth of nations, American
  economic review 104(9), 2736­62. 1, 17, 5

Meng, X.-L. et al.: 2018, Statistical paradises and paradoxes in big data (i): Law of large
  populations, big data paradox, and the 2016 us presidential election, Annals of Applied
  Statistics 12(2), 685­726. 10, 4.1

Mincer, J.: 1958, Investment in human capital and personal income distribution, Journal of
  political economy 66(4), 281­302. 1, 4.2

Murphy, K. M. and Welch, F.: 1990, Empirical age-earnings profiles, Journal of Labor eco-
  nomics 8(2), 202­229. 1, 2

NACE: 2020, Job Outlook 2020, National Association of Colleges and Employers. 1, 4.2

Neal, D.: 1999, The complexity of job mobility among young men, Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 17(2), 237­261. 3.2




                                              40
Nelson, R. R. and Phelps, E. S.: 1966, Investment in humans, technological diffusion, and
  economic growth, The American economic review 56(1/2), 69­75. 1, 2.1, 2.3, 4.2

Oechssler, J., Roider, A. and Schmitz, P. W.: 2009, Cognitive abilities and behavioral biases,
  Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 72(1), 147­152. 2.3

Pavan, R.: 2011, Career choice and wage growth, Journal of Labor Economics 29(3), 549­587.
  2.3

Pierce, B.: 1999, Using the national compensation survey to predict wage rates, Compensa-
  tion and Working Conditions 4(4), 8­16. 23

Rabin, M. and Thaler, R. H.: 2001, Anomalies: risk aversion, Journal of Economic perspec-
  tives 15(1), 219­232. 1, 2.3

Ram, R.: 1980, Role of education in production: a slightly new approach, The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 95(2), 365­373. 1, 4.2

Robinson, C.: 2018, Occupational mobility, occupation distance, and specific human capital,
  Journal of Human Resources 53(2), 513­551. 2.3

Ruggles, S., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Grover, J. and Sobek, M.: 2017, Integrated public use
  microdata series: Version 6.0 [dataset]. minneapolis: University of minnesota, 2015. 3.2

Rustichini, A.: 2015, The role of intelligence in economic decision making, Current Opinion
  in Behavioral Sciences 5, 32­36. 1, 2.3

Shaw, K. L.: 1989, Life-cycle labor supply with human capital accumulation, International
  Economic Review pp. 431­456. 2

Stanovich, K. E. and West, R. F.: 2000, Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for
  the rationality debate?, Behavioral and brain sciences 23(5), 645­665. 1




                                             41
Stantcheva, S.: 2015, Learning and (or) doing: Human capital investments and optimal tax-
  ation, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research. 1

Sternberg, R. J.: 2013, Intelligence., John Wiley & Sons Inc. 2.3

Sternberg, R. J.: 2021, Adaptive intelligence. 2.3

Stinebrickner, R., Stinebrickner, T. and Sullivan, P.: 2019, Job tasks, time allocation, and
  wages, Journal of Labor Economics 37(2), 399­433. 1

Thaler, R. H.: 1988, Anomalies: The winner's curse, Journal of Economic Perspectives
  2(1), 191­202. 1, 2.3

Topel, R.: 1991, Specific capital, mobility, and wages: Wages rise with job seniority, Journal
  of political Economy 99(1), 145­176. 3.2

Topel, R. H. and Ward, M. P.: 1992, Job mobility and the careers of young men, The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2), 439­479. 3.2

Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D.: 1973, Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
  probability, Cognitive psychology 5(2), 207­232. 1, 2.3

Veldkamp, L. and Chung, C.: 2019, Data and the aggregate economy. 1

Welch, F.: 1970, Education in production, Journal of political economy 78(1), 35­59. 1, 2.1,
  4.2

Welch, F.: 1979, Effects of cohort size on earnings: The baby boom babies' financial bust,
  Journal of Political Economy 87(5, Part 2), S65­S97. 6

Yang, D. T.: 2004, Education and allocative efficiency: household income growth during rural
  reforms in china, Journal of Development Economics 74(1), 137­162. 1, 4.2




                                             42
                                               Figure 1

           Share of all Wages Paid to Management-Related Occupations
                  Wage bill calculated in Census/ACS and CPS data, 1960-2018
  .35
  .3
  .25
  .2
  .15




        1960         1970           1980           1990            2000        2008          2017
                                     Census / ACS                    March CPS


Notes: This figure shows the labor supply-weighted share of all wage and salary income paid to managerial
occupations between 1960 and 2020. The solid line shows data from the 1960-2000 U.S. Census and
pooled 3-year samples of the 2007-2009 and 2016-2018 American Community Surveys. The dashed line
shows data from the 1968-2020 Annual Social and Economic Supplement of the March CPS (ASEC).
Occupations are coded consistently using the "occ1990dd" crosswalk developed by Autor and Dorn (2013)
and extended by Deming (2017). To maximize consistency over time, the definition pools management
(codes 4 to 22) management support (codes 23 to 37) and all first-line supervisors together. See text for
details.
                                                  Figure 2

                  Share of All Jobs Requiring Decision-Making
                      Calculated using weighted job vacancy data, 1960-2018
  .35
  .3
  .25
  .2
  .15
  .1
  .05
  0




        1960         1970               1980           1990          2000        2007             2018

                            Atalay et al (2020) data            within occupation (3 digit SOC)
                            Burning Glass data                  within occupation (3 digit SOC)



Notes: This figure computes the labor supply-weighted share of all job vacancies that include key words
and phrases signaling a demand for worker decision-making ­ see the text for detailed definitions. The
solid line uses classified ad data collected by Atalay et al (2020) over the 1960-1999 period, while the
dashed line uses Burning Glass Technologies data from 2007 and 2010-2018. The data are weighted by
the actual occupation distribution in the nearest Census and ACS years, and are smoothed using a five-
year moving average. The grey lines below present the same series except controlling for occupation fixed
effects at the three-digit Standard Occupation Classification (SOC) level. I convert Census occupation
codes to SOC codes using a crosswalk developed by Atalay et al (2020).
                                                                                                Figure 3

                                                Firms Requiring Decision-Making have Higher Experience and Skill Requirements
                                                                      Panel A                                                  Panel B
                                                1




                                                                                                     1
 Share of vacancies requiring decision-making

                                                .8




                                                                                                     .8
                                                .6




                                                                                                     .6
                                                .4




                                                                                                     .4
                                                .2




                                                                                                     .2
                                                0




                                                                                                     0




                                                     0      2             4            6         8         0      .2            .4            .6            .8
                                                         Average years of experience required                  Share of vacancies requiring at least a BA




Notes: This figure presents scatterplots of the establishment-level correlation between the share of
vacancies requiring decision-making and experience (Panel A, =0.59) and education (Panel B, =0.65)
requirements. The data come from job vacancy postings collected by Burning Glass Technologies over the
2007-2018 period. An establishment is a firm name by metropolitan statistical area (MSA) pair. The sample
restricted to establishments with at least 500 total vacancies.
                                                 Figure 4
                   Demand for Decision-Making and Work Experience
                           Vacancy-level regression in Burning Glass Data
  .6
  .5
  .4
  .3
  .2




       0               2               4                6                 8          9-10            11+
                                           Years of Experience Required

                    Percent of vacancies requiring decision-making                Within firm and MSA
                    Within occupation, firm and MSA


Notes: This figure plots coefficients from a vacancy-level regression of an indicator for whether the job
requires decision-making on years of experience indicators, controlling for establishment (firm by
metropolitan statistical area (MSA)) or establishment by six-digit Standard Occupation Classification (SOC)
codes, as indicated. The data come from job vacancy postings collected by Burning Glass Technologies
over the 2007-2018 period.
                                                  Figure 5

                  Life-Cycle Wage Growth in the U.S. by Decade
                              Log earnings growth relative to age 20-24
   1
   .8
   .6
   .4
   .2
   0




        20-24        25-29          30-34       35-39         40-44         45-49        50-54         55-59
                                                        Age
                             1960                 1980                  2000                  2017


Notes: This figure presents results from a labor supply-weighted regression of log annual wage and
salary income on indicators for five-year age bins, controlling for year fixed effects. The sample is all full-
time workers ages 20-59 in the 1960-2000 U.S. Census and pooled 3-year samples of the 2016-2018
American Community Surveys.
                                                Figure 6

           Shifting Occupation Distribution Explains Trends in Life-Cycle Wage Growth
70k
60k
50k
40k
30k
20k




      20                      30                     40                       50                       60
                                                     Age

              1960 (actual)         1960 income, 2017 occ shares          1980 income, 2017 occ shares
               2000 income, 2017 occ shares            2017 (actual)


Notes: This figure presents results of a decomposition that holds inflation-adjusted wage and salary
income constant within age-race-sex-education-occupation cells, while adjusting employment shares to
match the occupation distribution in different years. The sample is all full-time workers ages 20-59 in the
1960-2000 U.S. Census and pooled 3-year samples of the 2016-2018 American Community Surveys.
Occupations are coded consistently using the "occ1990dd" crosswalk developed by Autor and Dorn
(2013) and extended by Deming (2017).
                                                                       Figure 7

                           Greater Wage Growth in Decision-Intensive Occupations
                                      Age-earnings profiles across Census and ACS years
                                         1960                                                                       1980




                                                                             .2 .4 .6 .8
   .2 .4 .6 .8




                                                                             0
   0




                   20-24      30-34             40-44          50-54                           20-24     30-34             40-44          50-54
                                          Age                                                                        Age
                            Low Decision Jobs           High Decision Jobs                             Low Decision Jobs           High Decision Jobs



                                         2000                                                                       2017
                                                                             0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1
   0 .2 .4 .6 .8




                   20-24      30-34             40-44          50-54                           20-24     30-34             40-44          50-54
                                          Age                                                                        Age
                            Low Decision Jobs           High Decision Jobs                             Low Decision Jobs           High Decision Jobs




Notes: This figure presents results from two separate regressions of log annual wage and salary income
on indicators for five-year age bins and year fixed effects, restricting the sample to occupations in the 25th
percentile or below (the solid line) and the 75th percentile or above (the dashed line of decision intensity.
Decision intensity is the average of three task variables related to decision-making from the Occupational
Information Network (O*NET) survey ­ see the text for details. The sample is all full-time workers ages
20-59 in the 1960-2000 U.S. Census and pooled 3-year samples of the 2016-2018 American Community
Surveys (ACS). Each panel presents the coefficients from the indicated Census or ACS year.
                                                   Figure 8

       Higher Individual Worker Wage Growth in Decision-Intensive Occupations
                                   Log hourly wage growth in the NLSY79
 .75
 .6
 .45
 .3
 .15
 0




   20 to 23              28 to 31                36 to 39              44 to 47              52 to 55
                                                  Age (4 year bins)

                      25th percentile decision intensity                75th percentile decision intensity


               20 to 23 24 to 27    28 to 31 32 to 35 36 to 39 40 to 43 44 to 47 48 to 51   52 to 55    56 to 59
Age                0     0.121       0.129    0.113    0.228    0.264    0.247    0.222      0.218       0.205
                        [0.006]     [0.007] [0.008] [0.008] [0.009] [0.010] [0.010]         [0.012]     [0.018]
Decision * Age -0.002    0.019       0.032    0.046    0.058    0.054    0.062    0.076      0.079       0.087
               [0.005] [0.005]      [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005] [0.005]         [0.005]     [0.006]

Notes: The table presents estimates of a version of equation (9) in the paper, where the natural log of real
hourly wages is regressed on interactions with age and the decision intensity of a worker's occupation,
plus individual and occupation fixed effects. The figure presents the implied value of the coefficients for
occupations at the 25th and 75th percentile of decision intensity. The sample is comprised of youth ages
14-22 in 1979 and follows them through 2017. Decision intensity is the average of three O*NET task
variables related to decision-making - see the text for details. Standard errors are in brackets and are
clustered at the individual level.
                                                                          Figure 9

                                         Complementarity between Age, Decision Intensity and Cognitive Skill
                                .8
   Log wages relative to age 20-23
                                .6
                                .4
                                .2
                                0




                                     24 to 27            32 to 35                40 to 43                48 to 51                 56 to 59
                                                                             Age (4 year bins)

                                                 Low decision job, low cognitive skill           Low decision job, high cognitive skill
                                                 High decision job, low cognitive skill          High decision job, high cognitive skill



Notes: This figure presents implied values from the coefficients of an estimate of equation (9) in the paper,
with log hourly wages regressed on interactions between age, decision intensity and cognitive skill, plus
occupation, individual and year fixed effects. The figure plots implied wage growth in jobs at the 25th
percentile (solid line) and 75th percentile (dashed line) of decision intensity, and for workers with cognitive
skill one standard deviation below average (circles) and one standard deviation above average (squares).
The sample is youth ages 14-22 in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 cohort. Occupations
are coded consistently using the "occ1990dd" crosswalk developed by Autor and Dorn (2013) and
extended by Deming (2017). Decision intensity is the average of three O*NET task variables related to
decision-making ­ see the text for details. All the regression coefficients - including the three-way
interaction between age, decision intensity, and cognitive skill ­ are statistically significant at the less than
one percent level.
Table 1: Returns to Cognitive Skill and Risk Tolerance in Decision-Intensive Occupations
                                      (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)
Age                                 0.0140      0.0100     0.0100      0.0087     0.0104
                                   [0.0002] [0.0003] [0.0003] [0.0005] [0.0005]
Age * AFQT                          0.0054      0.0038     0.0031                 0.0029
                                   [0.0002] [0.0002] [0.0003]                   [0.0003]
Age * Decision                                  0.0014     0.0013      0.0014     0.0007
                                               [0.0001] [0.0001] [0.0002] [0.0002]
Decision                                       -0.0141     -0.0121    -0.0147     0.0030
                                               [0.0059] [0.0058] [0.0075] [0.0075]
Decision * AFQT                                 0.0143     0.0053                 0.0052
                                               [0.0011] [0.0033]                [0.0036]
Age * Decision * AFQT                                      0.0003                 0.0003
                                                          [0.0001]              [0.0001]
Age * Risk Tolerance                                                  -0.0007    -0.0007
                                                                      [0.0004] [0.0004]
Decision * Risk Tolerance                                             -0.0148    -0.0159
                                                                      [0.0043] [0.0043]
Age * Decision * Risk                                                  0.0005     0.0005
                                                                      [0.0001] [0.0001]
Notes: Each column presents estimates of a version of equation (9) in the paper, where the
natural log of real hourly wages is regressed on interactions with age, the decision intensity of a
worker's occupation, normalized AFQT scores, and/or self-reported risk tolerance, plus individual
and occupation fixed effects. See the text for details. The sample is comprised of youth ages 14-22
in 1979, and follows them through 2017. Decision intensity is the average of three O*NET task
variables related to decision-making, and risk tolerance is a categorical variable where 0/1/2 are
low/medium/high - see the text for details. Standard errors are in brackets and are clustered at
the individual level.
Table 2: Returns to Cognitive Skill and Decision Intensity by NLS Cohort
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)
Decision * NLS 66                     0.0222 -0.0317                 -0.0083
                                     [0.0015] [0.0059]               [0.0071]
Decision * NLSY79                     0.0311 -0.0640                 -0.0276
                                     [0.0010] [0.0043]               [0.0045]
Decision * NLSY97                     0.0571 -0.0528                  0.0007
                                     [0.0017] [0.0068]               [0.0079]
Age * Decision * NLS 66                         0.0019                0.0010
                                               [0.0002]              [0.0002]
Age * Decision * NLSY79                         0.0033                0.0018
                                               [0.0001]              [0.0002]
Age * Decision * NLSY97                         0.0041                0.0018
                                               [0.0002]              [0.0003]
Age * Cog * NLS 66                                         0.0063     0.0030
                                                          [0.0006] [0.0007]
Age * Cog * NLSY79                                         0.0110     0.0066
                                                          [0.0004] [0.0004]
Age * Cog * NLSY97                                         0.0159     0.0093
                                                          [0.0006] [0.0007]
Age * Decision * Cog * NLS 66                                        0.00036
                                                                    [0.00010]
Age * Decision * Cog * NLSY79                                        0.00048
                                                                    [0.00008]
Age * Decision * Cog * NLSY97                                        0.00053
                                                                    [0.00011]
F (decision * age) terms                             0.0000                  0.0184
F ( cog * age) terms                                             0.0000      0.0000
F (decision * cog * age) terms                                               0.1260
Notes: Each column presents estimates of a version of equation (9) in the paper,
where the natural log of real hourly wages is regressed on interactions with age, the
decision intensity of a worker's occupation, normalized IQ (NLS 66) or AFQT (NLSY79
and NLSY97) scores, and an indicator for survey cohort, plus individual and
occupation fixed effects. The coefficients on age interactions are suppressed to
conserve space. The sample is comprised of three different cohorts of youth ages 14-
22 in 1966, 1979 and 1997. I restrict the age range to 20-40 to keep the sample
consistent across survey waves. Decision intensity is the average of three O*NET task
variables related to decision-making - see the text for details. Standard errors are in
brackets and are clustered at the individual level.
