                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      USING SOCIAL MEDIA TO IDENTIFY THE EFFECTS OF CONGRESSIONAL
                     PARTISANSHIP ON ASSET PRICES

                                      Francesco Bianchi
                                        Howard Kung
                                     Roberto Gomez Cram

                                      Working Paper 28749
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28749


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




Lin Xie, and Sai Zhang provided excellent research assistantship. We thank the LBS AQR Asset
Management Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Francesco Bianchi, Howard Kung, and Roberto Gomez Cram. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Social Media to Identify the Effects of Congressional Partisanship on Asset Prices
Francesco Bianchi, Howard Kung, and Roberto Gomez Cram
NBER Working Paper No. 28749
April 2021
JEL No. D72,G14

                                         ABSTRACT

We measure the individual and collective viewpoints of US Congress members on various
economic policies by scraping their Twitter accounts. Tweets that criticize (support) a particular
company are associated with a significant negative (positive) stock price reaction in a narrow
time window around the tweet. A sharp partisan divide emerges, with Republicans and
Democrats coordinated in both their support and opposition for different industries emanating
from disparate legislative agendas. Members of congress coordinate within parties to push
legislation through their social media accounts. As an illustrative and relevant example, we
analyze the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 and document significant aggregate stock market
responses to the real-time evolution of partisan viewpoints about the bill.

Francesco Bianchi                               Roberto Gomez Cram
Social Sciences Building, 201B                  London Business School
Department of Economics                         Regent's Park
Duke University                                 London NW1 4SA
Box 90097                                       United Kingdom
Durham, NC 27708-0097                           rgomezcram@london.edu
and CEPR
and also NBER
francesco.bianchi@duke.edu

Howard Kung
London Business School
Regent's Park, Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
hkung@london.edu
1     Introduction
Social media platforms have become an increasingly important tool for politicians
to engage with the public and to coordinate among each other in real time. Both
federal and state elected government officials actively maintain social media accounts
by posting a large volume of content in a constant flow. For example, the members of
congress collectively average around 30,000 tweets per month, where 20% of those posts
communicate important stances on key economic agendas. 91% of these politicians tweet
about a trending economic issue each month, with such tweets often eliciting the greatest
amount of engagement and discord between Democrats and Republicans. Partisanship is
strongly exhibited by the coordination within parties to push key agendas collectively
through their social media accounts, with a particularly high volume of tweets relating
to proposed legislation occurring on the corresponding roll call day. In this paper, we
examine the informational content of tweets related to future economic policies, such as
tax reforms or antitrust interventions. Using high-frequency asset price data, we find
evidence that these tweets generate statistically significant movements in asset valuations,
suggesting revisions in market expectations about future policies.
    We measure individual and collective viewpoints about policy from the Twitter
accounts of a comprehensive panel of US politicians at high frequencies over the past
two election cycles to help address the following questions. How has partisanship among
individual politicians evolved over the past decade? How do politicians interact within
party and across party lines to achieve their policy objectives? To what extent can
politicians influence expectations about future policies and consequently the state of the
economy or the fortune of individual companies and industries? The answers to these
questions highlight how social media is an important way for politicians to communicate
their stance on policy in real time that can sway public opinion on key economic agendas.
    Strong patterns of partisanship emerge when the tweets by members of congress are
examined collectively. We find that Democrats and Republicans tend to direct support
and criticism at different industries and policies. When common topics are discussed by
both parties, there is substantial disagreement across parties but increasing solidarity
within. We find an increasing low-frequency trend in measures of partisanship, consistent

                                             1
with the evidence from congressional speeches documented in Gentzkow, Shapiro, and
Taddy (2019b). Over the presidential cycle, there is an increasing divergence in opinions
on economic agendas across party lines in the first two years of the presidential cycle,
leading to the mid-term elections, followed by a progressive decline in the last two years.
Politicians with a different (same) political affiliation as the incumbent president tend
to have a more negative (positive) outlook towards economic policies. Interestingly, a
reversal in general outlook occurs for the same politician when the political affiliation of
the president changes after an election. In sum, we find that there are rising differences
in viewpoints across parties, but increasing similarity within parties for a wide range of
economic agendas.
   We use a high-frequency identification approach to understand whether these partisan
viewpoints impact asset prices and market expectations about policies. Specifically, we
use tick-by-tick asset price data to check whether tweets by politicians can move asset
prices for individual companies and for the overall stock market. Given the strong degree
of partisanship among members of congress, individual politician tweets about a policy
or a company should encode valuable information about the overall stance of the party
affiliated with the politician.
   Our analysis begins by analyzing a large sample of tweets by members of congress
that explicitly target individual companies. We find that posts criticizing (supporting)
specific firms are associated with a statistically significant decrease (increase) in the stock
price of the targeted firm in a one-minute window around the tweet, and the results
are robust to various window lengths. Similar coefficient estimates are obtained if the
sample is restricted to only Democrat or only Republican politicians. More influential
politicians (committee chairs, party leaders of the house and senate) also have a larger
average impact. Overall, the significant stock price responses suggest that these tweets
induce revisions in market expectations about broader policy objectives, such as tax
reforms, regulation, and antitrust policies.
   The politician tweets about individual firms are then linked to broad economic
agendas by sorting them into groups based on industry. A clear partisan divide emerges
as Democrats tend to target different industries than Republicans and the politicians in
each party are highly unified in either their support or opposition for particular industries.
                                               2
For industries targeted by both parties, there is significant discord between parties,
indicative of a polarizing issue. For example, Republicans strongly support the banking
industry, while Democrats strongly oppose it. The tweets are also linked to specific policy
reforms by extracting the most common hashtags from the collection of social media
posts categorized at the industry-party level. The use of hashtags provides a direct and
clean way to identify the post's topic without requiring any estimation. We find clear
evidence that politician tweets that are critical (supportive) of firms within a particular
industry have negative (positive) effect on their stock prices.
   Members of congress also coordinate within parties to push or oppose specific legisla-
tion through their social media accounts. As an illustrative and relevant example, we
analyze the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Focusing on tweets related to a particular
policy reform allows us to study how partisan agendas affect market expectations about
the policy reform in real time as the legislative process unfolds. We focus on tweets by
members of congress relating to taxes as that is the policy instrument that is mentioned
the most in our sample. The intensity of the tweets surges in the months leading up to
the 2017 tax reform but with strongly opposing views across parties, identified through
hashtags. The tweets by Republicans (Democrats) are overwhelmingly supportive (crit-
ical) of tax cuts and we find that they have a positive (negative) impact on the stock
market. If the tweets relating the tax reform are from the accounts of politicians that
co-sponsored the bill, belonged to the Committee on Ways and Means, or on the Senate
Finance Committee, we find that the magnitude and statistical significance of the effects
to be enhanced.
   Our paper relates to the literature measuring partisanship on congressional and media
platforms. Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) and Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) analyze
partisanship and political polarization from media sources such as newspapers and cable
news. Greenstein and Zhu (2012) document Wikipedia entries lean Democrat on average.
Gentzkow et al. (2019b) and Jensen, Naidu, Kaplan, Wilse-Samson, Gergen, Zuckerman,
and Spirling (2012) measure partisanship in congressional speeches. Birney, Graetz, and
Shapiro (2006) examine the role of public opinion on political legislation. We complement
this literature by measuring congressional partisanship about economic agendas at high
frequencies from the social media accounts of members of congress and by studying the
                                            3
impact of the social media posts on stock prices. Our results provide support for the
view that social media can swing expectations about future policies and are therefore a
powerful communication tool to convey political views.
    Our methodological approach connects to a literature using textual analysis to extract
information that affects stock returns (e.g., Boudoukh, Feldman, Kogan, and Richardson
(2013), Buehlmaier and Whited (2018), Bianchi, Kind, and Kung (2019), Hoberg and
Moon (2019), Kelly, Manela, and Moreira (2019), and Gentzkow, Kelly, and Taddy
(2019a)) and high-frequency identification in macroeconomics (e.g., G¨
                                                                     urkaynak, Sack,
and Swanson (2005), Bernanke and Kuttner (2005) Nakamura and Steinsson (2018), and
Bianchi et al. (2019)).1 We build on this literature by highlighting that congressional
tweets about policy contain important information about stock prices and risk.
    More broadly, our work relates to papers examining the impact of partisanship on
stock returns (e.g., Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003), Belo, Gala, and Li (2013), Kelly,
P´
 astor, and Veronesi (2016), and P´
                                  astor and Veronesi (2020)). These papers focus on
linkages between the party of the incumbent president and aggregate stock returns. We
complement this literature but differ by focusing on how partisan agendas of members of
congress affect firm-level returns.



2        Data description
In this section, we provide an overview of the Twitter data used in our analysis. We first
explain how we select tweets and then document patterns in the data that reveal a clear
divide across party lines and fluctuations in the level of disagreement.


2.1       Congressional social media posts

Our primary data source is the complete set of tweets created by members of the U.S.
Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress to the 116th Congress.
The prevalence of social media posts as a congressional communication tool offers several
advantages in our empirical analysis relative to traditional mediums of communication.
    1
        See G¨
             urkaynak and Wright (2013) for a survey on high-frequency event studies in macroeconomics.


                                                    4
In particular, tweets are in a standardized format and they have a time stamp that is
accurate to the second. Both of these features allow us to directly measure the individual
congressional viewpoints at high frequencies.
   Every official, campaign, and personal account for each congressional member are
obtained from their congressional websites. We then append data on the state, party,
chamber, congressional committee, rank therein, and record their entire history of
legislative roll call votes. Moreover, to determine the political ideology of each member,
we use the DW-NOMINATE estimates of Carroll, Lewis, Lo, McCarty, Poole, and
Rosenthal (2015). DW-NOMINATE scores provide a measure of legislators' ideological
locations over time by estimating how similar their voting records are. Congress members
who did not list a Twitter account on their website or do not have a verified account
are dropped. On average, around 85 percent of the congressional accounts are captured.
Furthermore, information on institutional accounts that change hands between consecutive
congressional terms are not collected such that we can link each account to a single
legislator.
   To extract common messages from these posts, the text is passed through a series
of standard pre-processing steps. First, a list of common English words and common
phrases used in social media such as "Watch LIVE on" are removed.2 Second, URLs,
links to websites, image captions, and emojis are dropped. Third, posts that contain
photos or videos are eliminated, unless the posts have some useful text, such as a title or
a brief description. Finally, the text is converted to lowercase font, common contractions
expanded, and punctuation, hyphens, and apostrophes are deleted.
   Viewed collectively, politicians generate a large amount of social media content.
Overall, our dataset contains 2.5 million tweets from 740 different Twitter accounts. In
a median month, the median member of congress produces 42 tweets per month with
a total of 1,200 likes and retweets per tweet. Overall, these social media posts contain
77,000 unique words, written a total of 30 million times.
   2
       The list of common English words that we used is from the Python Natural Language Toolkit




                                                  5
2.1.1   Partisan viewpoints: Categorizing the posts

We aim to capture the subset of social media posts by members of congress that contain
their views about policy-related economic topics. To this end, we begin by selecting
posts that contain at least one keyword associated with the following six categories:
(1) government budget; (2) homeland security; (3) energy, commerce, and labor; (4)
regulation; (5) corporations; and (6) healthcare. Appendix A reports the complete set of
keywords included in each topic. Broadly, these posts capture directly the viewpoints
of politicians and cover a wide range of topics, including opinions about tax policy
(e.g., Rep Paul Ryan (SpeakerRyan) "An army of lobbyists will come to protect special
interest provisions & derail #TaxReform. But conservatives cannot shrink from this
moment." 12 Oct 2017, 14:05:44 EST, Tweet.) to stances about specific companies (e.g.,
Dem Elizabeth Warren (@ewarren) "Amazon has too much power. Under my plan to
#BreakUpBigTech , entrepreneurs would have a fighting chance to compete against tech
giants." 25 June 2019, 15:43:43, Tweet.)
   After assigning the economic topic for each tweet, the tone of the tweet is measured
(e.g., supportive, neutral, or critical stance on a particular policy), which is used to
compute the extent of partisanship across key economic topics. To systematically compute
the tone, lexicon developed by Loughran and McDonald (2011) is used to categorize tweets
that are supportive or critical for a specific policy-related economic topic. Loughran and
McDonald (2011) create word dictionaries of negative and positive words that account
for the nuances of finance jargon.3 Using these dictionaries, we then search for tweets
that contain positive and negative words. A social media post by a member of congress
is classified as `critical' (or has a negative outlook towards) the associated economic topic
if it includes at least one negative word. Similarly, a tweet is classified as `supportive' (or
has a favorable outlook) towards the topic if the tweet contains at least one positive word.
Finally, if a post includes negative and positive words or neither, the tweet is flagged
with a neutral tone. In each month, the average (median) number of tweets produced by
congress that supports an economic-related topic is 707 (610), criticizes is 1539 (1255),
   3
     Loughran and McDonald (2011) generate a list of 2,337 words (353 words) that typically have
negative (positive) implications in a financial sense. See https://sraf.nd.edu/textual-analysis/
for details.


                                               6
and are neutral is 2382 (2316).


2.2     Variation in partisan viewpoints

We next document that our topic and tone measures fluctuate significantly at high
frequencies, often varying based on current debates of policy-related issues or important
events of the day. We document that within these key topics, there is substantial
disagreement across parties, but increasing solidarity within. Overall, these results
highlight a strong degree of partisanship, as measured directly from congressional social
media accounts. We later show that updates regarding partisan viewpoints about
economic policies generate significant movements in asset prices, indicating revisions
in market expectations about the policies themselves. These policy interventions cover
regulation, tax reforms, and the threat of antitrust intervention.


2.2.1   Trends in partisanship

Collective viewpoints. To measure the collective viewpoints, we proceed in three steps.
First, only tweets by members of congress that are related to an economic topic as
defined in the section above are selected. Second, for every month, the number of tweets
that are either supportive or critical are separately counted, and then scaled by the
total number of tweets posted during that month. Third, partisan confidence is defined
as the difference between the fraction of supportive and critical tweets within a party
that month. We do these three steps for Democrats and Republicans separately and we
further standardize these measure.
   Figure 1 plots the resulting standardized partisan confidence measure. The dashed
vertical lines depict election days in the United States. Democrats exhibit a supportive
attitude towards economic policies during the Obama presidency, but shifted to a critical
attitude immediately after the 2016 election when Trump was elected president. We find
the opposite pattern for Republicans. Appendix B shows similar partisanship patterns
when we focus on each of the 6 categories of policy-related economic topics separately.
The collective viewpoints from the members of congress about policy vary substantially
over time and track the electoral calendar in timing. Next, we show the same pattern

                                            7
                                              Democrats
                                              Republicans
                        2                     General elections dates

                        1
 Standardized values




                        0

                        1

                        2
                                      2015            2016                  2017     2018           2019

Fig. 1. Collective viewpoints. This figure shows the standardized partisan confidence measure. We
compute this measure by taking the difference between the number of tweets that support and criticise a
policy-related economic topic. We scale these difference in counts by the total number of tweets posted
during that month. We further standardize the series to have a zero mean and unit variance. We report
results for Democrats (blue line) and Republicans (red line) separately. We use the complete set of
tweets created by any member of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress
to the 116th Congress.


holds true when we measure the individual viewpoints.
                Individual viewpoints. To measure individual viewpoints, for every member of congress
the number of tweets that are supportive and critical for an economic topic are counted.
These counts are then aggregated at the monthly level and scaled by the total number
of tweets posted by the same politician over the same month. Both Republicans and
Democrats express critical and supportive views about various economic policies. On
average, 17.7% of the tweets posted by a politician contained a positive word. Thus,
given a typical member of congress that posts 11 tweets per month about a policy-related
economic topics, 2 of those tweets have on average a positive outlook towards economic
policies. The standard deviation of the tweets per month that contained a positive
word is 8.9%. Similarly, the average number of tweets per politician that contained a
negative word was 25.8% over the entire sample with a standard deviation of 13.1%. It
follows that at the politician level, the confidence in the economic outlook (defined as
the difference between the supportive and critical tweet measures) has a negative mean;
that is, a typical member of congress post tweets that have about 8.1% more negative
than positive words.4
               4
                       This result could be by construction, since the word dictionaries that we are using contain more

                                                                        8
                      0.07                  Negative outlook                                       0.07                   Positive outlook
                              Democrats                                                                    Democrats
                      0.06    Republicans                                                          0.06    Republicans
                      0.05                                                                         0.05
Probability Density




                                                                             Probability Density
                      0.04                                                                         0.04
                      0.03                                                                         0.03
                      0.02                                                                         0.02
                      0.01                                                                         0.01
                      0.00                                                                         0.00
                             40         20           0         20   40                                    40         20           0         20   40
                                             Percentage points                                                            Percentage points

Fig. 2. Individual viewpoints This figure shows the probability density estimates of the difference
between the percentage of tweets with negative (left panel) and positive (right panel) outlook towards
economic policies after and before the 2016 presidential election. We compute this difference in
percentages for each member of congress and then aggregate them out for Democrats (blue shaded area)
and Republicans (red shaded area) separately. We use the complete set of tweets created by any member
of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress to the 116th Congress.


                       These averages hide a substantial amount of variation, both across party affiliation and
over time. Figure 2 shows the probability density estimates of the difference between the
percentage of tweets with negative (left panel) and positive (right panel) outlook towards
economic policies after and before the 2016 presidential election. The average member of
congress affiliated to the Democratic Party increased tweets with a critical outlook by 20
percentage points since 2016 ­ where virtually all members of the Democratic Party had
more critical viewpoints about policy. In contrast, for Republicans the average negative
outlook did not change after the election. Interestingly, however, the Republicans exhibit
an increase in tweets that contain a positive outlook, where the average increase is 17
percentage points. Finally, Appendix B shows that the results above are robust if we
focus within each of the 6 categories of policy-related economic topics independently.
                       Appendix B presents additional results. Salient cross-sectional patterns emerge
between characteristics of the politicians and the direction of the tweets over the past two
election cycles. First, politicians are more likely to tweet positively about policy-related
economic topics when they are affiliated with the same party as the incumbent president.
Second, individual DW-NOMINATE scores based on roll call voting data is predictive
of both the direction and intensity of the tweets relative to their party. Third, we also
negative words than positive words. For our purposes, we care about the time series properties rather
than the level per se.


                                                                         9
construct a party loyalty measure based on past roll call voting patterns. Politicians that
have a stronger record of voting with their party also tend to tweet more positively about
policies associated with their party. Fourth, leaders of the house, senate, and standing
committees tweet more positively and with greater frequency in support of agendas
originating from their affiliated party. Fifth, at business cycle frequencies, we find a
cyclical component in disagreement across parties that coincides with the presidential
cycle where there is rising disagreement for economic policies in the first two years of
the presidential cycle before declining in the last two years as shown in Figure B.3 in
Appendix B.
   Next, we relate tweets to congressional votes. We show that the majority of these
policy-related tweets occur precisely on days of key procedural congressional votes related
to substantive issues that divide parties such as taxation and budget resolutions.


2.2.2   Policy-related economic roll call votes and social media post.

To link tweets to congressional votes, we proceed in two stages. In the first stage, the
roll call votes taken during the 113th-116th Congresses are linked to the policy-related
economic topics. To do this, for each roll call we use their corresponding title or brief
descriptions as compiled through the electronic voting machines5 and identify roll calls
that include at least one of the topic keywords described in Section 2.1.1. Broadly, these
roll calls capture key bills and motions related to tax policy, budget resolutions, the
national debt limit, and social welfare policy. Interestingly, these roll calls address core
issues that divide parties as manifested in the ex-post vote outcomes.
   A common measure of the partisan divide based on roll call voting is the party
difference measure (e.g., Rohde, 1991; Snyder Jr and Groseclose, 2000). The party
difference for a given roll call j is
                                                   
             1           1                          1, if legislator i votes yea
RollCallj =       vij -       vij ×100% with vij =
            #D iD       #R iR                       0, if legislator i votes nay


where D and R denote the set of Democratic and Republican legislators, respectively.
   5
    This data can be download in a suitable format for analysis from Lewis, Poole, Rosenthal, Boche,
Rudkin, and Sonnet (2018).

                                                10
                      100            Party difference in roll-call votes                                     35            Policy-related economic tweets
                                 Policy-related economic roll-call votes                                               Days of policy-related economic roll-call votes
                                 Other roll-call votes                                                                 Days of other roll-call votes
                       90                                                                                    30

                       80                                                                                    25
  Percentage points




                                                                                         Percentage points
                       70                                                                                    20

                       60                                                                                    15

                       50                                                                                    10

                       40 2014    2015     2016     2017     2018     2019   2020                             5 2015       2016        2017        2018       2019       2020


Fig. 3. Social media posts and roll-call votes. The left panel shows the party difference measure
based on roll calls. This measure is defined as the absolute value of the difference between the percentage
of Republicans who voted yea and the percentage of Democrats who voted yea. We depict this measure
for roll calls related to policy-economic topics (blue line) and other type of roll calls (gray dashed line).
We smooth the series by taking the average of the party difference measures in a given quarter. The right
panel shows the total number of policy-related tweets as percentage of the total number of congressional
tweets. We further distinguish between tweets posted during days in which a policy-related economic
roll call was voted (blue line) or not (gray dashed line). Finally, we smooth both series by aggregating
the daily time series to quarterly series. We use the complete set of tweets created by any member of
the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress to the 116th Congress.


A value close to one implies that the vote on roll call j was lopsided across party lines.
Whereas a value close to zero implies that the vote was by-partisan, with a similar fraction
of yea votes in the two parties. The left panel of Figure 3 plots the party difference
measures for roll calls linked to the policy-related economic topics (blue line) and any
other roll call (gray dashed line). The series is smoothed by taking the average of the
party difference measures in a given quarter. The basic finding is that policy-related
economic roll-call votes are more contested, where the average difference is 20 percentage
points.
               Next, we select tweets by members of congress that contain the relevant economic
keywords and were posted on the same day as the roll calls recorded in the first stage.
The right panel of Figure 3 plots the total number of policy-related tweets as percentage
of the total number of congressional tweets. We further distinguish between tweets posted
during days in which a policy-related economic roll call was voted (blue line) or not
(gray dashed line). Finally, both series are smoothed by aggregating the daily time series
to quarterly series. The figure shows that there is a high volume of tweets related to
proposed legislation occurring on the corresponding roll call days. This increase in tweets


                                                                                    11
is also large in magnitude. For instance, over the entire sample, members of congress as
a whole increase their policy-related social media content by about 10 percentage points.
    Overall, these findings suggest rising differences in viewpoints across parties but
increasing similarity within parties for a wide range of economic agendas. Our cross-
sectional evidence illustrates how the Twitter posts by members of congress are strongly
consistent with their political ideology and therefore provides representative snapshots of
their viewpoints at high frequencies.



3       Partisan viewpoints and stock price responses
We next show that these partisan viewpoints have a significant effect on asset prices.
Our analysis begins by analyzing a large sample of tweets by members of congress that
explicitly target individual companies. We then trace out movements in asset prices at
the tweet-company-level in a narrow window around the tweet.


3.1     Identifying firm mentions in congressional social media posts.

Identifying firm mentions in a congressional social media post is challenging for two
reasons. First, different politicians may mention the same company using different
versions or variations of its name. For example, Apple Inc appears as Apple Computer
Inc in Compustat. However, politicians most likely will write either Apple or the twitter
account of the company @Apple in their tweets. Alternatively, they could even target the
company by mentioning the name of the CEO Tim Cook or the twitter account of the
CEO @tim cook instead of the company name itself. Second, a politician may mention a
company name (or several variations of its name) in a tweet without expressing a view
about the company being mentioned. For example, Dem. Keith Ellison (@keithellison)
writes, "'Good morning! We are on Apple Podcasts!" 8 August 2019, 16:50:31 EST,
Tweet. This problem is exacerbated if the company name has multiple meanings. For
instance, Dem. Chris Coons (@ChrisCoons) "Heading to Bridgeville for Apple Scrapple!
#netde" 11 October 2014, 16:19:04 EST, Tweet.6 In both of these cases, members of
    6
    The Apple Scrapple Festival is held annually during the second weekend in October in Bridgeville,
Delaware.

                                                 12
congress mentioned the word Apple, though neither was targeting the company. This
task of identifying tweets of politicians that target specific companies would be greatly
simplified, if we just search for a stock using its ticker. However, in our setting politicians
seldom refer to a company by means of its ticker.
   The aforementioned challenges are addressed as follows. To make the sample construc-
tion manageable, our search is restricted to stocks in the Russell 3000 index. This index
contains the 3,000 largest U.S. traded stocks, comprising roughly 98% of the U.S. equity
market index in terms of market capitalization. We then identify tweets that contained
either: (1) the full company legal name or parts thereof, after removing common words
such as `Inc' or `Corp.'7 , (2) the official twitter account for each company, or (3) the
Company CEO name or corresponding twitter account. This search generates a total
of 24,032 matches. To avoid the problem that a company name might have multiple
meanings, we manually went through all twenty-four thousand matches and drop those
that were erroneously classified and had nothing to do with companies. In total, we drop
4,936 of observations.
   The content of each tweet is further classified as follows. First, all tweets that do not
directly express a view about the company are dropped. Second, the remaining tweets
are sorted into three mutually exclusive categories: Supporting the firm (e.g., Rep. James
Lankford (@SenatorLankford) "The positive news just keeps on coming. Wal-Mart now
joining the growing list of companies w/ plans to increase wages for workers because of
the #TaxCutsandJobsAct" 01 November 2018 2014, 15:58:06 EST, Tweet.), criticising
the firm (e.g., Dem. Elizabeth Warren (@SenWarren) " @Walmart rakes in billions from
the #GOPTaxScam and sends the profits straight to Wall Street, while many employees
struggle to put food on the dinner table. These share buybacks are a perfect example of
how our economy is rigged against working families." 30 May 2018 2014, 15:02:40 EST,
Tweet.), or neutral (i.e., tweets that do no clearly support or criticise a company). In
the Appendix, robustness checks are reported where the tweets are classified using the
positive and negative word dictionaries of Loughran and McDonald (2011).
   Since we are interested in studying the impact of partisan viewpoints on firm valuations,
these tweets are then hand-matched with tick-by-tick data on stock prices from the
   7
       For company legal name we use both CONML and CONM in Compustat.

                                              13
NYSE Trade and Quote (TAQ) database. To do this, we keep all tweets posted during
regular trading days from 9:30 to 16:00 Eastern Standard Time (EST) and collect the
firm's ticker for all companies mentioned in our sample which we then use to merge with
the TAQ data. The raw TAQ data is well known for having wrong observations, this
is especially the case when working with TAQ data at the firm level. To address this
issue the raw series is cleaned following procedures described in Brownlees and Gallo
(2006), and then we manually go through all observations to further detect and remove
wrong observations. This generates a total of 5,694 firm-tweet observations. Table B.2 in
Appendix present sample statistics broken down by industries.


3.2     Response of asset prices to partisan viewpoints

A high-frequency identification strategy is used to estimate the effect of partisan view-
points contained in the social media accounts of members of congress on asset prices.
Specifically, the following equation is estimated:


                                   pi,t = a + bs · ts      c   c
                                                    i,t + b · ti,t + t ,                      (1)


where pi,t is the change in log prices of stock i at time t. The regressors are dummy
variables indicating if the politician tweet relating to firm i is supportive, ts
                                                                                i,t , or critical,

tc
 i,t , and   t   is the error term. The intercept a captures the average effect of a tweet that is
not either supportive or critical. The parameters of interest are bs and bc , which measure
the average marginal response of asset prices around each politician tweet depending on
whether the tweet is supportive or critical. Thus, the overall effects of a supportive and
critical tweet are a + bs and a + bc , respectively.
    We focus on movements in asset prices in a narrow window around the tweet. The
identifying assumption is that there is no other relevant information being released within
this short time window affecting asset prices. Log price changes are computed using a
90-second window going from 30 seconds before the tweet to 60 seconds after it. If there
is not a trade at those exact seconds, we select the price associated with the last trade 30
seconds before the tweet and the first trade 60 seconds after the tweet. To ensure that
the information is up-to-date, prices for which the last and first trades happened either
                                                    14
              Table 1. Response of asset prices to partisan viewpoints

                                                           Regression
                                  Returns                                          Volatility
   Coef.                 Tot         Dem          Rep                     Tot        Dem          Rep
                         (1)          (2)         (3)                     (4)         (5)         (6)
   a                     0.23         0.60        -0.33          a        2.96        3.11        2.93
                        [1.44]       [2.90]      [-1.22]                [33.96]     [28.86]     [15.48]
   bs ­ Support          4.48         4.55         4.58         bs-c      5.01        4.76        5.21
                       [11.23]       [7.98]       [7.46]                [20.26]     [15.14]      [9.98]
   bc ­ Criticize       -8.01        -8.16        -9.04                    ­           ­            ­
                      [-13.29]     [ -15.60]     [-5.73]                   ­           ­            ­
   nObs                 5,694        2,434        1,998                  5694        2434         1998

This table reports the effect of tweets by members of congress that explicitly target individual companies
on the stock price of the targeted firm. For the first three regressions, the dependent variable is the
90-second stock price change of the targeted firm, while the regressors are dummy variables indicating if
the politician tweet is in support or criticises the targeted firm. The constant in this regression measures
the average effect of the tweets by members of congress that do no clearly support or criticise a company.
For the last three regressions, the dependent variable is the absolute value of the 90-second stock price
change of the targeted firm, while the regressor is a dummy variables indicating if the politician tweet is
either in support or against the targeted firm. We double cluster the standard errors at the day-politician
level. We report t-statistics in brackets and all numbers are in basis points.


60 minutes or more before and after the tweet are disregarded, respectively. After all of
these considerations, the average window goes from 37 seconds before the tweet to 67
seconds after it.
    Table 1 presents the estimates. We estimate equation (1) by running a pooled panel
regression, where we double cluster the standard errors at the day-politician level. We
report t-statistics in brackets and all numbers are in basis points (bps).
    The first column of Table 1 shows that there is a statistically significant relation
between the tweets targeting a specific firm and the corresponding stock price. We find
that, on average, posts that criticize particular firms are associated with a statistically
significant decrease in the stock price of the targeted firm. The coefficient estimate for
bc of -8 bps (t-statistic = -13) shows that stock prices fall by an average of -7.78 bps
(= a + bc ). Conversely, when members of congress support a specific firm we find that
stock prices tend to increase by 4.71 bps (= a + bs ). The point estimate for the constant, a,
is just above 0, but not statistically significant. The constant in this regression measures


                                                    15
the average effect of the tweets by members of congress that do not clearly support
or criticise a company. As shown in regressions (2) and (3), the point estimates are
remarkably similar if we restrict the sample to only Democrat or Republican politicians.
This suggest that our results are not driven by one specific party in particular.
   The average absolute price variation around the politician tweets is estimated next.
Specifically, the following regression is run:

                                                       -c
                                |pi,t |= a + bs-c · ts
                                                     i,t + t ,                        (2)

         -c
where ts
       i,t is the dummy variable that equals one if the politician tweet is support or

criticises firm i. Column (4) presents the estimates, where again we double cluster the
standard errors at the day-politician level are clustered and t-statistics are reported in
brackets. The average effect is positive and statistically significant. The magnitude of
the effect is large ­ a congressional social media posts that targets specific company
generates an increase of about 62% in the absolute average price variation. Columns (5)
and (6) show similar results when the focus is on the tweets made by politicians from
each party separately.
   Results in Section 2 illustrate that social media posts by members of congress contain
a strong degree of partisanship. Moreover, as shown above, posts that target a specific
company have a substantial effect on the stock price of the targeted company. Next, the
politician tweets targeting specific companies are linked to broader partisan agendas.


3.3   Partisan viewpoints and agendas across industries

How do partisan agendas impact market expectations about future economic policy? To
tackle this question, we condition on policy agendas systematically targeting particular
industries. To this end, we sort the tweets targeting companies into different industries.
An analysis of the text contained in the tweets grouped in industries allows us to relate
to broader policy objectives. We find large differences in attitudes towards industries
across parties but strong unanimity within. Movements in asset prices are then analyzed
in a narrow window around these viewpoints. Finally, these viewpoints across sectors are
linked to specific partisan agendas.
                                             16
     Social media post are categorized as follows. Each company in our dataset is assigned
to an industry based on their four-digit SIC code. The industry definitions are provided on
Kenneth French's website. The average partisan viewpoint about industry j is computed
by taking the difference between the sum of the tweets that are supportive and the sum
of the tweets that are critical about firms in the industry. This measure is then scaled
by the total number of tweets assigned to industry j . A positive value means that on
average politicians tweet more in support of industry j . In contrast, negative values
imply that members of congress tend to criticise that specific industry.
     To measure the effect of partisan viewpoints on asset prices, for each industry, the
following panel regression is estimated:

                               -j                          -j
                          pind
                           i,t    = aind-j + bind-j · tind
                                                       i,t    +   ind-j,t ,                    (3)

                                                                               -j
where the time unit t is the exact time of the tweet. The dummy variable, tind
                                                                           i,t    , equals
                                                                                -j
one if the politician either supports or criticises firm i in industry j . pind
                                                                            i,t    denotes the
corresponding change in log stock prices in a small time window around the tweet. A
negative (positive) coefficient bind-j < 0 (bind-j > 0) implies that tweets by members of
congress decrease (increase) on average stock prices assigned to industry j . The intercept
aind-j captures the average effect of a the tweets that are neutral about firms in industry
j.
     In Figure 4, the average tick-by-tick stock price change is displayed (i.e., aind-j + bind-j )
as a function of the average partisan viewpoints. Each circle corresponds to one industry
and binned scatter plots broken down by political parties are presented.
     A striking pattern in partisan viewpoints emerge once the tweets targeting individual
firms are aggregated at the industry level. Republicans tweet more negatively about the
Printing and Publishing industry (hereafter referred to simply as Books) and the Business
Services sector (BusSv), whereas they tweet more positively about Banking (Banks),
Communication (Telcm), Restaurants and Hotels (Meals), Retail (Rtail), and Automobiles
(Autos). Conversely, Democrats most frequently attack firms in the Banks, Telcm, BusSv,
and Pharmaceutical Products (Drugs) sectors, while they typically support firms in the
Autos, Rtail, Electronic Equipment (Chips), and Consumer Goods (Hshld) industries.

                                                17
Fig. 4. Partisan viewpoints toward industry sectors and industry returns. This figure shows
the average tick-by-tick stock price change as a function of the average partisan viewpoints. Each dot
corresponds to one industry and we present binned scatter plots broken down by political parties. For
each industry, we compute the average partisan viewpoint by taking the difference between the sum of
tweets that are in support and the sum of tweets that criticise specific firms. We then scale this measure
by the total number of tweets assigned to that specific industry. The x-axis reports this measure and
it's in percentage points. To compute the average tick-by-tick stock price change, we run the following
regression:
                                    -j                          -j
                              pind
                                i,t    = aind-j + bind-j · tind
                                                            i,t    + ind-j,t ,
                                                                                         -j
where pi,t denotes the 90-second log stock price change of the targeted firm and tindi,t    is a dummy
variable that equals one if the politician tweet mentions firm i in industry j . The y-axis reports the
average stock price change (i.e., aind-j + bind-j ) in basis points.


For firms in a few industries that are targeted by both parties, there is significant discord
between parties, indicative of a polarizing issue. For example, Republicans strongly
support Banks and Telcm, while Democrats strongly oppose both.
    As shown in the figure, for both parties the range in partisan viewpoints is quite wide
and goes from around -54 percentage points to 62 percentage points. This wide spread
in partisan viewpoints serves our empirical approach well as, if any, the wider the spread,
the wider the differential impact on industry returns from changes in partisan viewpoints,
all else being equal. Indeed, the variation in industry returns ranges from -5 basis points
to 3 basis points for Republicans and goes from -4 basis points to +4 basis points for
Democrats.
    Once the regression is conditioned on political party, a strong positive relation between
the industry returns and the partisan viewpoints measure emerges as shown in the first
two panels of Figure 4 and highlighted by the positive slope of the regression line. Table
2 shows the regression estimates of industry returns on partisan viewpoints by party. For
both Republicans and Democrats, a one standard deviation increase in the measure of
                                                   18
 Table 2. Partisan viewpoints toward industry sectors and industry returns

                                                          Regression
                                                                        Republicans and
         Coef.                      Republicans        Democrats          Democrats
                                       (1)                (2)                (3)
         Constant                        -2.05             0.50                -0.76
                                        [-2.68]           [0.58]              [-1.65]
         Partisan viewpoints              0.06             0.07                 0.02
                                         [3.16]           [2.71]               [1.48]
         R-squared                        0.58             0.51                 0.18

This table reports estimates from OLS regressions. The dependent variable is the average industry
return computed as in equation (3) in the main text. The independent variable is the average partisan
viewpoints toward industry sectors. We report t-statistics in brackets using robust standard errors.


partisan viewpoints increases industry returns by around 2 basis points. Moreover, this
factor explains above 50 percent of the differential impact on industry returns, as shown
in the bottom row of the table.
    A clear partisan divide emerges as Democrats tend to target different industries than
Republicans and the politicians in each party are highly unified in either their support
or opposition for particular industries. To show this, we present results where we do not
condition on the political party. The third scatter-plot of Figure 4 shows that the strong
monotonic relationship between the partisan viewpoints and industry returns previously
documented disappears when we do not condition on the political party. Regression
estimates in the third column of Table 1 confirm this message: the slope is 0.02 with
a t-stat of 1.48. In other words, partisan viewpoints are strongly related to industry
returns, but only when we condition on the political party. This is one of our most
striking findings.


3.3.1    Inferring partisan agendas from partisan viewpoints

Partisan viewpoints are linked to specific agendas and policy reforms. To show this, we
leverage the specific structure of our dataset and extract the most common hashtags
from the collection of social media posts, organizing by industry and by party. These
hashtags are then linked to partisan agendas and policy reforms. The use of hashtags is


                                                  19
             Table 3. Most common hashtags by Industry and Party

                 Republicans                                         Democrats
Industry          hashtag      Percentage Industry          hashtag                     Percentage
                              Disagreement between parties
Banks      #TaxReform             25.93      Banks #GOPTaxScam                          15.38
           #TaxCutsandJobsAct     14.81              #BankLobbyistAct                   7.69
           #TaxRelief              7.41              #ConsumersFirst                    7.69
           #ProGrowth              3.70              #DoddFrankRollback                 4.62
           #SmallBusiness          3.70              #WithABuckFiftyAWeek               4.62
                               Solidarity between parties
BusSv      #StopTheBias            4.68      BusSv #Facebook                            4.74
           #Facebook               4.42              #BreakUpBigTech                    4.28
           #ZuckerbergHearing      3.90              #Zuckerberg                        3.36
           #China                  2.60              #CambridgeAnalytica                2.14
           #Google                 2.34              #HonestAds                         1.83
                                  To each party its own
Books      #FakeNews              18.75      Drugs #GOPTaxScam                          19.51
           #Republican            12.50              #BigPharma                         9.76
           #Kentucky               6.25              #SOTU                              4.88
           #SchumerShutdown        6.25              #ABetterDeal                       4.88
           #Israel                 6.25              #EndRxMonopolyPrices               2.44

The table shows for each industry the most common hashtags used by Republicans and Democrats. We
also report the hashtag count scale by the sum of all hashtags used in each sector.


useful for our purposes because it provides a direct and clean way to identify the topic of
the post without requiring any estimation.
   Table 3 lists the five most common topics discussed by each political party and
for four different industries. The appendix presents the list of topics discussed for the
remaining industries. It turns out that the most popular topics in each industry align
closely with specific partisan agendas and policy reforms. These results together with
the significant stock price responses documented above, suggest that these tweets by
members of congress are tightly linked to revisions in market expectations about broader
policy objectives. In the appendix, each hashtag is described in detail, while below we
highlight few examples.
   There is significant discord in partisan viewpoints about firms in the Banking sector.
The difference in opinion arises mostly on common issues that tend to divide parties
the most, like taxation. Republican legislators used hashtags such as #TaxReform,

                                              20
#TaxCutsandJobsAct, and #TaxRelief to support the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017.
Democrats strongly opposed this legislation through the use of the opposing hashtag
#GOPTaxScam. High-tax firms in the Banking industry had a particularly big exposure
to these proposed tax cuts and, therefore, to the related partisan viewpoints. In the
next section, this tax reform is analyzed in detail and we link aggregate market price
movements at high frequencies to the legislative history of the bill and to the substantial
uncertainties therein.
    Bipartisanship is exhibited for some industries, such as, the business services sector.
Certain topics (#Facebook, #Google,#ZuckerbergHearing, #Zuckerberg, #BreakUp-
BigTech) reflect bipartisan consensus on antitrust lawsuits. Collectively, the social media
posts by members of congress reflect their concerns about the increasingly dominant role
that online platforms exert and imply significant regulatory challenges for the targeted
firms such as Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Google, or Microsoft. Republican lawmakers
also used the hashtag #StopTheBias to target big tech companies of biases against
their viewpoints. Democrats in the U.S. Senate and some Republican senators used the
hashtag #HonestAds in support of a bill called the "Honest Ads Act" that regulates
political ads and help prevent foreign interference in U.S. elections.
    Firms in other industries tend to be targeted only by a single party. For instance,
Republicans use #FakeNews to attack firms in the printing and publishing industry. By
contrast, Democrats used #BigPharma and #EndRxMonopolyPrices to criticise firms in
Pharmaceutical sector and to push legislative proposals aiming to reduce the industry's
prices and profits.



4     Partisan viewpoints within policy reforms
The results in Section 3 demonstrate how members of congress coordinate support and
opposition within and across party lines for different industries, originating from disparate
legislative agendas. Moreover, these partisan viewpoints have a significant effect on
industry returns once we conditioned on the political party. In this section, we condition
on each legislative agenda and identify ­within a specific policy reform­ the effect of
partisan viewpoints on stock prices.

                                             21
    Our analysis focuses on the Public Law 115­97, commonly referred to as the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act (henceforth TCJA) or the 2017 tax reform.8 This tax reform is used as an
illustrative case of how members of congress can influence expectations about policy by
communicating their stance in real time through their social media accounts. The 2017 tax
reform is one of the most important bills in our sample since it made the largest changes
to the US tax code in over thirty years. For example, the tax reform had an important
impact on firms given that the major changes were to the US corporate tax system,
including a reduction in the federal corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent.9
This reform moved swiftly through the legislative process taking less than three months
from the release of a nine-page "Unified Framework for Tax Reform" on September 27,
2017 to a nearly 200 page final bill signed into law by President Trump on December 22,
2017. The bill was extensively revised as it was rushed by Republicans through the House
and Senate generating substantial uncertainty both in the actual content of the bill and
on whether it would pass (Wagner, Zeckhauser, and Ziegler, 2018).10 The uncertainty
remained until the passing of the bill. Importantly, members of congress actively used
their social media accounts to communicate their stance about these changes in real
time. For instance, Democrat Senator Dick Durbin (@SenatorDurbin) posted "Trying
to review the #GOPTaxScam but they are making hand-written changes to brand new
text as we speak ­ can anyone else read this?" [attached a screenshot of a page of the
bill with the changes], 1 Dec, 2017, 23:25:27 EST, Tweet.
    8
      The short title "Tax Cuts and Jobs Act" was not approved by Senate and to comply with Senate
rules, the official title of the bill was changed to "An Act to provide for reconciliation pursuant to titles
II and V of the concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2018."
    9
      Auerbach (2018) provides a detail explanation of the main changes of the the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
The full set of changes are in https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/1.
   10
      It is important to note that the Republican party did not have 60 or more votes in the Senate to
pass the bill over a Democratic filibuster. However, the Republicans passed the tax cuts via a procedural
maneuver known as budget reconciliation. This fast-track process allows the bill to be passed by majority
vote as long as the bill does not increase the deficit in the next decade. For details on this see Alex
Tausanovitch Sam Berger, Center for American Progress, TheImpact of the Filibuster on Federal
Policymaking (Dec. 5, 2019), available at https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/democracy/
reports/2019/12/05/478199/impact-filibuster-federalpolicymaking/.




                                                    22
                      Tax day                                                        Signed by President
             60       Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017              Passed the House
             50                                                                     Passed the Senate
Percentage


             40                                          Introduced in the House

             30                                                  GOP unveiled
                                                                 their tax plan
                                      The House passed
             20                          the PATH Act

             10
             0
             2014           2015            2016              2017                 2018                 2019
Fig. 5. Tax-related posts. This figure shows the percentage of congressional post containing tax
related word or hashtag, such as "tax", "taxation", and "#TrumpCuts" in a given day. The gray shaded
area in the figure highlights the time the bill spent in Congress till it became Public Law. We use the
complete set of tweets created by any member of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the
113th Congress to the 116th Congress.


4.1               The legislative process of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act

The legislative process of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act directly is captured from the
Twitter accounts of the members of congress. The main advantage of this approach is
that congressional social media posts provide representative snapshots of their viewpoints
at high frequencies. Importantly, we show that these partisan viewpoints about policy
generate significant revisions in market expectations.
             To identify the legislative process of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, we start by building
an index of tax related terms based on our panel of congressional social media posts. All
posts that contain a tax related word or hashtag are counted, such as "tax", "taxation",
and "#TrumpCuts" in a given day. This raw count is then scaled by the total number
of congressional tweets posted in the same day. Figure 5 depicts the resulting index.
The gray shaded area in the figure highlights the time the bill spent in Congress until it
became Public Law.
             The figure shows significant spikes on the main legislative events of the tax reform.
Republicans unveiled their tax plan on September 27. On November 2, the House Ways
and Means Committee introduced the bill, which was then passed on November 16.
On the same day, the Senate Finance Committee passed a draft of the bill, which was
subsequently passed by the Senate in the early hours of December 2. After reconciling

                                                         23
the difference between the House and Senate bills, the final version of the bill passed each
chamber in a mostly party line vote. Finally, the President signed the bill into law on
December 22. Noteworthy, this spike in tweet intensity confirms the message of Section
2.2.2 that documented a high volume of tweets related to proposed legislation occurring
on the corresponding roll call days. The figure also displays other events such as the Tax
day (dotted vertical lines) which usually falls on the 15 of April of each year. In the
U.S., the Tax Day denotes the due date on which individual income tax returns should
be submitted to the federal government.


4.2      Corporate taxes and the aggregate market: A high-frequency identifi-
         cation approach

To what extent can politicians influence market expectations about policy? To answer
this question we use a high-identification approach and focus on movements in asset
prices in a short time window around the tweets that communicate the congressional
viewpoints about the 2017 tax reform. The key finding is that these viewpoints provide
real-time updates to market participants about the stance of each party to the continually
changing provisions made to the bill.
   We proceed in two steps. In the first step, we select posts that explicitly express a view
about the tax reform, and classify them as being supportive or critical of the tax framework.
Members of congress primarily used four hashtags (#TaxReform, #TaxCutsandJobsAct,
#TrumpCuts, #GOPTaxScam) to engage with the public and express their viewpoints
about the GOP's tax bill. Therefore, to select the tax reform tweets posts are selected
that contain any of these four hashtags. All of these tweets that do not directly express
a view about the reform are dropped. We then classify the remaining tweets. To
do so, for each politician we cross-referenced the use of hashtags with the ex -post
voting behavior. It turns out that 92% and 98% of the tweets containing the hashtags
#TaxReform and #TaxCutsandJobsAct, respectively, were posted by a legislator who
voted in support of the bill. Conversely, 100% of the tweets that contained #TrumpCuts
and #GOPTaxScam came from a member of congress who voted against the bill.11
  11
       We did not use directly the party of the politician to classify the tweets because it was not entirely


                                                      24
Therefore, to avoid subjectivity in the classification procedure, we classify a tweet being
in support of the bill if it contains #TaxReform or #TaxCutsandJobsAct, and opposing
the bill if it contains either #TrumpCuts or #GOPTaxScam.
   In the second step, we measure the average effect of the politician tweet that is either
in support or opposes the tax reform on the aggregate stock market. Specifically, for the
aggregate stock market we take the intraday prices of the exchange-traded fund that
tracks the S&P 500 stock market index (henceforth, SPY) which is obtained from the
TAQ database. To clean the raw tick-by-tick series, the same procedure as in Section 3.1
is followed and a 90-second window around the tweet is used. Similarly, only the tweets
posted during normal NYSE trading hours are used, which begin at 9:30 a.m. EST and
end at 4 p.m EST.
   Table 4 presents the results. All estimated coefficients are in basis points. In regression
1 we estimate the following model of aggregate stock prices:

                                                     s/c
                                  pt = a + bs/c · ti,t + t ,                                (4)

                                                                               s/c
where pt denotes the 90-second log aggregate stock price change and ti,t is a dummy
variable that equals one if politician i tweeted at time t that was supportive or critical of
the tax reform. The intercept a captures the average effect of the policy-related economic
topics. When we do not condition on the direction of the tweet, the estimated coefficient
bs/c is economically small and statistically insignificant (t-statistic = 0.59).
   Regression 2 in Table 4 conditions on the direction of the tweet:


                               pt = a + bs · ts      c   c
                                              i,t + b · ti,t + t .                          (5)


ts        c
 i,t and ti,t are dummy variables indicating if the politician tweet is supportive or critical

of the bill. A striking change is evident in the estimated coefficients. Social media post
that are supportive of the tax reform increase on average valuations on the aggregate
stock market index. It is 0.37 basis points higher, with a t-statistic of 2.11 on the
difference. Conversely, tweets critical of the reform decrease valuations. The effect is
a party-line vote. Although, no Democrat supported the bill, there were 13 Republicans who voted
against it.

                                               25
            Table 4. Effect of politicians on returns: Tax related tweets

  Coefficient        Variable                      Estimated coefficients [t-statistics]
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)
  a                             1     0.0164         0.0164         0.0164         0.0164          0.0164
                                     [14.448]       [14.541]       [14.522]       [14.587]        [14.573]
                              s/c
  bs/c                       ti,t     0.0746
                                     [0.5922]
  bs                          ts
                               i,t                   0.3729          0.3387         0.2120         0.1585
                                                    [2.1108]        [1.8069]       [1.0051]       [0.7080]
  bc                          tc
                               i,t                  -0.2237         -0.1567        -0.1889        -0.1234
                                                   [-1.4157]       [-0.8312]      [-1.0589]      [-0.5916]
  bs-imp            Iimp,t · ts
                              i,t                                    0.6251                        0.7613
                                                                    [1.6560]                      [1.9182]
  bc-imp            Iimp,t · tc
                              i,t                                   -0.4745                       -0.4703
                                                                   [-2.0457]                     [-2.0313]
  bs-inf             Iinf,t · ts
                               i,t                                                  0.5866         0.6297
                                                                                   [1.9035]       [2.0241]
  bc-inf             Iinf,t · ts
                               i,t                                                 -0.2876        -0.2795
                                                                                  [-1.0641]      [-0.9904]
  nObs                               357,815        357,815        357,815         357,815        357,815

This table reports the effect of tweets that explicitly express a view about the 2017 tax reform on the
aggregate stock market. In all regressions, the dependent variable variable is the 90-second log stock
price of the SPY ETF. The independent variables are a constant, ts                  c
                                                                           i,t and ti,t are dummy variables
indicating if the politician tweet is in support or opposes the bill, an indicator for important days Iimp,t ,
which equals one if the tweet was posted on an important day in the legislative process, and an indicator,
Iinf,t , that equals one if the tweet was posted by a politician that co-sponsored the bill or if she/he
belonged either to the Committee on Ways and Means or to the Senate Finance Committee. We report
t-statistics in brackets and all estimated coefficients are in basis points.


somewhat smaller of around -0.22, , but not statistically significant (t-statistic= 1.4).
      Next, we add one additional element to the regression to assess the extent to which the
informational content of the congressional tweets differ on crucial days of the legislative
process:


             pt = a + bs + bs-imp · Iimp,t · ts      c
                                              i,t + b + b
                                                          c-imp
                                                                · Iimp,t · tc
                                                                            i,t + t ,                      (6)


where Iimp,t is an indicator that equals one if the tweet was posted on an important
day in the legislative process. The important days in the legislative process of the 2017
tax reform are: (1) Republicans unveil their tax plan on the 27 of September of 2017;

                                                     26
(2) The bill was introduced in the house (11/02/2017); (3) passed/agreed to in House
(11/16/2017); (4) Passed/agreed to in Senate (12/02/2017); (4) Resolving differences
between the House and Senate (12/20/2017); and (5) Signed into law by the President
(12/22/2017).
    Column (3) of Table 4 presents the results. The estimates bs-imp of 0.62 (t-statistic=
1.65) and bc-imp of -0.47 (t-statistic= -2.04) show that a disproportionate amount of news
about the provisions of the tax reform are revealed during these important days. During
these days, the effect of supporting viewpoints is 0.98 basis points (= a + bs + bs-imp ),
while the effect of opposing viewpoints is -0.61 (= a + bc + bc-imp ).
    Regression 4 modifies the previous specification to evaluate whether more influential
politicians also have a larger market impact:


            pt = a + bs + bs-inf · Iinf,t · ts      c
                                             i,t + b + b
                                                         c-inf
                                                               · Iinf,t · tc
                                                                           i,t + t ,     (7)


where Iinf,t is an indicator that equals one if the tweet was posted by a politician that
co-sponsored the bill or if they belonged either to the Committee on Ways and Means
or to the Senate Finance Committee, which are the government bodies in the House
and Senate, respectively, in charge of making provisions to the tax reform. Column (4)
highlights that positive viewpoints of more influential politicians have an average effect
of 0.81 basis points. In contrast, the point estimate effect of negative viewpoints is - 0.46
basis points, but not statistically significant.
    Overall, these results suggest that members of congress coordinate within parties
to push legislation through their social media accounts. Given the strong degree of
partisanship among policymakers, individual politician tweets about policy encodes
valuable information about the overall stance of the party affiliated with the politician.



5     Conclusion
Strong patterns of partisanship emerge when the tweets by members of congress are
examined collectively. This measure of partisanship fluctuates significantly at high-
frequencies on current debates of policy-related issues and important events of the day

                                              27
such as roll call votes. Republicans and Democrats are highly coordinated in both their
support and opposition for different economic agendas and generate a significant revision
in market expectations about future policy. Using tick-by-tick asset price data and
a high-frequency identification approach, we document that these partisan viewpoints
impact asset prices at the firm, industry, and the aggregate level. Our results provide
support for the view that social media can swing expectations about future policies and
are therefore a powerful communication tool to convey political views. We provide direct
evidence that members of congress affect asset prices.




                                           28
References
Auerbach, A. J., 2018. Measuring the effects of corporate tax cuts. Journal of Economic
  Perspectives 32, 97­120.

Belo, F., Gala, V. D., Li, J., 2013. Government spending, political cycles, and the cross
  section of stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 107, 305­324.

Bernanke, B. S., Kuttner, K. N., 2005. What explains the stock market's reaction to
  federal reserve policy? The Journal of finance 60, 1221­1257.

Bianchi, F., Kind, T., Kung, H., 2019. Threats to central bank independence: High-
  frequency identification with twitter. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Birney, M., Graetz, M. J., Shapiro, I., 2006. Public opinion and the push to repeal the
  estate tax. National Tax Journal pp. 439­461.

Boudoukh, J., Feldman, R., Kogan, S., Richardson, M., 2013. Which news moves stock
  prices? a textual analysis. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brownlees, C. T., Gallo, G. M., 2006. Financial econometric analysis at ultra-high
  frequency: Data handling concerns. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 51,
  2232­2245.

Buehlmaier, M. M., Whited, T. M., 2018. Are financial constraints priced? evidence
  from textual analysis. The Review of Financial Studies 31, 2693­2728.

Carroll, R., Lewis, J., Lo, J., McCarty, N., Poole, K., Rosenthal, H., 2015. `common
  space'dw-nominate scores with bootstrapped standard errors. September 2, 2015.

Gentzkow, M., Kelly, B., Taddy, M., 2019a. Text as data. Journal of Economic Literature
  57, 535­74.

Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., 2010. What drives media slant? evidence from us daily
  newspapers. Econometrica 78, 35­71.




                                           29
Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., Taddy, M., 2019b. Measuring group differences in high-
  dimensional choices: method and application to congressional speech. Econometrica
  87, 1307­1340.

Greenstein, S., Zhu, F., 2012. Is wikipedia biased? American Economic Review 102,
  343­48.

G¨
 urkaynak, R. S., Sack, B., Swanson, E., 2005. Do actions speak louder than words?
  the response of asset prices to monetary policy actions and statements-ijcb-may 2005.
  International Journal of Central Banking .

G¨
 urkaynak, R. S., Wright, J. H., 2013. Identification and inference using event studies.
  The Manchester School 81, 48­65.

Hoberg, G., Moon, S. K., 2019. The offshoring return premium. Management Science 65,
  2876­2899.

Jensen, J., Naidu, S., Kaplan, E., Wilse-Samson, L., Gergen, D., Zuckerman, M., Spirling,
  A., 2012. Political polarization and the dynamics of political language: Evidence from
  130 years of partisan speech [with comments and discussion]. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity pp. 1­81.

Kelly, B., P´
            astor, L., Veronesi, P., 2016. The price of political uncertainty: Theory and
  evidence from the option market. The Journal of Finance 71, 2417­2480.

Kelly, B. T., Manela, A., Moreira, A., 2019. Text selection. Tech. rep., National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Lewis, J. B., Poole, K., Rosenthal, H., Boche, A., Rudkin, A., Sonnet, L., 2018. Voteview:
  Congressional roll-call votes database. See https://voteview.com/(accessed 27 January
  2020) .

Loughran, T., McDonald, B., 2011. When is a liability not a liability? textual analysis,
  dictionaries, and 10-ks. The Journal of Finance 66, 35­65.

Martin, G. J., Yurukoglu, A., 2017. Bias in cable news: Persuasion and polarization.
  American Economic Review 107, 2565­99.
                                           30
Nakamura, E., Steinsson, J., 2018. High-frequency identification of monetary non-
  neutrality: the information effect. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, 1283­1330.

P´
 astor, L., Veronesi, P., 2020. Political cycles and stock returns. Journal of Political
  Economy 128, 4011­4045.

Rohde, D. W., 1991. Parties and leaders in the postreform House. University of Chicago
  Press.

Santa-Clara, P., Valkanov, R., 2003. The presidential puzzle: Political cycles and the
  stock market. The Journal of Finance 58, 1841­1872.

Snyder Jr, J. M., Groseclose, T., 2000. Estimating party influence in congressional roll-call
  voting. American Journal of Political Science pp. 193­211.

Wagner, A. F., Zeckhauser, R. J., Ziegler, A., 2018. Unequal rewards to firms: Stock
  market responses to the trump election and the 2017 corporate tax reform. In: AEA
  Papers and Proceedings , vol. 108, pp. 590­96.




                                             31
Appendix A              Words used in the policy-related eco-
                        nomic topics

Next we present the keywords that we used for each category. To assign the hashtags to
each category we proceeded in two steps. First, we search for the most common hashtags
used by all members of congress. Second, we manually classify each one of these common
hashtags into one category.

   · Government budget: taxes, tax, taxation, taxed, tariff, tariffs, government
     spending, federal budget, budget battle, balanced budget, defense spending, mili-
     tary spending, entitlement spending, fiscal stimulus, budget deficit, federal debt,
     national debt, debt ceiling, fiscal footing, government deficits, balance the budget,
     fiscal stimulus, debt ceiling, debt limit, welfare, food stamps, AFDC, tanf, oasdi,
     earned income tax credit, EITC, public assistance, head start program, entitlement
     program, wic program, government subsidies, deficit, budget, national debt, federal
     debt, sovereign debt, government policy, public policy, government spending, govern-
     ment expenditures, entitlement spending, entitlement expenditures, unemployment
     insurance, unemployment benefits, disability insurance, disability benefits, welfare
     reform, fiscal stimulus, Fiscal stimulus, fiscal policies, fiscal policy, fiscal reform

        ­ Related hashtags: #TaxDay, #taxreform, #TaxReform, #TaxCutsand-
          JobsAct, #TrumpCuts, #GOPTaxScam, #IRS,#TrumpShutdown, #Trump-
          Budget, #SchumerShutdown, #EndTheShutdown, #budget, #DontShut-
          DownOurSecurity, #StandWithPP.

   · Homeland security: national security, war, military conflict, terrorism, terror,
     defense spending, military spending, police action, armed forces, base closure,
     military procurement, saber rattling, naval blockade, military embargo, no-fly zone,
     military invasion, national security, military invasion, military conflict, military
     embargo, military procurement, war, armed forces, police action, base closure,
     saber rattling, naval blockade, no-fly zone, defense spending, defense expenditures,
     military spending, military expenditures

        ­ Related hashtags: #NDAA, #SecDef, #ISIL, #ISIS, #Benghazi, #Ukraine,
          #NorthKorea, #Syria, #Iran, #IranDeal.

   · Energy, commerce, and labor: carbon tax cap, pollution controls, environmen-
     tal restrictions, clean air act, clean water act, energy policy, drill restrict, import
     tariffs, import duty, import barrier, government subsidies, government subsidy,
     wto, world trade organization, trade treaty, trade agreement, trade policy, trade
     act, doha round, uruguay round, gatt, dumping, trade policy, trade act, trade
     agreement, trade treaty, duty, duties, import tariff, import barrier, minimum wage,
     minimum wage, union rights, card check, national labor rel. board, nlrb, collective
     bargaining, right to work, closed shop, worker compensation, maximum hours,


                                            32
  wages and hours, advanced notice requirement, affirmative action, overtime require-
  ments, at-will employment, equal employment opportunity, eeo, osha, immigration,
  unemployment insurance, unemployment benefits,

     ­ Related hashtags: #JobsReport, #jobs, #RaiseTheWage, #climatechange,
       #ClimateChange, #energy, #GreenNewDeal, #ParisAgreement, #ActOnCli-
       mate, #EPA, #KeystoneXL, #China, #Russia, #USMCA, #TPP.

· Regulation: banking supervision, bank supervision, glass-steagall, tarp, thrift
  supervision, dodd-frank, financial reform, commodity futures trading commission,
  cftc, house financial services committee, basel, capital requirement, Volcker rule,
  bank stress test, securities and exchange commission, sec, deposit insurance, fdic,
  fslic, ots, occ, firrea, truth in lending, union rights, card check, collective bargaining
  law, national labor relations board, nlrb, minimum wage, living wage, right to
  work, closed shop, wages and hours, workers compensation, prescription drugs, drug
  policy, food and drug admin, FDA, Gramm- Rudman, Bank supervision, thrift
  supervision, malpractice reform, constitutional re- form, financial reform, medical
  insurance reform, welfare reform, tort reform, constitutional amendment, Glass-
  Steagall, Dodd-Frank, housing financial services committee, capital requirement,
  security exchange commission, sec, deposit insurance, fdic, fslic, ots, occ, firrea,
  truth in lending, monometallist, bimetallist, silver coinage, gold coinage, alcohol
  prohibition, liquor prohibition, bill

     ­ Related hashtags: #EqualityAct, #RenewUI, #VAWA, #FarmBill, #Net-
       Neutrality, #EqualPay, #SCOTUS, #EnoughIsEnough, #EndGunViolence,
       #gunviolence, #DisarmHate, #NoBillNoBreak, #SOTU.

· Healthcare: health care, Medicaid, Medicare, health insurance, malpractice
  tort reform, malpractice reform, prescription drugs, drug policy, food and drug
  administration, FDA, medical malpractice, prescription drug act, medical insurance
  reform, medical liability, affordable care act, Obamacare, health care, social security,
  Medicare, Medicaid, affordable care act, nutritional assistant program, health
  insurance, health benefits, medical insurance reform, constitutional reform

     ­ Related hashtags: #Trumpcare, #TrumpCare, #MedicareForAll, #Protec-
       tOurCare, #AHCA, #GetCovered, #ACA, #healthcare, #Medicaid, #Oba-
       macare, #SocialSecurity, #ObamaCare, #GrahamCassidy, #PayMoreForLess,
       #CHIP

· Corporations: For each company listed in the CRSP dataset, we searched the
  legal company name, as well as common variations of the name. This search
  produced a total of 24,032 matches. A team of research assistants read these
  24,032 tweets and found 4,936 matches that were erroneously classified, which we
  drop from the sample. These false positive mainly arise because we search for
  common variations of the company names. For example, when looking for tweets
  that mention the company Apple Inc., we search for apple too, which gave rise to
  the following false positive: Senator Chuck Grassley (@ChuckGrassley) "Every so

                                          33
often senators have the chance to host Thursday Lunch Group w our caucus 2day
was my turn so I served a typical Iowa meal: pork chop green beans potatoes apple
crisp + ICE CREAM" 2 July 2018, 18:52:26 EST, Tweet.




                                    34
Appendix B                                            Additional results
B.1                          Disagreement across parties and solidarity within parties
We present robustness to the set of categories used in the policy-related economic topics.
Specifically, we replicate Figure 1 and Figure 2 of the main text, but considering only
tweets that contain at least one keyword associated with our 6 categories. By and large,
we find similar patterns when we restrict the post by each category separately.


                                               Government budget                                                              Homeland security
                       2.0      Democrats                                                                  2.0
                                Republicans                                                                1.5
                       1.5
                                                                                                           1.0
 Standardized values




                                                                                     Standardized values
                       1.0
                       0.5                                                                                 0.5
                       0.0                                                                                 0.0
                       0.5                                                                                 0.5
                       1.0                                                                                 1.0
                       1.5                                                                                 1.5


                                              Energy and commerce                                                                 Regulation
                       2.5
                                                                                                           1.5
                       2.0
                                                                                                           1.0
                       1.5
                                                                                                           0.5
 Standardized values




                                                                                     Standardized values




                       1.0
                                                                                                           0.0
                       0.5
                                                                                                           0.5
                       0.0
                                                                                                           1.0
                       0.5
                                                                                                           1.5
                       1.0                                                                                 2.0
                       1.5                                                                                 2.5

                                                  Healthcare                                                                      Corporations
                       2.0                                                                                 2.0
                       1.5                                                                                 1.5
                       1.0                                                                                 1.0
 Standardized values




                                                                                     Standardized values




                       0.5                                                                                 0.5
                       0.0                                                                                 0.0
                       0.5                                                                                 0.5
                       1.0                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                           1.5
                       1.5
                                                                                                           2.0
                        2014    2015     2016       2017       2018   2019   2020                            2014   2015   2016     2017       2018   2019   2020


Fig. B.1. Collective viewpoints by category This figure shows the standardized partisan confidence
measure. We compute this measure by taking the difference between the number of tweets that support
and criticise a policy-related economic topic. We scale these difference in counts by the total number
of tweets posted during that month. We further standardize the series to have a zero mean and unit
variance. We report results for Democrats (blue line) and Republicans (red line) separately. We use the
complete set of tweets created by any member of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the
113th Congress to the 116th Congress.

                                                                                    35
                                                               Negative outlook
                                                                                         Government budget                                                     Positive outlook
                      0.07                                                                                                  0.07
                                            Democrats                                                                                     Democrats
                      0.06                  Republicans                                                                     0.06          Republicans
                      0.05                                                                                                  0.05
Probability Density




                                                                                                      Probability Density
                      0.04                                                                                                  0.04
                      0.03                                                                                                  0.03
                      0.02                                                                                                  0.02
                      0.01                                                                                                  0.01
                      0.00                                                                                                  0.00
                                           40           20            0            20      40                                            40             20            0           20        40
                                                              Percentage points                                                                               Percentage points

                                                                Negative outlook
                                                                                          Homeland security                                                    Positive outlook
                                  0.07                                                                                            0.07
                                                Democrats                                                                                     Democrats
                                  0.06          Republicans                                                                       0.06        Republicans
                                  0.05                                                                                            0.05
            Probability Density




                                                                                                            Probability Density
                                  0.04                                                                                            0.04
                                  0.03                                                                                            0.03
                                  0.02                                                                                            0.02
                                  0.01                                                                                            0.01
                                  0.00                                                                                            0.00
                                            40            20            0         20        40                                            40            20            0         20          40
                                                                Percentage points                                                                             Percentage points

                                                               Negative outlook
                                                                                        Energy and commerce                                                   Positive outlook
                        0.07                                                                                                0.07
                                            Democrats                                                                                     Democrats
                        0.06                Republicans                                                                     0.06          Republicans
                        0.05                                                                                                0.05
  Probability Density




                                                                                                      Probability Density


                        0.04                                                                                                0.04
                        0.03                                                                                                0.03
                        0.02                                                                                                0.02
                        0.01                                                                                                0.01
                        0.00                                                                                                0.00
                                           40           20             0         20        40                                            40            20            0         20       40
                                                               Percentage points                                                                             Percentage points
                                                                Negative outlook
                                                                                                Regulation                                                   Positive outlook
                                    0.07                                                                                    0.07
                                                Democrats                                                                                 Democrats
                                    0.06        Republicans                                                                 0.06          Republicans
                                    0.05                                                                                    0.05
              Probability Density




                                                                                                      Probability Density




                                    0.04                                                                                    0.04
                                    0.03                                                                                    0.03
                                    0.02                                                                                    0.02
                                    0.01                                                                                    0.01
                                    0.00                                                                                    0.00
                                            40            20            0         20       40                                            40           20             0         20      40
                                                                Percentage points                                                                            Percentage points

                                                               Negative outlook
                                                                                                Healthcare                                                    Positive outlook
                      0.07                                                                                                0.07
                                            Democrats                                                                                     Democrats
                      0.06                  Republicans                                                                   0.06            Republicans
                      0.05                                                                                                0.05
Probability Density




                                                                                                    Probability Density




                      0.04                                                                                                0.04
                      0.03                                                                                                0.03
                      0.02                                                                                                0.02
                      0.01                                                                                                0.01
                      0.00                                                                                                0.00
                                           40           20            0         20        40                                             40           20             0         20       40
                                                              Percentage points                                                                              Percentage points


Fig. B.2. Individual viewpoints by category This figure shows the probability density estimates
of the difference between the percentage of tweets with negative (left panel) and positive (right panel)
outlook towards economic policies after and before the 2016 presidential election. We compute this
difference in percentages for each member of congress and then aggregate them out for Democrats (blue
shaded area) and Republicans (red shaded area) separately. We use the complete set of tweets created
by any member of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress to the 116th
Congress.
                                                                                                  36
B.2    Measuring Partisanship: Cross-sectional evidence.
In this section, we focus on the relation between characteristics of the members of congress
and the tone of the tweet. More specifically, we consider how the tone of the tweet of
legislator i is related to: (1) party affiliation, (2) political ideology, (3) political rank,
and (4) party loyalty.
    The benchmark regression model is:

                                      ti,t = a + bDi,t +   i,t ,                              (B.1)
where ti,t takes a value of 1 (-1) if the tweet if legislator i at time t contains a topic
keyword and a positive (negative) word, and takes a value of 0 otherwise. Di,t denotes
a dummy variable specific to each regression specification. In all regressions we double
cluster the standard errors at the date-legislator level. Table B.1 presents model estimates,
and we discuss below the results.
    Party affiliation. To test whether party affiliation is related to the tone of the tweet,
we consider two different model specifications for equation B.1. In the first one, the
dummy variable Di,t takes a value of 1 if politician i belongs to the party that has
majority in her/his chamber and a value of 0 otherwise. In the second one, the dummy
variable Di,t takes a value of 1 if politician i is affiliated with the same party as the
incumbent president and 0 otherwise. Columns (1) and (2) of Table B.1 present the
estimated coefficients. The estimated coefficient for the second specification is positive
and statistically significant, indicating that members of congress are more likely to tweet
positively about policy-related economic topics when they are affiliated with the same
party as the incumbent president. Interestingly, if politician i belongs to the party that
has
    Political ideology. We extent the previous model specification, where we interact
the dummy variable "Party president" that takes a value of 1 if politician i is affiliated
with the same party as the incumbent president and 0 otherwise with the absolute
value of her/his DW-NOMINATE score from the roll call voting data. We add an extra
dummy variable, "Not party president" that takes a value of 1 if politician i does not
belong to the party of the president and, similarly, we interact the dummy with the
absolute value of her/his DW-NOMINATE score. The estimated coefficients suggest that
DW-NOMINATE scores based on roll call voting data is predictive of both the direction
and intensity of the tweets relative to their party.
    Political rank. The model estimated is identical to the one in Specification (4), but
instead of interacting the dummy variables with the DW-NOMINATE scores, we flag if
politician i are leaders of the house, senate, and standing committees. The estimated
coefficients suggest tweet with greater frequency in support of the agendas originating
from their affiliated party;
    Party loyalty. We also construct a party loyalty measure based on past roll call voting
patterns. Specifically, for each legislator we compute the percentage of times she/he
vote in line with her/his party over the her/his entire career.12 Note, a member voted
with her/his party if she/he cast a similar vote to the majority of their party. We then
   12
      We find similar results if instead we compute the percentage of times she/he vote in line with
her/his party for each congress.


                                                37
           Table B.1. Measuring Partisanship: Cross-sectional evidence

                                                 (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)
   Chamber majority                            -4.5287
                                              [-0.9312]
   Party president                                         10.463
                                                          [2.9129]
   Party president ×|DW-score|i                                         2.0354
                                                                       [0.2471]
   Not party president ×|DW-score|i                                    -25.598
                                                                      [-4.9192]
   Party president and leader                                                       6.0983
                                                                                   [1.3835]
   Not party president and leader                                                  -10.678
                                                                                  [-3.3034]
   Party president and party loyalty                                                    15.752
                                                                                       [2.8673]
   Const                                       -18.580 -24.549 -16.996 -20.254 -29.033
                                              (-7.2726) (-7.3878) (-5.1374) (-8.5310) (-6.9734)
   Observations                                 3,480     3,480     3,480     3,220      3,480

The dependent variable is our measure of disagreement. The independent variables are (1) Iip ,chamberp
dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if politician i belongs to party p and is in chamber j (either
senate or house) and the party majority of chamber j is party p. (2) Iip ,presidentp dummy variable that
takes a value of 1 if politician i has the same party affiliation as the president. (2) and (3) We interact
the dummy Iip ,presidentp with the absolute value of the politician i DW-nominate score. Iip ,presidentnot-p
dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if politician i has a different party affiliation as the president.
(4) and (5) we consider only politicans that were leaders of the house, senate or a committee. (6) and
(7) we consider the politicans that wanted to impeach Trump. (6) we only consider the cabinet accounts.
These accounts are managed by the party associated to the presidency.


interact this party loyalty measure with the "Party president" dummy variable. The
coefficient is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that members of congress
that have a stronger record of voting with their party also tend to tweet more positively
about policies associated with their party.




                                                    38
     Table B.2. Summary Statistics: Firms mentioned in politician tweets

                  Number of tweets          Number of firm mentions Average size Sentiment
   Industry     Tot      Dem       Rep      Average       Unique           (millions)    Dem Rep
   BusSv      2881.00   1778.00   1103.00    92.94           31            372110.27     -0.16   -0.12
   Rtail      1044.00    592.00   452.00     47.45           22            485573.96     -0.02    0.59
   Autos       445.00    273.00    172.00    44.50           10            50140.00       0.51    0.44
   Banks       434.00    352.00    82.00    15.50            28            226142.20     -0.52   0.27
   Telcm       393.00    225.00   168.00    43.67            9             166406.10     -0.28   0.35
   Chips       359.00    161.00   198.00     25.64           14            661321.86      0.11   0.18
   Aero        357.00    126.00   231.00    89.25            4             107454.53      0.52    0.17
   Meals       326.00    209.00   117.00    40.75             8             70201.74      0.15   0.62
   Books      230.00      85.00   145.00    115.00            2              4014.04     -0.08   -0.54
   Trans       186.00     66.00    120.00    15.50           12            47721.02       0.12    0.78
   Hshld      148.00      57.00    91.00    24.67             6             16973.12      0.25   0.35
   Drugs      138.00     102.00    36.00      9.86           14            201840.02     -0.45    0.69
   Fun         137.00     85.00    52.00    45.67             3            68596.28       0.51    0.23

Each company in our dataset is assigned to an industry based on their four-digit SIC code. The industry
definitions are provided on Kenneth French's website. The average partisan viewpoint about industry i
is computed by taking the difference between the sum of the tweets that are supportive and the sum of
the tweets that are critical about firms in the industry. This measure is then scaled by the total number
of tweets assigned to industry i. To search for the firm mentions, we use the complete set of tweets
created by any member of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress to the
116th Congress.




                                                   39
     Table B.3. Appendix: Most common hashtags by Industry and Party

                                             Republicans
Industry        hashtag        Percentage Description
Telcm #TaxReform                 17.24    The tax reform plan announced by President Trump in 2017
         #LetsKeepWorking         6.90    The slogan for governor election in Florida in 2014
         #Florida                 3.45    State of Florida
         #Trump4Prez              3.45    Trump for president
         #TaxCuts                 3.45    Republicans' 2017 tax cuts
Rtail    #TaxReform              11.94    The tax reform plan announced by President Trump in 2017
         #TaxCutsandJobsAct      11.44    Republicans 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
         #Walmart                 2.99    Walmart
         #TaxReformWorks          2.99    In support of the 2017 Tax reform
         #veterans                1.99    U.S. veterans
Meals    #TaxCutsandJobsAct      27.12    Republicans 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
         #TaxReform              20.34    The tax reform plan announced by President Trump in 2017
         #China                   5.08    Republicans are turning to attacks on China
         #SOTU                    5.08    The State of the Union Addres
         #TaxCutsAndJobsAct       3.39    Republicans 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
Hshld    #Ohio                   14.29    State of Ohio
         #TaxReform              10.71    The tax reform plan announced by President Trump in 2017
         #Walker16                7.14    Scott Walker ran for President of the US in 2016
         #HarleyDavidson          7.14    Trump's policy pushed Harley-Davidson's production abroad
         #small                   3.57    Small government
Chips    #TaxReform              27.14    The tax reform plan announced by President Trump in 2017
         #China                  11.43    Republicans are turning to attacks on China
         #TaxCutsandJobsAct       7.14    Republicans 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
         #TaxReformWorks          2.86    In support of the 2017 Tax reform
         #InnovationInitiative    2.86    Array of Innovation Initiative Bills
Autos    #jobs                   10.20    Job creation
         #KYMakes                 4.08    Kentucky had a record-braking year of export in 2017
         #GMRecall                4.08    GM recall scandal in 2014
         #Kentucky                4.08    State of Kentucky
         #Tesla                   4.08    Company Tesla
Aero     #Iran                   25.36    Trump's targeted killing of Iranian top military commander
         #Boeing                 13.77    Boeing's 737 Max 8 aircraft was grounded because of
         #TaxReform               7.97    The tax reform plan announced by President Trump in 2017
         #jobs                    3.62    Job creation
         #AZ05                    2.17    Arizona' 5th congressional district

The table shows for each industry the most common hashtags used by Republicans. We also report the
hashtag count scale by the sum of all hashtags used in each sector.




                                               40
    Table B.4. Appendix: Most common hashtags by Industry and Party

                                           Democrats
Industry       hashtag      Percentage Description
Telcm #NetNeutrality          28.04    Proposal to restore the 2015 net neutrality rules
         #ATTUnfair            4.67    AT&T workers strike for unfair labor practice
         #GOPTaxScam           3.74    The Republicans tax reform is meant to benefit the rich
         #OneMoreVote          2.80    Democrats seek for one more vote for Net Neutrality
         #TX33                 2.80    Texas's 33rd congressional district
Rtail    #BreakUpBigTech       6.75    Break up big tech companies
         #FightFor15           3.80    Democrats introduce $15 minimum wage bill
         #RaiseTheWage         3.38    House passed Raise the Wage Act
         #GOPTaxScam           2.95    The Republicans tax reform is meant to benefit the rich
         #jobs                 2.53    Create more jobs
Meals    #tobeincollege        7.87    College Achievement plan
         #EqualPay             3.37    Democrats champion equal pay for equal work
         #CAPtheTuitionGap     2.25    College Achievement plan helps cap the tuition gap
         #tcot                 2.25    Top Conservatives on Twitter
         #RaiseTheWage         2.25    House passed Raise the Wage Act
Hshld    #GOPTaxScam          17.86    The Republicans tax reform is meant to benefit the rich
         #MadeInWI            10.71    Made in Wisconsin
         #CNYRising            7.14    Central New York rising
         #ABetterDeal          7.14    Democrats unveiled A Better Deal for the American people
         #TradeWar             7.14    US-China trade war
Chips    #Apple               18.03    Apple' employee heavily lean Democrats
         #LGBT                 3.28    Democrats focus on LGBT issues
         #climate              3.28    Democrats' new climate plan
         #TodaysClimateFact    3.28    Today's climate fact, need to fight for the climate
         #StopCISA             3.28    Stop Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
Autos    #KCMO                 6.72    Kansas City, Missouri
         #NAIAS                5.22    North American International Auto Show
         #MO                   5.22    Missouri
         #F150                 5.22    Ford F-150 pickup truck
         #KC                   2.99    Kansas City

The table shows for each industry the most common hashtags used by Democrats. We also report the
hashtag count scale by the sum of all hashtags used in each sector.




                                              41
                                     20
                                                                                                                       Same party of the presidency
                                                                                                                       Opposing party of the presidency
                 Percentage points   10

                                      0

                                     10

                                     20        1                                      2                                3                                      4
                                                                                          Presidential cycle (years)
Fig. B.3. Presidential cycle This figure reports the partisan confidence measure across different years
in the presidential cycle. We report values for members of congress that are in the same party or the
opposing party of the presidency. We compute this measure by taking the difference between the number
of tweets that support and criticize a policy-related economic topic. We scale these differences in counts
by the total number of tweets posted during that month. We further center the series such that in the
first year of the presidency, both measures equal zero. We use the complete set of tweets created by any
member of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives from the 113th Congress to the 116th Congress



                                            Rep. and Dem.                                             Rep.                                             Dem.
                         6                                                            6                                                   6           Hshld
                                                                                                                                                                  Autos
                         4                                                            4                        Trans                      4
                                                         Soda                                                                                          Chips
                                                          Trans                                           Telcm
                         2                              Aero
                                                      Hshld
                                                         Autos                        2               Banks Meals                         2            Rtail
  Basis points




                                                                       Basis points




                                                                                                                           Basis points



                                          Banks   Oil  Rtail
                                                    Chips                                                      Rtail                                 Drugs
                                                     Telcm                                              Chips
                                                                                                            Hshld
                         0                        Clths
                                                   Drugs
                                                         Meals                        0                    Autos
                                                                                                                                          0            Telcm
                                                                                                                                              Banks BusSv
                                          Books BusSv                                                BusSvAero                                              Meals
                         2                                                            2    Books                                          2
                                                                                                         Fun
                         4                             Fun
                                                        Insur
                                                                                      4                                                   4
                         6                                                            6                                                   6
                                          50            0         50                          50        0          50                          50         0               50
                                                   Percentage                                      Percentage                                        Percentage
Fig. B.4. Sentiment and Industry effect: bag of words This figure shows the average tick-by-tick
stock price change as a function of the average partisan viewpoints. Each dot corresponds to one industry
and we present binned scatter plots broken down by political parties. For each industry, we compute the
average partisan viewpoint by taking the difference between the sum of tweets that are in support and
the sum of tweets that criticise specific firms. We use the word dictionaries of negative and positive
words from Loughran and McDonald (2011) to categorize the tweets. We then scale this measure by
the total number of tweets assigned to that specific industry. The x-axis reports this measure and it's
in percentage points. To compute the average tick-by-tick stock price change, we run the following
regression:
                                     -j                          -j
                              pind
                                 i,t    = aind-j + bind-j · tind
                                                             i,t    + ind-j,t ,
                                                                                         -j
where pi,t denotes the 90-second log stock price change of the targeted firm and tindi,t    is a dummy
variable that equals one if the politician tweet mentions firm i in industry j . The y-axis reports the
average stock price change (i.e., aind-j + bind-j ) in basis points.




                                                                                                   42
