                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              PUBLIC ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCE AROUND THE GLOBE

                                           Jessica Bai
                                          Shai Bernstein
                                          Abhishek Dev
                                           Josh Lerner

                                       Working Paper 28744
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28744


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2021




Harvard Business School's Division of Research provided financial support for this project.
Mufitcan Atalay, Max Bahdanovich, Baran Cekim, Elizabeth Lively, Palina Misiuk, Yuan Sun,
Lizzy Yang, and especially Lydia Wang provided excellent research assistance. We thank Ufuk
Akcigit and Alex Wu for help in this process. Seminar participants at Harvard Business School,
the National Bureau of Economic Research, the New Economic School, the U.S. National
Science Foundation, and the University of Bergen provided helpful comments, as did Sabrina
Howell, Asim Khwaja, Kyle Myers, Jacquelyn Pless, and Andrei Shleifer. Josh Lerner has
received compensation for advising institutional investors in venture capital funds, venture capital
groups, and governments designing policies relevant to venture capital. All errors and omissions
are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Jessica Bai, Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Public Entrepreneurial Finance around the Globe
Jessica Bai, Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 28744
April 2021
JEL No. G24,H81

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines how government funding programs geared towards early-stage companies
interact with private capital markets. Using hand-collected data on 755 government programs
worldwide, we find that governments' allocations to such funding programs have been
comparable to global venture capital disbursements in the past decade. Government programs
were more frequent in periods with more private venture activity, a relationship that was stronger
in nations with better public governance. The programs' structures often relied on the local
private sector. The private sector's involvement was greater when government programs targeted
earlier-stage companies and when rankings of government effectiveness were higher. We find
that such government funding programs increased local innovation, particularly when the
programs focused on early-stage ventures or collaborated with the private sector. These findings
are most consistent with the explanation that the reliance on private capital markets enabled
governments to mitigate investment frictions and improve capital allocation.

Jessica Bai                                     Abhishek Dev
Harvard University                              Department of Economics
jbai@g.harvard.edu                              Yale University
                                                165 Whitney Avenue
Shai Bernstein                                  New Haven, CT 06511
Harvard Business School                         abhishek.dev@yale.edu
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163                                Josh Lerner
and NBER                                        Harvard Business School
sbernstein@hbs.edu                              Rock Center 214
                                                Soldiers Field
                                                Boston, MA 02163
                                                and NBER
                                                jlerner@hbs.edu




A data archive (to be completed by end of May 2021) is available at www.public-entrepreneurship.org
    1. Introduction

In recent decades, governments around the world have been increasingly interested in boosting
innovation and the "knowledge economy," as opposed to the manufacturing sectors that were the
traditional foci of industrial policies. One manifestation of this trend has been public efforts to
boost financing for early-stage ventures. But young high-growth businesses face substantial
information problems, and their financing requires significant expertise (see, for instance,
Gompers and Lerner 1999; Kaplan and Stromberg 2003).

The skillful allocation of capital to such companies may consequentially be difficult for public
officials. First, substantial uncertainty and informational asymmetries surround the selection of
new ventures, leading private investors to frequently make decisions based on soft information
(Kaplan and Stromberg 2004; Bernstein et al. 2016). Decision-making based on such imperfect
information may be difficult for officials in bureaucracies to duplicate (e.g., Stein 2002).
Moreover, unlike virtually all government employees, private financiers' compensation is strongly
tied to the success of their investments. The latter approach improves investors' incentives to
devote substantial effort and make tough decisions (e.g., to shut down an investment despite the
pressures associated with career concerns and other agency problems).

This paper assembles the first comprehensive and detailed data on the universe of government
funding programs of entrepreneurial ventures around the world. We explore whether government
entrepreneurial funding programs can address capital allocation through ties with private capital
markets. Consistent with the suggestions of Acemoglu and Robinson 2013, we might anticipate
that highly effective governments would anticipate the capital allocation difficulties outlined above
and collaborate with private capital markets to address them.

This hypothesis can be contrasted with two alternative views. The first, our null hypothesis, is that
government programs' allocation of capital is unrelated to private financing. In fact, government
investments may even "crowd out" private capital, as highlighted in a number of analyses of public
funding for innovation (e.g., David, Hall, and Toole 2000; Wallsten 2000; Bloom, Griffith, and
Van Reenen 2002; Lach 2002).

Alternatively, public funding may follow private funding. But these dynamics may also arise for
reasons other than maximizing efficacy and improving capital allocations to early-stage ventures.
We highlight two alternative explanations for such a pattern. First, Trend-Chasing may explain
the positive correlation between private capital markets and public government programs, as both
sets of actors pursue investments perceived with promising attractive private returns.2 Second, the
literature has suggested that government financing programs subject to Rent Extraction may have
a pro-cyclical bias. The abundant revenues during booms may be especially tempting for parties
seeking to benefit themselves (Alesina, Campante, and Tabellini 2008, Ilzetzki 2007). Such forces


2
  For instance, public programs are sometimes assessed based on "success stories" (accounts of
companies that succeed commercially, regardless of the marginal contribution of public funds) or
rely on proceeds from successfully exited investments for additional investment capital. Both these
considerations may pressure public managers to in the companies or sectors with the greatest
financial prospects.
                                                 2
could generate a positive correlation between private capital markets and government funding
programs, but for reasons other than improving capital allocation.

Motivated by the hypotheses articulated above, we seek to understand (1) if public entrepreneurial
finance programs rely on private capital, and (2) if so, is it because of an attempt to improve capital
allocation to early-stage ventures or instead due to trend-chasing or rent-extraction motives?

Answering these questions is challenging due to data limitations. The earlier academic and
practitioner literature provided scanty documentation of the universe of government funding
programs geared toward entrepreneurial companies. In this paper, we addressed this gap by using
a hand-collected novel data set on nationwide entrepreneurial finance policies around the world
active between 1995 and 2019 (755 programs in 66 countries). As discussed in depth below, we
focused on national-level programs focused on financing domestic entrepreneurial firms or
intermediaries that fund them. We built as comprehensive a dataset as possible of the universe of
these programs and their features to explore the relationship between public entrepreneurial
finance initiatives and local private capital markets.

Due to the novelty of the data, we first established several stylized facts about public
entrepreneurial finance efforts. We found that government funding programs have become
prevalent around the globe. Between 2010 and 2019, national governments' entrepreneurial
finance programs around the world had on average a cumulative annual budget of $156 billion, as
opposed to an average of $153 billion of global disbursements of traditional venture funds.3 These
efforts were geographically dispersed, and not just confined to developed countries. Moreover,
such government efforts relied on a host of different financial instruments, from grants and equity
funding, to credit guarantees, loans, innovation vouchers, and tax credits. Many public funding
programs targeted specific industries and company stages.

Turning to our main analyses, we found that more private venture activity was associated with
subsequent government entrepreneurial finance: the two sources of capital were positively
correlated. Using panel data, we saw not just a positive correlation but that public policies followed
private capital investments. Moreover, increases in venture capital activity in a given industry-
country pair were followed by subsequent government funding programs that targeted those
industries as well.

To better understand the mechanisms behind the positive correlation between governments'
funding programs and local private capital, we then examined the structure of these programs.
Consistent with the hypothesis that the complementarity mitigated investment frictions, we found
three ways in which government programs frequently structured their programs to rely on private
capital markets: the involvement of private sector actors in investment screening, the funding of
intermediaries rather than companies directly, and capital matching requirements by private
investors. Moreover, we found that government programs were even more likely to rely on private


3
 These estimates are based on our sample, as described below. If we exclude the 42% of public
entrepreneurial finance programs that are debt-oriented, the total average expenditure still exceeds
$90 billion annually. See Appendix 1 for a discussion of the methodology behind these
comparisons.
                                                  3
capital markets when targeting earlier-stage companies, where information asymmetries may be
greater.

Consistent with the interpretation that government reliance on the private sector alleviated the
information and incentive problems that the public sector may encounter, we found that the
positive correlation between private and public activities was more pronounced when governments
were more effective. To show this, we used a wide variety of metrics compiled by the World Bank.
In addition, more effective governments were more likely to structure their funding programs with
greater private sector involvement. These findings were consistent with the hypothesis that highly
effective governments foresaw and addressed the information and incentive problems that public
programs encountered. By collaborating with private financiers of entrepreneurial firms, public
bodies may have been able to head off problems proactively.

We also found consistent evidence when we looked at the impact of neighboring programs.
Nations whose neighbors initiated public entrepreneurial finance programs were more likely to do
so themselves. More interestingly, the evidence was consistent with knowledge spillovers
regarding effective program design: countries with neighboring programs were likely to display a
strong correlation between public and private funding.

Finally, we explored the innovation generated following the initiation of government funding
programs. We explored four different metrics based on U.S. patent filings, which (as discussed
below) were well suited for this assessment. These included the total number of patent applications
from residents of a given country, the number of high-quality innovations based on citations, the
number of patents in basic technology classes, and the number of patents filed by new patenting
entities. Across all innovation measures, we found similar patterns: a meaningful and statistically
significant improvement following the initiation of government funding programs. Important for
interpreting these results, we found no statistically significant pre-existing trends in the years
leading to the government funding programs. Moreover, the improvements in innovations were
particularly concentrated among the set of programs that targeted early-stage ventures or required
collaboration with the private capital markets.

The results are inconsistent with the alternative interpretations offered above. There was little a
priori reason why the trend-chasing or the rent-seeking stories would lead to the heavy reliance on
private sector actors when structuring public programs. Moreover, we saw that more effective
governments were more likely to deploy their public funding in a manner that was both highly
correlated with private funding and more likely to rely structurally on private capital markets. The
measure of more effective governments was strongly inversely correlated with the level of
corruption. If governments were simply engaged in trend-chasing or rent-seeking, we would not
expect to find these patterns in the data.

Ultimately, the complementarity between public and private entrepreneurial finance seemed to be
most consistent with the hypothesis that such complementarity mitigated frictions that arose in the
deployment of capital to early-stage firms. This was also consistent with our finding that
innovation increased following government funding programs that either targeted early-stage
ventures or required collaboration with private capital investors.



                                                 4
Our paper diverged from most of the earlier literature, which looked in depth at a single program
at a time and exploited discontinuities in program design (Bronzini and Iachini 2014, Howell 2017,
Le and Jaffe 2017, Myers and Lanahan 2020, Santoleri et al. 2020, and many others). The standard
approach allows a well-identified look at a program's efficacy at promoting innovation and/or
commercialization but sheds limited light on the interplay of public and private entrepreneurial
finance, particularly in relation to program initiation and design.4 This approach also is subject in
some cases to external validity concerns. Our approach allowed us to examine the broader
relationship between public and private entrepreneurial finance across the near universe of
government funding programs of early-stage ventures.

The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the creation of the data set. Section 3
presents some stylized facts about these programs. The results regarding the positive correlation
between public and private entrepreneurial finance are presented in Section 4. Section 5 examines
program design. We explore the impact of these programs on local innovation in Section 6. The
mechanisms behind the results are discussed in Section 7. The final section concludes the paper.

    2. Creating the Data Set

    2.1. Defining the included programs

This paper examined a broad panel of nations in the spirit of the law-and-finance literature (and in
the specific context of innovation policy, Bloom, Griffith, and van Reenen 2003).5 The first step
was the identification of the public entrepreneurial finance programs. A guiding principle was to
focus on national programs that involved the provision of capital to entrepreneurs. We also
included the many entrepreneurial finance programs that engaged venture capitalists, angel funds,
and banks.

These seemingly straightforward criteria, however, required extensive refinement. In Appendix 2,
we provided examples of policies that were included and deleted. The key principles that motivated
our decisions were as follows:

    ·   Domestic focus: We dropped policies focused specifically on other markets and not on the
        country in which they were initiated. For instance, we deleted the programs of a number of
        wealthy nations that were aimed towards promoting entrepreneurship in emerging
        economies.

    ·   Financial orientation: We wished to focus on programs that involved the financing of
        entrepreneurs. Thus, we kept policies supporting innovation centers so long as the
        innovation center itself offered financing of entrepreneurial firms, but not if the emphasis

4
  This paper was also related to efforts to understand examinations of multiple programs in a single
nation, such as Kiselev (2020) and Pless (2020). The latter is particularly relevant to this work, as
it examines whether the policies are substitutes or complements (i.e., their interaction effect on
R&D and productivity).
5
  All data and code from the paper will be posted at www.public-entrepreneurship.org by the end
of May 2021.
                                                 5
          was solely on training, mentoring, or similar activities. Similarly, we kept policies that
          involved special economic zones, so long as the program involved the financing of
          entrepreneurial firms.

   ·      Nation-level policies: Because we focused our analysis on the national level, we dropped
          programs run by international bodies such as the European Union. We kept policies that
          were joint efforts between a national government and an international body, as long as the
          participation of the international body was only for funding purposes and the policy itself
          was run by a national government. We also dropped policies organized by states, provinces,
          and municipalities. Our decision to do so was driven not by a lack of interest in or
          significance of these programs, but because of the difficulty in getting systematic data on
          these efforts.

   ·      Appropriate program level: Governments were inconsistent about how programs were
          defined. These situations were quite idiosyncratic and could be complex. In general, we
          adjusted the definition of what constituted a program in one of three cases. Below are three
          commonly encountered situations, and how and why we modified the definition of the
          programs:

             o In some cases, there were "umbrella" policies that encompassed a number of clearly
               distinct programs with different types of financing provided and/or firms targeted.
               In many cases, the branding of the umbrella programs changed over time, even as
               the underlying programs remained constant: for instance, a new administration
               might announce an initiative, which essentially was a repackaging of already-
               existing programs. In these cases, we split the umbrella policies up into their clearly
               defined subprograms.
             o In some cases, policies were announced as separate programs, even though they
               had the same structure. For instance, in some cases, a government would launch
               three separate financing programs with identical features, but targeted at three
               different industries. In these cases, we classified these as a single program and
               aggregated the budget information. While such a reclassification reduced the
               number of reported programs, it did not affect most of the analyses using weighted
               totals.
             o In policies where there was a clear primary financing type but some additional
               capital provided (e.g., an equity financing program with a small loan component
               appended), we coded the policy according to the primary financing type.

Sometimes programs changed design or scale over time. We addressed these shifts as follows. If
the program design changed radically, we created a second entry with a note that it was a
restructured version of the original program. If there were only minor modifications, we used the
characteristics as of the end of 2019.

   2.2.      Identifying and coding the programs

We now describe the process by which we identified and coded the programs. To do this, we first
created as comprehensive a list of programs to research as possible.

                                                   6
One concern with the coding was those policies that had terminated might be difficult to observe:
they were less likely to be included on current government websites and other directories. We
sought to avoid such truncation bias by identifying programs using contemporaneous sources to
as great an extent as possible.

In particular, we used 190 sources on public entrepreneurial finance programs published between
1998 and 2020. These documents were prepared by international bodies (especially the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development), national governments, and academics.
They summarized relevant policies on a national, regional, or international basis, often providing
information on their design. Table A-1 in the Internet Appendix summarized the sources used;
Appendix 2 provides more details on the criteria used for the selection process.

Many of these directories listed websites for these programs, which were either still active or
available through the Internet Archive (www.archive.org). The information that we obtained from
these websites caused us to revise the program list in some cases. For instance, we discovered that
some of the listed programs were either duplicates of other programs, umbrella designations that
encompassed multiple programs, or other problematic cases. In some cases, we also discovered
additional programs, which were either not included in the published sources or conflated with
another program. Table A-2 described how we created the final sample of 755 programs.

We gathered information on the features of these programs from multiple sources. Many of the
reports summarizing the programs had information on the key aspects of these features. In
addition, many existing (and terminated) programs had extensive information online on program
design, in current or archived sites. Appendix 3 provided definitions of the coded policy-level
variables.

Of the measures that we coded, the treatment of annual budgets was particularly challenging. We
sought to capture the annual budget flow of the program in US dollars. We used, wherever
possible, the amount actually disbursed, not the original appropriation or budget request. In some
cases, the flow varied from year to year. The quality of the budget information was generally
higher in later years, so we used the average of the most recent three years of the program, if
possible. If available budget information was a cumulative amount over a longer period, we took
the annual average. Using the recent flows was imperfect for two reasons: in some cases, programs
increased in size over time, so this approach may have overstated program size. (Though, as noted
above, we sought to address substantial breaks in program design by treating these as two separate
programs.) In other cases, equity and debt programs had an evergreen feature, where capital
returned from original investments was "recycled" in new deals. In these cases, the budget amounts
may understate the economic importance of mature programs.

   2.3.    Characterizing the countries

We characterized the countries using measures that were similar to those in Bernstein, Dev, and
Lerner (2020). We first used a number of explanatory variables that characterized the countries in
general. We obtained annual data on population (in millions) and GDP (in billions of 2010 US
dollars) from the Economist Intelligence Unit database. In some cases, these data were missing,

                                                7
so we supplemented this source with data from the CIA Factbook, United Nations databases, and
the government website of the respective countries. Appendix 4 provided definitions of the
country-level variables, including a number of measures used exclusively in Table 1, such as initial
public offering activity.

In our analysis, we also explored how entrepreneurial finance was associated with the quality of
government. To assess government quality, we used two measures compiled by the World Bank's
Worldwide Governance Indicators project: their measures of the effectiveness of government and
the rule of law. These aggregate indicators combined the views of a large number of corporate,
individual citizen, and expert survey respondents in developed and developing countries, and were
based on over 30 individual data sources produced by a variety of survey institutes, think tanks,
non-governmental organizations, international organizations, and private sector firms. The data
series dated back to 1996. Since these series were initially produced biannually, when data were
missing in a given year, we used the information in the immediately subsequent year,

In addition, we used two measures that were more business-focused: the World Bank's ease of
doing business score (which measured an economy's performance with respect to a measure of
regulatory best practice across 41 indicators that the Doing Business project compiles) and the
sub-score for enforcing contracts, which we felt to be particularly relevant for entrepreneurial
finance. These measures were compiled annually since 2004; for observations prior to this year,
we used the score for 2004.

We also gathered three metrics that we measured entrepreneurial and innovative activity. First, we
gathered country-level venture capital investment data from two sources.

The initial source of information was various national and regional associations. These
organizations routinely gather data on venture capital investments that should be of high quality
due to their close ties to members. Unfortunately, these data had two substantial limitations. First,
in much of the world, these associations were quite new and only recently began tracking venture
investments. Second, not all groups used the same methodologies.

Consequentially, we also used Refinitiv VentureXpert data (other databases had limited global
coverage, especially in the 1990s). The data included 342,832 transactions with an average of 2.16
investors per deal. We removed transactions with missing total investment values, or transactions
classified as Buyout, Fund of Funds, Generalist Private Equity, Mezzanine, Other Investor (Non-
Private Equity), Other Private Equity, and Real Estate. Our final deal count was 204,446
transactions. We summed the venture capital investment by country and year. Of 6,150 country-
year observations between 1990 and 2019, 4,150 had no data from either source, in which case we
assumed there were no venture capital investments. Table A-3 summarizes the methodology.

Finally, we gathered information about U.S. patenting activity from Clarivate's Derwent
Innovation and the USPTO's PatentsView databases. U.S. patents have several advantages when
evaluating these programs:




                                                 8
    ·   First, the use of USPTO awards assured that patents across nations were more directly
        comparable, thereby facilitating cross-national analyses. Some nations, for instance, were
        characterized by very narrow patent filings, which may inflate award counts.
    ·   Second, the standards for U.S. patent filings were unaffected by policy changes in the home
        country (except in the U.S., where a substantial literature suggests that patent policy was
        shaped by many considerations largely exogenous to entrepreneurship promotion). While
        it might be objected that many national patents were not filed in the U.S., we expected that
        more important awards would be filed in the U.S., as otherwise the inventions would not
        be protected in this important market.
    ·   Finally, unlike initial public offerings, which can take place years or even more than a
        decade after a company's innovations attract the attention of venture groups, the lag
        between innovation and patent filing was generally quite short: Hall et al. 1986 highlighted
        the short lag between R&D spending and patent filings.6 It should be noted, however, that
        foreign entities have one year after filing in their home country to file applications directly
        in the U.S. They may be able to delay their U.S. filings by up to 30 months after the original
        filing by exploiting features of the Patent Cooperation Treaty, as described at
        https://www.wipo.int/pct/en/faqs/faqs.html. Thus, even if the public programs had an
        immediate effect on innovation, there would likely be a delayed response in U.S. patent
        filings.

We extracted from these patent databases the name and nationality of each inventor, the primary
patent class, the application date, the identity of the assignee(s), and the number of citations
(through September 29, 2020) for each patent. Following Moretti (2019), we assigned patents to
countries proportionately to the number of investors from each particular nation. Appendix 5
provides more details about the construction of the patent database.

Using these data, we created four patent-based measures:

    ·   The first includes the overall number of U.S. patents applied in a given year and country.
    ·   The second was the number of "top patents", which are patents at the top 10% of citations,
        relative to other awards in that application year and patent class.
    ·   The third measure was the number of patents in basic technology classes. Following the
        approach of Akcigit et al. (2020), we define basic patent classes as the patent classes that
        are in the top 10% in citations to academic journals per patent, relative to other CPC classes
        in the same year.
    ·   Finally, we counted the volume of patenting by new patenting entities in a given country-
        year, based on the assignees who were quite new to the patent database.

    3. Stylized Facts about Government Funding Programs of Entrepreneurial Ventures

We thus assembled a hand-collected data of government funding programs of entrepreneurial
ventures around the world. Given the novelty of the data, and the limited information available in
the literature about the extent and structure of these programs, in this section, we describe several
stylized facts that also guide our main analysis in Section 4 below.

6


                                                  9
Stylized Fact 1: Government funding programs have become increasingly more prevalent, and
today are common around the globe.

As illustrated in Table 1, our data covered 755 government funding programs in 66 countries
around the world active between 1995 and 2019. On average, governments spent $1.85 billion per
year (conditional on having at least one policy). On average, a given country had 11.4 such
policies, and the average funding program lasted 11 years.

The tendency to rely on such government funding programs was geographically dispersed, and not
just a phenomenon confined to developed countries. For example, Figure 1 illustrated the total
number of policies around the world. Countries that had a significant number of different countries
include Canada, Germany, and the Netherlands, but also Turkey and a number of Eastern European
nations. Figure 2 presented the annual budget in these nations, and Figure 3 captured spending
relative to GDP. While Figure 2 illustrated a strong correlation with the size of the nations (such
as in the case of Brazil, China, Russia, and the U.S), Figure 3 revealed that a few smaller nations
spent significantly on such entrepreneurial funding programs. Canada, China, France, Germany,
and Indonesia were in the highest category in both Figures 2 and 3.7 Finally, Figure 4 explored the
stability of these programs, in terms of their length. Overall, it is evident that the use of such
programs is widespread.

It is also interesting to note that the importance of these government programs increased over time.
Figure 5 illustrated the annual aggregate budgets allocated for government funding programs of
entrepreneurial ventures. The figure illustrated the steady and significant increase in global
government spending over time, from roughly $50 billion in 1995 to more than $170 billion in
2019.

Stylized Fact 2: The aggregate budget of government funding programs is comparable to the
global venture capital market.

It is also interesting to compare these programs to the global venture capital market. As illustrated
in Figure 5, over the last decade, the average cumulative annual budget of such government
funding programs around the world was $156 billion. In contrast, global annual disbursements of
traditional venture funds around the world were on average $153 billion, as tabulated by
CrunchBase's Global VC Reports.8

Stylized Fact 3: Governments rely on a host of different financial instruments.



7
  The reader may be surprised by the inclusion of Algeria among the top nations. Algeria's ranking
was driven by the programs for young entrepreneurs run by the Agence Nationale de Soutien à
l'Emploi des Jeunes (ANSEJ), which was characterized by BTI as "a massive public investment"
(https://www.bti-project.org/en/reports/country-report-DZA-2020.html). For more details on the
program, see https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2014/cr14161.pdf.
8
    https://news.crunchbase.com/news/the-q4-eoy-2019-global-vc-report-a-strong-end-to-a-good-
but-not-fantastic-year/ and earlier years.
                                                 10
Panel A of Table 2 illustrated the different types of financial instruments employed by
governments. The most prevalent type of government instrument was grants, accounting for 43.8%
of all programs, as noted in column 1. The second most popular financing form was equity funding,
accounting for 18.2%. But governments utilize a host of other types of financial instruments,
ranging from credit guarantees and loans to innovation vouchers to tax credits. It is interesting to
note that when accounting for the size of the programs, as illustrated in column 2, tax credits and
government loans were more significant, partially because they tended to be utilized by later-stage
and larger companies.

Stylized Fact 4: Government funding programs often involve private capital markets.

Government funding programs often relied on private capital investors. Panel B of Table 2 showed
that the involvement came in various forms. Column 1 illustrated that the involvement of private
investors in the investment committee occurs in 35% of the government funding programs.
However, the most popular form of reliance on private investors was through the matching
requirements, in which government funding was conditional on the ability of firms to raise
matching capital from the private sector. Such requirements existed in 43% of the government
programs.

Quite remarkably, in 85% of all government funding programs, private investors were involved.
The particular design of government funding programs of entrepreneurial ventures is central to our
analyses below.

Stylized Fact 5: Government funding programs often target specific industries and company
stages.

Panel C and D of Table 2 highlighted the industries and company stages targeted by programs. In
our coding, we allowed programs to highlight multiple categories. In terms of the number of
programs, programs focusing on the life sciences and technology firms were the most common, as
well as those focusing on early-stage firms. We also tabulate categories that were excluded from
coverage in Panel D. Here, agricultural, financial services, and sin industries were the most
frequently explicitly excluded.

   4. The Correlation between Private and Public Activity

We first examined the relationship between national characteristics and the decision to begin these
programs. In particular, we focused on whether, as delineated in the introduction, these programs
were positively or negatively correlated with private entrepreneurial finance.

Table 3 provided a breakdown of nations along various dimensions, comparing the number of
policies active between 1995 and 2019. The number of active programs was highly related to
national characteristics. In particular, nations with larger populations, wealthier countries, those
with more patenting and venture capital activity, those with greater credit availability and investor
protection, and with more public market and IPO activity were more likely to have such programs.
These tabulations were corroborated by Figure 6, a bin-scatter plot showing a strong linear
relationship between the volume of venture capital investment in 1994 and the dollar-weighted

                                                 11
number of active programs in 2019. Of course, the interpretation of these univariate comparisons
must be cautious.

Thus, we turned to an econometric approach. Table 4 exploited the panel nature of the data to
examine the decision to begin programs. The dependent variable, ActiveGovPoliciesc,t, was the
budget-weighted number of active policies in each country-year between 1995 and 2019. We
included fixed effects for each country c to control for unobserved heterogeneity and a vector of
country characteristics Xc,t. In some specifications, we added year fixed effects  .

              ActiveGovPoliciesc ,t = c + t +  x PrivateVCc,t-1 +  x Xc,t + c,t (1)

Even after controlling for each nation, the coefficient on private venture capital investments  was
significantly positive. Lagged venture activity was strongly associated with the presence of such
policies. A one standard deviation increase in lagged VC investments led to a 60% increase in the
number of active programs in a country.

Table 5 presented another robustness check. Some policies targeted particular industries, while
others prohibited such investments. We focused on the eight industries most frequently mentioned
in these provisions. These sectors were agriculture (including forestry, fishing, and fish farming),
extractive (especially mining and oil-and-gas), financial (encompassing as well insurance and real
estate), healthcare (including biotechnology, devices, and pharmaceuticals), industrials (such as
aerospace, defense, machinery, industrial, and transport), sin (including alcohol, gambling, and
sex-related firms), sustainability (especially cleantech and recycling), and technology (such as
artificial intelligence, communications, electronics, and software). We identified annual venture
investments in these country-industry-year triples based on four-digit Standard Industrial
Classification codes. Table 2 highlighted that the most targeted industries were high technology,
healthcare, and sustainability, with the addition of a few large programs targeting agriculture-
related businesses.

We reported in Table 5 analyses akin to the spirit of those in Table 4. Because the observations
were at the country-industry or country-industry-year level, even in the cross-sectional analyses,
we were able to use country and industry fixed effects.

In the first three regressions, we used TargetedIndustryi,c,t, which denoted as one whether an
industry i in country c was specifically targeted in a given period t and zero otherwise, as a
dependent variable. We looked at whether a policy targeting that industry was introduced between
1995 and 2019 (in regression 1), or whether such a policy was active in those years (in regressions
2 and 3). More specifically, we estimated in regressions 2 and 3 at the industry-country-year level:

            TargetedIndustryi,c t = i + c + t +  x PrivateVCi,c,t-1 +  x Xc,t + i,c,t (2)

In the fourth and fifth regressions, we repeated the analysis, now using the dollar volume of active
government policies in a given country and year targeting a given industry.

Lagged venture activity in that industry (the coefficient ) had a powerful explanatory effect in the
regressions, even after controlling for country, industry, and year fixed effects, as well as annual


                                                 12
population and per capita GDP. These results supported the view of complementarity between
public entrepreneurial finance programs and private activity.

In the appendix tables, we explored additional robustness checks. Table A-4 explored the
relationship between venture activity and program initiation in the cross-section. We divided the
sample into three classes of programs (as in Table 2): those involving equity investment, those
involving loans, mezzanine, and other debt-related instruments, and programs focused on grants
(including those employing tax credits). Table A-5 looked at Table 4, now divided into the three
categories. The results were generally robust, though the standard errors were substantially nosier
when programs were divided by type.

   5. The Design of Programs

We next sought to understand how the design of programs differed across nations. As noted in the
introduction, there were reasons to expect that the involvement of the private sector would be
greater in better- or worse-governed nations. We also examined the impact of program focus. As
highlighted in the introduction, challenges to the public sector were particularly acute in efforts to
boost early-stage entrepreneurial finance, due to the substantial information asymmetries that
surround these ventures.

Before we looked at these questions, however, we revisited the positive correlation between public
and private entrepreneurial finance documented in Section 3. We asked whether the extent of these
correlations differs with the quality of the governments.

Table 6 repeated the analysis in Table 4. Now we added a measure of the effectiveness of
government and the rule of law in each nation, as well as these measures interacted with the volume
of venture investment in the previous year. More specifically, we estimated:

   ActiveGovPoliciesc ,t = c + t + 1 x PrivateVCc,t-1 + 2 x GovEff c,t-1 +  x PrivateVCc,t-1 x
                                GovEff c,t-1 +  x Xc,t +  c,t (3)

The coefficients on the government efficiency measures (2) were of little significance. Much of
their impact was presumably subsumed in the country fixed effects. (While these scores changed
over time, they tended to be quite stable). However, the coefficients on the interaction terms ()
were highly positive. While the coefficient on lagged venture activity (1) continued to be positive,
the only significant coefficients were the interaction between the venture measure and government
quality. The positive relationship between high-quality public administration and public-private
relationship suggested a positive view of the correlations documented in Section 3.

Figure 7 showed this relationship graphically: the relationship between government programs and
private VC funding, split by high and low government effectiveness countries. The figure
illustrated the heterogeneity in the relationship along this difference: the association was
noticeably stronger for countries with more effective governments. We repeated the analysis in
Table A-6, now using scores for the enforcement of contracts and the ease of doing business. The
results with ease of doing business were similar; those with the contract enforcement score were
much weaker (though directionally similar).


                                                 13
We found additional consistent evidence when we explored the influence of policy activity in
neighboring nations. Policies in neighboring countries could matter due to be "policy diffusion,"
where initiatives in one nation were understood and emulated elsewhere. While this phenomenon
has been extensively explored in political science (e.g., Volden, Ting, and Carpenter 2009), it has
received less scrutiny in economics. In this case, the experiences nearby might have led to a greater
appreciation of the importance of private sector involvement and influenced program design as a
consequence.

Table 7 looked at this phenomenon. We used panel data between 1995 and 2019 as before, using
the weighted number of new venture policies active in a given year as the dependent variable. We
used fixed effects as before, as well as controls for country size. We constructed the weighted
average of active policies in neighboring nations in the prior year. To create these measures, we
relied on CEPII data (http://www.cepii.fr/cepii/en/bdd_modele/bdd.asp) to create a matrix that
identified all neighboring countries for a given country. Merging it with our data allowed us to
calculate for each country-year the total weighted number of policies active in all neighboring
countries.

In the first and third regressions, we showed that the presence of neighbors with these policies was
a strong driver of the initiation or continuation of these programs. A one standard deviation
increase in active programs in neighboring countries was associated with 50-70% more active
policies in the country. While lagged venture capital activity in the nation in question continued to
be significantly positive, policy initiatives by neighbors were significantly associated with active
policies.

In the second and fourth regressions, we explored the suggestion above: that the presence of nearby
programs might have led to a greater appreciation of the complementarity between public and
private entrepreneurial finance. Indeed, the interaction between lagged neighboring programs and
private venture financing was strongly positive. In nations where neighbors undertook these
programs, the public-private complementarity was greater. Table A-7 re-estimated Table 7 without
the venture activity measure.

We then turned to the specific ways in which programs interacted with the private sector. In
particular, we examined three mechanisms (tabulated in Table 2) through which governments
could so engage:

   ·   The first of these was a matching fund requirement. In these cases, public investment was
       conditioned on raising capital from another source. Programs differed substantially on the
       match rate required and in the acceptable range of sources (e.g., whether funds raised from
       another public body were acceptable for a match). The essential motivation, though, was
       the same: the willingness of another investor provides a second, independent opinion for
       the public body.

   ·   The second mechanism was the involvement of the private sector in the investment
       decision-making process. Often programs included one or more entrepreneurs or venture
       capitalists on the investment committee that allocated funds. Such members might bring a
       different perspective to these deliberations.

                                                 14
   ·   A third approach was not to fund entrepreneurs directly, but rather to finance financial
       intermediaries, for instance, venture capital firms or angel groups, who could invest the
       funds according to their judgment (subject to various rules, such as restrictions on the
       industry and the geography of the financed firms). By removing the government from the
       financing decision, these programs sought to improve the quality of the decision-making
       and insulate the choices from political pressures.

Table 8 looked at the use of these provisions. The unit of observation in each regression was each
public entrepreneurial finance program p introduced between 1995 and 2019. We employed a
composite measure, PrivateSectorp, as the dependent variable, which was the sum of these three
elements (each coded from zero to one). The table presented ordered logit and ordinary least
squares (OLS) specifications (though the results were robust to others). In Panel A, we used the
effectiveness of governance and rule of law scores in the year of the policy introduction as the key
independent variables, as well as the natural logarithm of venture capital investment. We
controlled for population and per capita GDP:

             PrivateSectorp = 1 x PrivateVCc,t-1 + 2 x GovEff c,t-1 +  x Xc,t +  c,t (4)

Panel A of Table 8 showed that nations with better public governance, whether measured through
the effectiveness of government or rule of law score, were more likely to incorporate these
elements. When designing these policies, these nations seemed to respond to concerns about
investor protection, and adjusted the program design accordingly.

In Tables A-8 and A-9, we explored the robustness of these analyses. In Table A-8, we instead
used the scores of the ability to enforce contracts and the ease of doing business. We found a strong
association between the private sector engagement provisions and these two scores. When we
examined the individual program elements in A-9, the results were similar to Table 8, especially
for the matching fund and intermediary finding comments.

A final suggestion in the introduction was that whatever the policy of the government, these
protections should have been more common in programs facing greater informational
asymmetries. We examined this, at least roughly, by repeating the analysis in Panel A of Table 8,
now adding a dummy for programs with an early-stage focus, as well as an interaction with the
measure of government quality. Panel B was consistent with this suggestion. Programs focusing
on early-stage investments were more likely to have private sector involvement in these programs.

   6. Innovation and Government Funding Programs

The final analysis of the paper examined the consequences of these government funding efforts
for innovation. Any analysis that attempts to establish the causal consequences of these programs
had to be approached with caution due to two issues. Before turning to the analysis, we discuss
these concerns and how we addressed them.

The first of these issues is that we employed a staggered difference-in-difference analysis.
Moreover, as shown in Table 1, countries that undertake a single entrepreneurial finance policy
typically initiate multiple subsequent ones. Based on critiques such as Athey and Imbens (2018),

                                                 15
it is widely understood that this setting can lead to biased estimates of average treatment effects
unless precautions are taken.

Second, the decision to initiate these programs is non-random. The familiar Manski (1993)
reflection problem may hold here: the same underlying considerations that led to a boost in
innovation may also have triggered individual nations to start public entrepreneurial finance
programs. As we discuss below, the lack of pre-existing trends alleviate this concern.

To address the first concern, we employed four alternative approaches:

    ·   Method 1: We used first public entrepreneurial finance policy introductions only. We
        included 30 country-year observations for each country (1990-2019, conditional on data
        availability), and used all countries in the sample. The 139 of the countries that were never
        treated were used as controls.
    ·   Method 2: We used first policy introductions, as well as subsequent initiations, so long as
        there were no policy introduction in the five years prior. This added 16 additional initiations
        to the original 65. We continued to have 30 country-year observations for each country,
        and used all 204 countries in the sample. But we reset the relevant lead/lag indicators to 1
        for the second initiation, as well as for the first.9
    ·   Method 3: We used first policy introductions, as well as subsequent initiations, so long as
        there was no introduction in the five years prior, with the addition of a new independent
        observation for each additional program. Again, this added 16 additional initiations to the
        original 65. Using this approach, if Argentina had two clean initiations, we would have 60
        country-year observations for Argentina rather than 30. We again used the 139 of the
        countries that were never treated as controls.
    ·   Method 4: We used the stacked regressions approach implemented in Cengiz et al. (2019)
        and documented in Baker, Larcker, and Wang (2021). In this case we just used the five
        years prior to and after each policy initiation as observations for the treated and control
        nations.

The baseline specifications reported in Tables 9, 10, and A-10 and Figure 8 used the first method.
Methods 2 and 3 yielded quite similar results, as Tables A-11 and A-12 illustrated. Method 4
(Table A-13) displayed a similar increase after the policy initiation, though also evidence of a pre-
trend in some specifications.

It should be noted that our chosen approach, while more attractive from an estimation perspective,
sharply reduced the number of program initiations under study. This was particularly a concern in
Table 10, where we sought to distinguish between the relative impact of different types of
programs. As discussed below, in light of this concern, we looked at the combined impact of two
types of policies whose impact on subsequent innovation was anticipated to be particularly
positive.




9
 Note that this method will not include the >=+5 indicator from the first initiation for observations
beginning five years before the initiation of the second policy.
                                                  16
To address the second concern, we plotted the effects dynamically in Figure 8. The lack of pre-
existing trends provided us with some comfort with respect to the causal interpretation of the
results in this section. It should also be noted that, as discussed above, we are examining U.S.
patent applications, whose review standards should not be influenced by policy changes in the
nation initiating the entrepreneurial finance program.

Our baseline analysis relied on the following specification:

                      Innovationc,t = c + t + x POSTc,t +  x Xc,t + c,t (5)

where Innovationc,t were the logarithms of (one plus) the four measures of the U.S. patent filings
in a given country-year discussed in Section 2.3. POSTc,t was a dummy variable denoting that the
observation year was after that in which the country initiated its first program. The specification
included country and year fixed effects, as well as controls for population, per capita GDP, and
lagged venture capital activity. Standard errors were clustered at the country level.

The results of this specification are presented in Table 9. In column (1), the dependent variable
was the log number of patent applications. We found that the coefficient of the POST variable
equaled 0.344 and was statistically significant at the 1% level. The coefficient suggested a 41%
(=exp(0.344)) increase in patenting activity following the introduction of the first government
funding program.

Of course, the number of patents may not necessarily reflect the volume of high-quality
innovations. Therefore, in column (2), we focused on the number of "top patents," that is, those in
the top 10% of citations of all those with the same application year and technology class. Following
the initiation of government funding programs, the number of top patents filed increased
significantly by 32%.

It is also interesting to note that government programs seemed to induce patenting activity in more
basic technologies, as noted in column (3), which may reflect more fundamental discoveries.
Moreover, column (4) illustrated that government funding programs seemed to increase the
likelihood of patenting by new patenting entities by 24%.

These results suggested that government funding programs were associated with subsequent
increases in innovation. As noted above, a natural concern about the interpretation of the results
was that government funding programs and the increases in local innovation activity arose due to
an unobserved third factor. To explore whether this was the case, we plotted the innovation
dynamics in the five years before and after the initiation of initial government entrepreneurial
fiannce programs. Specifically, we estimated the following specification at the country-year level,
following the suggested approach of Clarke and Schythe (2020):
                                                               =4

            =  +  +   1{   - 5} +   1{ =  + }
                                                               =-4
                             +   1{   + 5} +  +  (6)




                                                17
where we included indicator variables for the years before and after the program initiation. Again,
the specification included country and year fixed effects, as well as the same set of country-specific
controls as described above. Standard errors were clustered at the country level. The omitted
baseline was the year prior to policy initiation, which was normalized to zero. The effects were
thus identified from the differences between treated countries and never-treated countries, as well
as differential timing of introduction of such programs within the treated countries.

Figure 8 illustrated the coefficients on the time dummies for the years surrounding the program
initiations with 95% confidence intervals. In Panel A, we saw a gradual increase in the number of
patent applications following the initiation of government funding program. The effect became
statistically significant in the third year after the funding program's initiation. We found similar
patterns when we focused on the number of top patent applications (Panel B), the number of
patents in basic research (Panel C), and the number of applications by new patenting entities (Panel
D).10 It is important to note that in all figures, we did not find any evidence for the existence of
statistically significant pre-trends, which helped alleviate concerns about pre-trends and reverse
causality issues.

We then looked at the differential impact of program initiations on innovation. In particular, we
hypothesized that these programs were more impactful when the information asymmetries that
surrounded the funded companies were greater, which should be associated with programs with a
focus on early-stage investments. We also hypothesized that the programs that involving the
private sector should have been more efficacious, for the reasons delineated earlier in the paper.

In addition to the relatively small number of program initiations that we examined, we also
grappled with the fact that programs with an early-stage focus or matching provisions became
more frequent over time. In particular, the correlation coefficient in programs initiated between
1990 and 2019 between the program start date and the probability that the program had an early-
stage focus was +0.28. The correlation in the same sample between the start date and a dummy
variable denoting the presence of at least one matching requirement was +0.53. Thus, the early
programs that dominated the initiation sample were less likely to have an early-stage focus and
(especially) matching requirements.

As a result, in Table 10, we looked at programs that had either of these two features. We compared
the impact on innovation of the initiation of programs with either an early-stage focus or matching
requirements on the one hand and the remaining programs on the other (or both features). Both the
early-stage and matching requirements programs might be anticipated to have a higher impact on
innovation. This approach allowed us to create pairs of regressions with roughly equal sample
sizes.

The results in Table 10 were consistent with our hypotheses. In column (1), we explored the effect
on the number of patent applications. We found statistically significant positive effects in the years
following program initiations. In contrast, when we explored the effects of other programs on
patenting activity, as illustrated in column (2), we found less consistently significant effects.



10
     The regressions behind these figures are provided in Table A-10.
                                                 18
Similar contrasts also emerged when exploring other dependent variables, such as the number of
top patents, number of basic patents, and the number of new patenting entities.

We tested the differences in the coefficients across the pairs of regressions by estimating a pooled
regression that stacked the observations from the two estimations. We estimated separate
coefficients of the ten observation periods (as in equation (6)), as well as separate annual
coefficients for the marginal differences between programs that were focused on early-stage
projects or had matching requirements on the one hand and the remaining programs on the other
hand. The final line of the table reports the tests of the null hypothesis that the sum of the
coefficients for the five interaction terms between period 0 and period 4 were equal to zero.11 In
three of the four cases, the sum of the coefficients in the two equations were significantly different
from zero at least at the ten percent confidence level.

Taken together, the results provided suggestive evidence that government funding programs
improved high quality and basic innovation. These effects took place particularly in the set of
programs that either targeted early-stage companies or required matching funding from the private
capital markets.

     7. Mechanisms

The main contributions of our paper were two-fold. First, we shed light on the scale and design of
government funding programs tailored to boost entrepreneurial activity around the world. Second,
we explored how public entrepreneurial finance interacted with private capital markets. We found
that government funding was positively correlated with the local availability of venture capital
funding, a result that held both at the country and the industry level.

In this section, we considered four potential mechanisms that may have driven this
complementarity. The evidence compiled above helped distinguish between the various
explanations.

7.1 Trend-Chasing

One possible interpretation of the positive correlation between private capital markets and public
government programs was that both sets of actors were pursuing investments perceived as
promising attractive private returns. Such a strategy could lead to crowding out, where firms that
would have raised private capital instead receive the equivalent amount in subsidies (see Lach
2002 and Wallsten 2000, as well as Lerner 2009 for a more general discussion).

Such a scenario may be a consequence of the criteria by which many public firms were evaluated
or structured. For instance, Wallsten (2000) suggested that in its first decades, the Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) program in the US was largely evaluated through compilations of
"success stories": accounts of companies that received public funding and then achieved success
in the product and/or financial markets. As he noted, such schemes were problematic as they led


11
  We exclude the binned period 5 and after indicator from this joint test as any subsequent program
initiations during the sample period may have had different features from the first.
                                                 19
program managers to focus on "measurable private returns and anecdotes, largely ignoring the
difficult-to-estimate expected returns and spillovers." Such an evaluation scheme may have led
program administrators to target sectors that were contemporaneously the focus of intense investor
interest.

Meanwhile, many equity programs in the sample featured an "evergreen" structure, where program
administrators could reinvest the proceeds from their investments. Obtaining appropriations for
additional investment capital was frequently challenging. This program design may have again
driven officials, eager to sustain their programs and their own positions, to select transactions
promising the highest private returns.

However, this interpretation of the results was inconsistent with the two findings documented
above. First, government programs frequently relied on private capital markets through the
involvement of private sector actors in investment screening, the funding of intermediaries rather
than direct companies, and capital matching requirements. The frequent reliance of government
programs on private capital markets suggested that the public funding was doing more than
"chasing" private funding.

The second relevant set of findings related to where the correlations between private and public
funding were the strongest. Under the trend-chasing hypothesis, we might have expected that a
wide range of governments would have followed local venture capital activities. Alternatively, if
trend-chasing was a manifestation of the "gaming" of evaluation criteria or program design, such
behavior might have been especially common in settings where government effectiveness was
lower. Instead, more effective governments were more likely to deploy their public funding in a
manner that was highly correlated with private funding. Similarly, effective governments, whom
we would expect to allocate capital more efficiently, were more likely to rely on private capital
markets when structuring their funding programs.

7.2 Rent Extraction

Many government policies seek in principle to stabilize business cycle-fluctuations, such as
lowering interest rates and easing credit constraints during economic downturns. We might have
anticipated that public entrepreneurial finance programs would have displayed the same pattern.
Instead, government programs geared to funding entrepreneurial ventures were pro-cyclical,
positively correlated with the availability of venture capital funding.

A second explanation for this timing was rent-seeking. The literature has suggested that financing
programs of rent-extracting governments have had a pro-cyclical bias, in order to appropriate the
abundant revenues during booms for the benefit of special interests (Alesina, Campante, and
Tabellini 2008, Ilzetzki 2007).12 Public programs around the world to subsidize firms (Shleifer and
Vishny 1998), and entrepreneurial entities specifically (Lerner 2009), have fallen prey to influence



12
  Similarly, Calderón, Duncan, and Schmidt-Hebbel (2012) argue that the ability of countries to
adopt such counter-cyclical policies largely depends on countries' quality of institutions: countries
with stronger institutions can more creditability commit to pursuing such cyclical policies.
                                                 20
activities. Such forces could thus explain the positive correlation we found between private capital
markets and government funding programs.

However, this channel was inconsistent with our findings. In contrast to the literature mentioned
above, we found that the positive correlation between public and private sources of capital was
greater among countries with stronger institutions: i.e., countries with more effective governments
(a measure strongly inversely correlated with the level of corruption).

7.3 Variation in Fiscal Policy
Another potential interpretation was that the documented complementarity between private and
public entrepreneurial finance simply reflected pro-cyclical government spending, and thus could
be viewed primarily as a fiscal issue. One initial piece of evidence inconsistent with this possibility,
however, was the frequent reliance of public programs on private capital markets, which suggested
that government programs were not merely a product of fiscal cyclicality. Our data allowed us to
further test this potential interpretation. In particular, if this explanation were true, we might have
expected government expenditures in a given year to be significantly positively correlated with
active government venture programs in the next. We could also assess the importance of
government spending as a share of GDP for program initiation across nations.

We obtained country-year level data on government expenditures to examine this possibility. The
results of this analysis did not support this potential interpretation. Table A-12 reproduced the
cross-sectional analysis of Table A-4, adding initial government expenditures as a share of GDP
on the right-hand side. The dependent variable was the budget-weighted number of policies
introduced between 1995 and 2019 in a given nation. The coefficient on the government
expenditure share was positive but statistically insignificant. Meanwhile, being in the top quartile
of initial VC activity remained a highly significant predictor of program initiation. Table A-13
replicated the panel analysis of Table 4 while including the natural logarithm of government
expenditures in the prior year as an explanatory variable. Once again, lagged government
expenditures had little effect, while lagged private venture activity continued to be strongly
associated with the presence of government policies.

Overall, the results showed that the findings of the complementarity between private and public
activity were robust to controlling for government spending. Coupled with our documentation of
a structural reliance on the private sector, this evidence was inconsistent with public-private
complementarity being a primarily fiscal phenomenon.

7.4 Mitigating Investment Frictions
The fourth potential channel was that government funding programs relied on private capital
markets to mitigate potential frictions associated with the allocation of capital to early-stage
ventures, therefore driving pro-cyclicality. There were several reasons for which private capital
allocation may have been more efficient. First, private financiers' compensation was strongly tied
to the success of their investments. Second, private investors developed careful approaches to
identify promising firms and provide effective governance and informal mentoring (as
documented, for instance, in Kaplan and Stromberg 2004 and Gompers et al. 2020). Replicating
the level of compensation and skillful due diligence and governance may have been difficult for

                                                  21
public sector bureaucrats. For instance, public officials might have found it hard to use the "soft
information" that has been shown to be so important in the contractual arrangements of
independent venture firms (Kaplan and Stromberg 2003).

We documented several findings consistent with this channel. First, as we discussed earlier, many
funding programs relied on private investors to allocate capital. Moreover, more effective
governments were more likely to rely on such investors when structuring these programs and
responded more strongly to the local availability of venture capital when deploying funds. We also
found that government programs that targeted earlier-stage ventures, where information
asymmetries were likely to be greater, were more likely to rely on private capital markets. Finally,
the increased correlation between public and private funding in countries with neighboring
programs was consistent with learning about effective program design.

This mechanism was consistent with Acemoglu and Robinson 2013, who argued that highly
effective governments foresee and address information and incentive problems that public
programs encounter. In our setting, by collaborating with private financiers of entrepreneurial
firms, the public bodies may have been able to mitigate these problems proactively.

   8. Conclusion

This paper examined government efforts to promote entrepreneurial finance, which collectively
represented a source of financing rivaling independent venture funds. We examined 755 programs
in 66 countries active between 1995 and 2019. These programs were more frequent in nations and
periods with more private venture activity. The positive correlation between private and public
activities was more pronounced when governments were more effective. When we looked at the
interactions between government programs and private capital markets, we found that these
mechanisms were more frequent when the government programs targeted earlier-stage
companies--where information asymmetries were likely greater--and the effectiveness of
government was higher. The initiation of these programs was associated with an increase in patent
filings from that nation, particularly for programs that focused on early-stage ventures or required
matching from the private sector. Together, the results suggested a socially beneficial
complementarity between the private and public sectors in this arena.

The analysis suggested a wide variety of questions for future research. Foremost among these was
the need for better understanding of the mechanisms employed in these programs and their
implications. These programs had a wide variety of provisions that lent themselves to theoretical
and empirical economic analysis. Examples included the differing sharing rules in the equity
programs (e.g., the capping of the return to the public sector, as was the case in the Israeli Yozma
initiative and a number of subsequent programs) and the extent that governments attempted to use
these programs to achieve multiple goals. For instance, the SBIR program simultaneously
attempted to promote technological innovation, to use small businesses to meet Federal R&D
needs, and to encourage diversity.

In short, despite the proliferation and size of public programs to promote entrepreneurial finance,
many questions remain about their design and implementation. It is our hope that this analysis will
encourage work on the open questions identified above, as well as related questions.

                                                22
References


Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity,
and Poverty, New York, Crown Business, 2012.

Alberto Alesina, Filipe R. Campante, and Guido Tabellini, "Why is fiscal policy often
procyclical?" Journal of the European Economic Association 6 (2008) 1006-1036.

Susan Athey and Guido W. Imbens, "Design-based analysis in difference-in-differences settings
with staggered adoption", Working paper no. 24693, https://www.nber.org/papers/w24963,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Andrew Baker, David F. Larcker, and Charles C.Y. Wang, "How much should we trust staggered
difference-in-differences estimates?," Working paper no. 246, Rock Center for Corporate
Governance, Stanford University, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3794018, 2021.

Shai Bernstein, Abhishek Dev, and Josh Lerner, "The creation and evolution of entrepreneurial
public markets," Journal of Financial Economics 136 (2020) 307-329.

Nicholas Bloom, Rachel Griffith, and John van Reenen, "Do R&D tax credits work? Evidence
from a panel of countries 1979-1997," Journal of Public Economics 85 (2002) 1-31.

Raffaello Bronzini and Eleonora Iachini, "Are incentives for R&D effective? Evidence from a
regression discontinuity approach," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (2014) 100­
134.

Doruk Cengiz, Arindrajit Dube, Attila Lindner, and Ben Zipperer, "The effect of minimum wages
on low-wage jobs," Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (2019), 1405­54.

Damian Clarke and Kathya T. Schythe, "Implementing the panel event study," Discussion paper
no. 13524, Institute of Labor Economics, http://ftp.iza.org/dp13524.pdf, 2020.

Paul A. David, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Andrew A. Toole, "Is public R&D a complement or
substitute for private R&D? A review of the econometric evidence," Research Policy 29 (2000)
497-529,

Roberto Duncan, Cesar Calderon, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, "Do good institutions promote
counter-cyclical macroeconomic policies?," Working paper no. 118, Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas, 2012.

Paul A. Gompers, Will Gornall, Steven N. Kaplan, and Ilya A. Strebulaev, "How do venture
capitalists make decisions?," Journal of Financial Economics 135 (2020) 169-190,

Bronwyn H. Hall, Zvi Griliches, and Jerry Hausman. "Patents and R&D: Is there a lag?,"
International Economic Review, 27 (1986) 265-283.


                                             23
Bronwyn H. Hall and Josh Lerner, "The financing of R&D and innovation." In Bronwyn H. Hall
and Nathan Rosenberg, editors, Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, New York: Elsevier-
North Holland, 2010, pp. 609-639.

Sabrina T. Howell, "Financing innovation: Evidence from R&D grants," American Economic
Review 107 (2017) 1136­1164.

Ethan Ilzetzki, "Rent-seeking distortions and fiscal procyclicality". Journal of Development
Economics 96.1 (2011) 30-46.

Steven N. Kaplan and Per Stromberg, "Financial contracting theory meets the real world: An
empirical analysis of venture capital contracts," Review of Economic Studies 70 (2003), 281-315.

Steven N. Kaplan and Per Stromberg, "Characteristics, contracts, and actions: Evidence from
venture capitalist analyses, Journal of Finance 59 (2004) 2177-2210.

Katja Kisseleva, "Public funding and entrepreneurial firm growth: Which channel works best?,"
Unpublished working paper, ESMT Berlin, 2020.

Saul Lach, "Do R&D subsidies stimulate or displace private R&D? Evidence from Israel," Journal
of Industrial Economics 50 (2002) 369-390.

Trinh Le and Adam B. Jaffe, "The impact of R&D subsidy on innovation: evidence from New
Zealand firms," Economics of Innovation and New Technology 26 (2017) 429-452.

Josh Lerner, Boulevard of Broken Dreams: Why Public Efforts to Boost Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital Have Failed--and What to Do About It, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2009.

Charles F. Manski, "Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection problem," Review
of Economic Studies 60 (1993) 531-542.

Kyle Myers and Lauren Lanahan, "Research subsidy spillovers, two ways," Unpublished working
paper, 2020 https://ssrn.com/abstract=3550479.

Jacquelyn Pless, "Are 'complementary policies' substitutes? Evidence from R&D subsidies in the
UK." Unpublished working paper, 2020, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3379256.

Pietro Santoleri, Andrea Mina, Alberto Di Minin, and Irene Martelli, "The causal effects of R&D
grants: Evidence from a regression discontinuity," LEM Papers Series 2020/18, Laboratory of
Economics and Management, Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy, 2020.

Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and Their
Cures, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1998.




                                              24
Craig Volden, Michael M. Ting, and Daniel P. Carpenter, "A formal model of learning and policy
diffusion," American Political Science Review 102 (1998) 319-32.

Scott J. Wallsten, "The effects of government-industry R&D programs on private R&D: The case
of the Small Business Innovation Research program," RAND Journal of Economics 31 (2000) 82­
100.




                                             25
Figure 1. The count of distinct entrepreneurial finance policies active between 1995 and 2019
inclusive by nation.




     (30,45]
     (20,30]
     (17,20]
     (15,17]
     (10,15]
     (8,10]
     (4,8]
     (3,4]
     (2,3]
     [1,2]
     No Programs Found




                                              26
Figure 2. Average of annual budget (in billions of US dollars) of entrepreneurial finance policies
active between 1995 and 2019 inclusive by nation.




     (5,15]
     (2,5]
     (1,2]
     (.8,1]
     (.4,.8]
     (.25,.4]
     (.05,.25]
     (.02,.05]
     (.003,.02]
     [0,.003]
     No Programs Found




                                               27
Figure 3. Average of annual budget/GDP (in percent) of entrepreneurial finance policies active
between 1995 and 2019 inclusive by nation.




     (.6,1.3]
     (.4,.6]
     (.2,.4]
     (.15,.2]
     (.09,.15]
     (.08,.09]
     (.03,.08]
     (.01,.03]
     (.002,.01]
     [0,.002]
     No Programs Found




                                             28
Figure 4. Average length (in years) of entrepreneurial finance policies active between 1995 and
2019 inclusive by nation.




     (17,50]
     (14,17]
     (12,14]
     (11,12]
     (10,11]
     (8,10]
     (7,8]
     (6,7]
     (5,6]
     [1,5]
     No Programs Found




                                              29
Figure 5. The figure indicates the aggregate spending on all active programs by year between
1995 to 2019.




Figure 6. The bin-scatter plot depicts the average number of active policies in 2019. Initial ln (VC
investment) is the natural logarithm of one plus a country's venture capital investment in 1994 (in
millions of US dollars). Policy counts are weighted by the policy's annual budget.




                                                30
Figure 7. This figure is a binned scatter plot of the weighted count of active policies versus the
natural logarithm of lagged VC activity split by government effectiveness, that is, above and below
the median level of the government effectiveness measure. The binscatter controls for population
and GDP per capita, and includes country and year fixed effects. Observations are at the country-
year level from 1995 to 2019. The figure corresponds to Table 6.




                                                31
Figure 8. New venture policy introduction and innovation outcomes. The figure shows the
coefficients on the relative year indicators from the following specification:
                                         =4

    =  +  +   1{   - 5} +   1{ =  + } +   1{   + 5} +  + 
                                        =-4
which includes country and year fixed effects as well as country-year specific controls, specifically
ln(Population), ln(Per capita GDP), and ln(Lagged venture capital activity). The construction of
the patent outcome variables is described in the Section 2.3 of the text. All patent variables are log
transformed.  is the year of the first introduction of an entrepreneurial finance program
observed in the sample period of 1990-2019 by country i. The vertical line is positioned at the year
prior to program initiation. Standard errors are clustered at the country level. 95% confidence
intervals are shown.




                                                 32
33
Table 1. Distribution of the budget and number of government entrepreneurial finance policies
active between 1995 and 2019. Observations are at the country-year level. The table presents the
sum of distinct policies active in this period, the count of years in which individual programs were
active, and the annual national budgets, as well as measures of the distribution of these variables
(total program as a share of GDP and policy age through time of termination or 2019). Distribution
measures are computed only for the 66 nations with at least one active policy between 1995 and
2019.

                                             Sum N Mean            P10 Median        P90
 Total Policy Count                           755 66 11.4            1      9         23
 Total Policy-Years                         7,368 66 111.6          17   83.5        234
 Average of Annual Budget (USD
                                           122.10 66       1.85 0.002        0.34    8.54
 Billions)
 Average of Annual Budget/GDP
                                                     66 0.227 0.001         0.106 0.662
 (%)
 Average length of policies (years)                  66    11.2       5     10.08      18




                                                34
Table 2. Characteristics of programs initiated, 1995-2019.

                                                       Share of
                                    Program counts       Budget-weighted programs
 Panel A: Program type
 Debt
 Credit Guarantee                            5.12%                        11.59%
 Loan                                       10.23%                        22.90%
 Mezzanine                                   1.75%                         7.98%
 Equity
 Business Angel                              5.41%                         1.89%
 Equity                                     18.27%                         6.87%
 Grant
 Grant                                      43.86%                        16.02%
 Innovation voucher                          5.85%                         0.39%
 Tax Credits                                 9.50%                        32.37%

 Panel B: Private sector involvement
 Role on Investment
 Committee                                  34.69%                        21.22%
 Funding Intermediaries                      7.02%                        12.58%
 Matching Fund Requirement                  43.63%                        26.91%

 Panel C: Industry Targeting
 Included industries
 Healthcare                                 10.67%                         8.00%
 Technologies                               15.94%                        11.89%
 Industrials                                 8.19%                         5.28%
 Sustainability                              9.21%                         7.31%
 Sin                                         0.15%                         0.01%
 Agriculture                                 5.99%                        11.04%
 Extractive                                  1.90%                         0.33%
 Financial                                   0.58%                         0.31%

 Excluded industries
 Healthcare                                 10.38%                         7.37%
 Technologies                                7.02%                         3.87%
 Industrials                                12.72%                         7.40%
 Sustainability                             11.99%                         8.04%
 Sin                                        17.69%                        11.13%
 Agriculture                                19.15%                         9.54%
 Extractive                                 16.96%                        11.03%
 Financial                                  18.57%                        11.77%

                                               35
Panel D: Stage and Alternative Objectives
Stage focus
Early-Stage/Seed                          81.87%   92.84%
Venture                                   47.60%   71.96%
Growth                                    20.76%   40.40%

Additional stated objectives
Diversity                                0.90%     0.06%
Meeting government needs                 0.20%     0.08%
Other goals                              1.51%     0.52%




                                           36
Table 3. Public entrepreneurial finance programs active between 1995 and 2019 and country characteristics.
                                                                                                         Average        Avg. no. of
                                                                                       Policy count        no. of        policies/
                                               No. of countries     Policy count
                                                                                        (weighted)      policies per     country
                                                                                                          country         (wtd.)
GDP                                  (Above)          102                675             550.47             6.62           5.40
                                     (Below)          102                 80              16.53             0.78***        0.16***
Population                                            103                588             546.01             5.71           5.30
                                                      102                167              20.99             1.64***        0.21***
Annual patent applications                             41                487             430.07            11.88          10.49
                                                      164                268             136.93             1.63***        0.83***
Annual VC funding                                      28                375             421.99            13.39          15.07
                                                      177                380             145.01             2.15***        0.82***
Annual IPO Proceeds                                    45                579             495.38              12.87        11.01
                                                      160                176              71.62               1.10***      0.45***
Domestic credit to private
sector / GDP                                          64                 535             449.92              8.36          7.03
                                                      64                  79              72.34              1.23***       1.13***
Stock market capitalization
to GDP                                                 50                459             356.96              9.18          7.14
                                                      155                296             210.04              1.91***       1.36***
Protecting minority investor index                     88                559             425.86              6.35          4.84
                                                       99                196             141.14              1.98***       1.43**
Income group                                           66                554             356.19              8.39          5.40
                                                      128                201             210.81              1.57***       1.65***
Legal origin - Common law                              66                270             139.85              4.09          2.12
Legal origin - Civil law                              107                361             330.70              3.37          3.09




                                                               37
Notes: The table explores the differences in active program counts between 1995 and 2019 among countries above and below median
levels of eight country-level characteristics: gross domestic product, population, annual patent applications, annual venture capital
funding, annual IPO proceeds, domestic credit to private sector as a percentage of GDP, stock market capitalization to GDP, and
protection of minority investors. We also divide nations by income group and legal origin. The medians of all variables are taken using
1994 data with the exception of the protecting minority investor index, for which we use the earliest year available, 2006. The Protecting
minority investor index ranges from a score of 0 to 100, from lowest to highest economy on this measure. Patent applications are the
total applications filed by nationals, as compiled by the World Intellectual Property Office. Income groups are low and lower-middle
vs. upper-middle and high. No. of countries denotes the number of countries above or below the median or in each group. Weighted
policy counts are weighted by the annual budget of the relevant policy. ***, **, and * (displayed in the second row of each measure)
indicate the statistical significance of the difference in means between the above and below median samples at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.




                                                                   38
Table 4. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies. Observations are annual ones of each
country in the sample between 1995 and 2019. The dependent variable is the budget-weighted number
of policies active in that year in a given nation. The independent variables include the natural
logarithm of population, per capita GDP, and lagged venture capital investment, as well as country
and year fixed effects. The standardized beta ln(VC investments in prior year) measures the percent
change in the dependent variable relative to its mean with a one standard deviation increase in ln(VC
investments in prior year).

                                                             (1)           (2)      (3)        (4)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                         0.628**      0.565**   0.511**   0.511**
                                                           (0.245)      (0.228)   (0.232)   (0.232)
 ln (Population)                                            0.516       -0.0168   -2.155*   -2.206*
                                                           (0.394)      (0.450)   (1.150)   (1.137)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                                    0.812**             -0.0802
                                                                        (0.337)             (0.279)
 Constant                                                   0.254        -0.566   3.331**   3.516**
                                                           (0.585)      (0.830)   (1.385)   (1.460)
 Adjusted R2                                                0.781         0.784    0.789     0.789
 Std. beta ln(VC investments in prior year)                 77.71         69.85    63.22     63.16
 Country FE                                                 YES           YES      YES        YES
 Year FE                                                                           YES        YES
 Observations                                               5,125       5,112      5,125     5,112
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           39
Table 5. Cross-sectional and panel analyses of industry-targeted new venture policies. Observations
in column 1 consist of each country-industry in the sample; in columns 2 through 5, annual
observations of each country-industry pair in the sample between 1995 and 2019. The dependent
variable in column 1 is a dummy indicating whether policies introduced between 1995 and 2019 in a
given nation targeted one of eight industries; in column 2 and 3, whether a policy targeting that
industry was active in that nation and year; and in columns 4 and 5, the cumulative dollar value of
policies active in a given country and year targeting a given industry. The independent variables in
column 1 include the budget-weighted number of policies active targeting that industry in 1994, an
indicator if the country-industry was in the top quartile of VC activity in 1994, and country and
industry fixed effects; in column 2 through 5, the natural logarithm of venture capital investment in
the country and industry in the year prior to the observation, population, and (in some regressions)
per capita GDP, and country, industry, and year fixed effects. The standardized beta measures the
percent change in the dependent variable relative to its mean with being a top VC industry-nation
indicator in column 1 and a one standard deviation increase in ln (VC investments in prior year in
industry-nation) in columns 2 through 5.

                                                     (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)
                                                   Cross-          Panel        Panel        Panel      Panel
                                                   section
                                                                  Active        Active     ln (Policy ln (Policy
                                                  Targeted       program       program     expenditu expenditu
                                                  industry           in            in         res in     res in
                                                                 industry-     industry-    industry- industry-
                                                                   nation        nation      nation)    nation)
 Initial top VC industry-nation                    0.182**
 indicator
                                                   (0.083)
 Initial weighted programs in                      -0.024
 industry-nation
                                                   (0.032)
 ln (VC investments in prior year in                              0.045***     0.045***    0.173***    0.173***
 industry-nation)
                                                                  (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.045)     (0.045)
 ln (Population)                                                  -0.087**     -0.092**    -0.316**    -0.343**
                                                                  (0.043)      (0.041)     (0.155)     (0.150)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                                            -0.007                 -0.038*
                                                                               (0.005)                 (0.021)
 Constant                                          0.096***       0.148***     0.165***    0.581***    0.673***
                                                   (0.016)        (0.056)      (0.054)     (0.211)     (0.208)
 Adjusted R2                                         0.407          0.299        0.299       0.284       0.285
 Std. beta                                          221.30         117.51       117.45      106.65      106.59
 Country FE                                          YES            YES          YES         YES         YES
 Industry FE                                         YES            YES          YES         YES         YES
 Year FE                                                            YES          YES         YES         YES
 Observations                                       1,640          41,000       40,896      41,000      40,896
Standard errors in parentheses; panel regressions clustered at country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


                                                            40
Table 6. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies, with quality of public governance
measures. Observations are annual ones of each country in the sample between 1995 and 2019. The
dependent variable is the budget-weighted number of policies active in that year in a given nation.
The independent variables include the natural logarithm of population, per capita GDP, and lagged
venture capital investment, scores of the effectiveness of government (alone and interacted with the
venture capital measure), and country and year fixed effects.

                                                              (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                           0.345       0.323     0.299     0.269
                                                            (0.213)     (0.223)   (0.193)   (0.204)
 Effectiveness of government score                           0.122       0.334
                                                            (0.573)     (0.563)
 ln (Lagged VC activity)* Govt. effectiveness               0.301**     0.275**
                                                            (0.147)     (0.138)
 Rule of law score                                                                 0.431     0.666
                                                                                  (0.422)   (0.449)
 ln (Lagged VC activity) * Rule of law                                            0.320*    0.277*
                                                                                  (0.180)   (0.166)
 ln (Population)                                             -0.093     -2.152*    0.185    -1.760*
                                                            (0.571)     (1.121)   (0.461)   (1.025)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                        1.029***    -0.114    0.976**   -0.084
                                                            (0.390)     (0.412)   (0.411)   (0.367)
 Constant                                                    -0.906     3.823**   -1.150    4.050**
                                                            (1.042)     (1.716)   (1.093)   (1.611)
 Adjusted R2                                                 0.786       0.791     0.821     0.824
 Country FE                                                   YES        YES       YES       YES
 Year FE                                                                 YES                 YES
 Observations                                                4,924       4,924    4,196      4,196
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           41
Table 7. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies, with a focus on the impact of nearby
nations. Observations are annual ones of each country in the sample between 1995 and 2019. The
dependent variable is the budget-weighted number of policies active in that year in a given nation.
The independent variables include the sum of the budget-weighted number of policies active in the
immediately prior year in neighboring nations, the natural logarithm of population and per capita
GDP, the logarithm of venture capital investment in the immediately prior year, and country and year
fixed effects.

                                                     (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)
 Weighted policies active in                       0.075**        -0.012    0.056*     -0.020
 bordering countries (prior year)                  (0.030)        (0.027)   (0.029)    (0.028)

 Weighted policies active in                                      0.021**              0.021**
 bordering countries (prior year) # ln                            (0.010)              (0.010)
 (VC investments in prior year)

 ln (VC investments in prior year)                 0.475**         0.157     0.442*     0.159
                                                   (0.231)        (0.160)   (0.235)    (0.176)
 ln (Population)                                    0.274         -1.328    -2.559**   -2.357**
                                                   (0.916)        (1.264)   (1.028)    (1.064)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                              1.049*                0.488
                                                                  (0.565)              (0.592)

 Constant                                           0.035         -0.007    5.274***   3.677**
                                                   (1.726)        (1.537)   (1.750)    (1.541)
 Adjusted R2                                        0.776          0.787     0.779      0.788
 Country FE                                         YES            YES        YES       YES
 Year FE                                                                      YES       YES
 Observations                                       4,325          4,325     4,325      4,325
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                            42
Table 8. The determinants of private sector participation in public entrepreneurial finance programs.
The observations are public entrepreneurial finance programs introduced between 1995 and 2019
with the requisite data. The dependent variable is a composite, measuring whether the program had a
matching fund requirement, the involvement of the private sector in the investment decision-making
process, and if it financed financial intermediaries. In Panel A, the independent variables include the
natural logarithm of population, per capita GDP, and venture capital investment in the year
immediately prior to the program introduction, and measures of the effectiveness of government and
rule of law in the year of the policy introduction. The first two specifications employ an ordered logit
specification; the remainder, an ordinary least squares one. Panel B adds a measure of whether the
program was early-stage and an interaction of this dummy with the effectiveness of government or
rule of law score.

Panel A: Basic analysis.

                                                      (1)           (2)       (3)        (4)
                                                   Ordered        Ordered     OLS        OLS
                                                     logit         logit
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                  -0.010        -0.020      -0.006    -0.010
                                                   (0.036)        (0.035)    (0.014)    (0.013)
 Effectiveness of government score                 0.681***                  0.245***
                                                   (0.189)                   (0.065)
 Rule of law score                                                0.718***              0.265***
                                                                  (0.160)               (0.053)
 ln (Population in prior year)                     -0.010          0.053      0.007      0.030
                                                   (0.089)        (0.085)    (0.034)    (0.032)
 ln (GDP in prior year)                                                       0.017      0.005
                                                                             (0.049)    (0.051)
 Constant                                                                    0.401**     0.392*
                                                                             (0.195)    (0.203)
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.063      0.085
 Observations                                        583            539        583        539
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           43
Panel B: With early-stage measure and interaction.
                                           (1)                      (2)       (3)        (4)
                                        Ordered                   Ordered     OLS        OLS
                                          logit                    logit

 ln (VC investments in prior year)                  -0.001         -0.011     -0.003     -0.007
                                                   (0.033)        (0.033)    (0.014)    (0.013)
 Early-stage focus                                 0.661***       0.946***   0.209***   0.285***
                                                   (0.249)        (0.221)    (0.073)    (0.065)
 Effectiveness of government score                 0.437**                   0.148**
                                                   (0.207)                   (0.069)
 Effectiveness of government * Early-                0.231                    0.099*
 stage focus
                                                   (0.176)                   (0.055)
 Rule of law score                                                0.555***              0.188***
                                                                  (0.176)               (0.054)
 Rule of law * Early-stage focus                                   0.071                  0.060
                                                                  (0.148)               (0.046)
 ln (Population in prior year)                     -0.020          0.033      0.006       0.023
                                                   (0.086)        (0.083)    (0.032)    (0.031)
 ln (GDP in prior year)                                                       0.020      -0.001
                                                                             (0.051)    (0.050)
 Constant                                                                     0.319       0.314
                                                                             (0.200)    (0.205)
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.116       0.147
 Observations                                        583            539        583         539
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           44
Table 9. New venture policies and innovation outcomes. This table reports the coefficients from the
following specification:

                                       =  +  +  +  + 

where  is a dummy variable equal to one the year of nation i's first program initiation, and
every year thereafter. The specification includes country and year fixed effects as well as country-
year specific controls  , specifically ln(Population), ln(Per capita GDP), and ln(Lagged venture
capital activity). The construction of the patent outcome variables is described in the Data section of
the text. All outcome variables are log transformed.

                                                        (1)               (2)        (3)           (4)
                                                                        Highly
 VARIABLES                                            Patents            cited   Basic class   New inventor

 Post Policy                                         0.344***      0.276***       0.244***       0.212**
                                                     (0.0946)      (0.0734)       (0.0749)       (0.0823)
 ln (Population)                                       0.186        0.0869          0.166         0.292*
                                                      (0.179)      (0.0722)        (0.104)        (0.165)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                 0.0902*        0.0404         0.0445        0.0835*
                                                     (0.0509)      (0.0270)       (0.0282)       (0.0440)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                   0.0609**      0.0528**      0.0550***        0.0208
                                                     (0.0253)      (0.0229)       (0.0189)       (0.0230)
 Constant                                            1.137***      0.454***       0.639***       0.689**
                                                      (0.301)       (0.140)        (0.166)        (0.270)

 Observations                                          5,928            5,928      5,928          5,928
 R-squared                                             0.958            0.941      0.948          0.948
 Country FE                                            YES              YES        YES            YES
 Year FE                                               YES              YES        YES            YES

Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                              45
Table 10. Heterogeneity analysis: matching or early-stage versus other programs. The table employs the following specification:
                                                                                   =4
                          =  +  +   1{   - 5} + =-4  1{ =  + } +   1{   + 5} +  + 

separately (a) for nations whose initiations had either a matching requirement or targeted early-stage companies and (b) for nations whose initiations
had neither of these characteristics. The specification includes country and year fixed effects, as well as country-year specific controls, specifically
ln(Population), ln(Per capita GDP), and ln(Lagged venture capital activity). The construction of the patent outcome variables is described in the text.
All outcome variables are log transformed.  is the year of the first introduction of an entrepreneurial finance program observed in the sample
period of 1990-2019 by country i. The final three lines present joint tests within regressions and across pairs of regressions.

                                                 (1)                 (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)         (7)              (8)
                                             Match/Early            Other     Match/Early        Other        Match/Early           Other     Match/Early        Other
    VARIABLES                                 Patents              Patents    Highly cited    Highly cited      Basic               Basic     New inventor    New inventor

    Year = 0                                   0.220***              0.0235     0.220*              0.110*      0.195**             -0.0284      0.131               0.0135
                                               (0.0693)            (0.0848)     (0.120)            (0.0656)    (0.0843)            (0.0980)    (0.0847)            (0.0856)
    Year = +1                                  0.223***             -0.0769     0.189**             0.0988       0.166               -0.118     0.160*              -0.0811
                                               (0.0658)            (0.0958)    (0.0925)            (0.0691)     (0.101)            (0.0919)    (0.0826)            (0.0949)
    Year = +2                                  0.201***             0.00385     0.257**             0.0862      0.226**             -0.0387    0.203**               -0.100
                                               (0.0719)             (0.106)     (0.102)            (0.0727)    (0.0973)            (0.0919)    (0.0797)             (0.116)
    Year = +3                                  0.309***               0.157     0.248**              0.155     0.299***            0.000401    0.249**                0.114
                                               (0.0848)             (0.108)     (0.120)            (0.0971)    (0.0985)             (0.115)    (0.0981)             (0.105)
    Year = +4                                  0.349***               0.193    0.361***            0.226***    0.447***              0.0978    0.376***               0.126
                                               (0.0960)             (0.117)     (0.119)            (0.0835)     (0.124)             (0.115)     (0.101)             (0.126)
    Year >= +5                                 0.456***            0.418***    0.468***            0.342***    0.392***               0.175     0.242*                0.192
                                                (0.134)             (0.143)     (0.152)             (0.107)     (0.130)             (0.130)     (0.131)             (0.131)

    Observations                                 4,884               5,087       4,884               5,087       4,884               5,087      4,884              5,087
    R-squared                                    0.953               0.943       0.941               0.927       0.943               0.930      0.941              0.929
    Lag indicators                               YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                YES
    Controls                                     YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                YES
    Country FE                                   YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                YES
    Year FE                                      YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                 YES         YES                YES
    p-Value, Joint F-test (0-2)                 0.0076              0.6277      0.0952              0.3724      0.0487              0.4743      0.0857             0.4414
    p-Value, Joint F-test (3-5)                 0.0021              0.0269      0.0082              0.0113      0.0057              0.1688      0.0020             0.4969
    p-Value, Sum of interaction
                                                          0.0617                          0.2723                          0.0204                          0.0745
    coeffs. (0-4)
*               **               ***
    p < 0.10,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01. Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level


                                                                                                     46
Appendix 1: Comparing Public and Private Entrepreneurial Finance Activity

Compiling data on traditional venture investment globally is difficult, due to the limited reporting.
Probably the best regarded set of estimates over the past decade have been compiled by Crunchbase,
Crunchbase compiles the total amount of capital into venture-backed firms, and exclude "private
equity rounds in non-venture-backed startups, undisclosed funding rounds, secondary market
transactions, post-IPO transactions, debt financings, grants, non-equity assistance, initial coin
offerings, and ... investments in companies not part of the technology ecosystem"
(https://news.crunchbase.com/methodology/). Their compilation does include investments into
venture-backed firms by investors who are not venture capitalists, such as corporations and sovereign
wealth funds.

It should be acknowledged that this methodology is likely to lead to some double-counting. The
Crunchbase funding includes equity invested directly by governments into companies already backed
by venture capitalists (including by international organizations not included in our analysis, such as
the International Finance Corporation and European Investment Fund). Some of the capital of the
venture groups will come from governments acting as limited partners as well.

The analysis focuses on the period from 1995 to 2019. The choice of the start date was associated
data availability, as discussed in the body of the paper. It should also be noted that the level of public
funding doubtless increased sharply in 2020, as many tens of billions of dollars allocated to support
entrepreneurial firms and venture funds across major industrialized nations in the months after the
onset of the COVID-19 crisis.13




13
  See, for example,
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/02/coronavirus-europe-races-to-rescue-tech-startups.html;
https://betakit.com/bdc-launches-matching-investment-program-for-canadian-vc-backed-
companies/; https://www.scribd.com/document/455681169/Letter-to-the-Chancellor; and
https://www.businessinsider.com/uk-future-fund-government-loans-startups-coronavirus-2020-4.
                                                   47
Appendix 2: Examples of Criteria for Selecting Projects

Policies in advanced economies focused on emerging markets

We drop policies focused specifically on emerging markets and not on the country in which they are
initiated.

Examples:
   · (Credit Guarantee) US Development Finance Corporation
          o Description: The US DFC assists in financing projects in emerging market economies.
             The program offers both direct equity into projects in the developing world as well as
             debt financing in the form of loans and loan guarantees to support investment projects
             in developing countries.
          o URL: https://www.dfc.gov/
          o Status: Dropped from sample

Policies supporting innovation centers

We keep policies supporting innovation centers so long as the innovation center itself offers financing
activities aimed towards SMEs or entrepreneurial firms.

Examples:
   · (Grant) Norway Centers for Research-Based Innovation
          o Description: The Centers for Research-Based Innovation focus on fostering
             collaboration between R&D-performing companies and research institutions. The
             Norwegian Research Council allocates an annual budget to the 24 active centers in the
             form of grants. The centers recruit doctoral students and encourage research output in
             the form of academic publications and commercial innovation. There do not appear to
             be any notable restrictions (other than that the business is involved in R&D) on
             companies that can participate. There is no emphasis on direct financing activities of
             the centers themselves to support SMEs or entrepreneurial firms.
          o URL: https://www.forskningsradet.no/en/about-the-research-council/programmes/sfi/
          o Status: Dropped from sample
   · (Credit guarantee) Swiss Innovation Parks
          o Description: The Swiss Innovation Parks offer support initiatives ranging from
             building networks, providing working space, and fostering collaboration with research
             institutes. While the Parks assist businesses in applying for grants and funding
             instruments, they do not specialize in financing activities for SMEs, but rather in
             mentorship-style support. The Swiss government supports the Innovation Parks with
             loans and loan guarantees.
          o URL: https://www.parkinnovaare.ch/innovation-park
          o Status: Dropped from sample

Policies that participate in international or joint initiatives




                                                  48
We keep policies that participate in international or joint initiatives so long as the participation is only
for funding purposes and the policy itself is a national government policy financing SMEs or
entrepreneurial firms.

Examples:
   · (Grant) Norway BIA Competition Arena
          o Description: The BIA program provides funding for research-based innovation
            projects across Norwegian industries. The program contributes to EUROSTARS, a
            joint initiative of EUREKA and the European Commission to strengthen research
            performance in SMEs. As a result, the BIA benefits from EUROSTARS and project
            financing is shared by the Norwegian Research Council and the EU. However, the
            policy provides support for Norwegian businesses only.
          o URL: https://www.forskningsradet.no/om-forskningsradet/programmer/bia/
          o Status: Kept in sample

Policies for special economic zones

We keep policies that are special economic zones so long as the zone emphasizes financing activities
aimed towards SMEs or entrepreneurial firms that fit the relevant policy type. There are few zones
that meet these criteria, however.

Examples:
   · (Grant) Thailand Eastern Economic Corridor of Innovation
          o Description: The Thai government aims to turn eastern provinces into a leading
            economic zone. Planned investment projects in the EEC include developing
            transportation infrastructure, promoting tourism, and developing business hubs. The
            Corridor of Innovation would involve establishing science parks to foster R&D.
            Overall, the emphasis of the policy is not on financing policies for SMEs but on
            creating a hub for innovation.
          o URL with information: https://www.aseanbriefing.com/news/thailand-eastern-
            economic-corridor/
          o Status: Dropped from sample
   · (R&D tax credit) Russia Special Economic Zones for Technological Innovation
          o Description: Russian companies in any of the 26 Special Economic Zones can enjoy
            reduced profit and property tax rates. While a subset of the Zones are aimed at
            encouraging innovation activity and businesses in these Zones are allowed tax
            benefits, the reductions are for all profits and not specifically for R&D activities.
          o URL                                    with                                 information:
            https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ru/Documents/tax/Tax_incentives_i
            n_Russia.pdf
          o Status: Dropped from sample

Policies with subprograms

Some policies have many subprograms that are labelled separately by the government. These can
become quite complex, though they generally fall into one of three categories. We address policies in
each category as follows:

                                                    49
·   Umbrella policies that encompass a number of clearly distinct programs with different types
    of financing. In this case, we split the policy up into its defined subprograms.
        o Example: The Danish Growth Fund (https://vf.dk/)
                 The Danish Growth Fund offers financing in the form of equity, loans, and
                     matching for business angel investments, where these are clearly presented as
                     separate programs, each with detailed criteria and structure:
                 Loans for Entrepreneurs (https://vf.dk/en/financing/loans-for-entrepreneurs/),
                     Business Angel Matching Fund (https://vf.dk/en/products-for-partners/eaf-
                     denmark-business-angel-matching-fund/),                  VF            Venture
                     (https://vfventure.com/da/)
                 Thus, we code each program separately in each sheet
·   Policies with subprograms that have the same structures but with minor differences (e.g. each
    subprogram is separated by industry): we classify these together and aggregate any budget
    information for the individual subprograms. Moreover, we only include programs with an
    explicit provision geared towards SMEs, entrepreneurs, VCs, or angels. If the program only
    funds innovation by firms or universities in general, we do not include it.
        o Example: (Grant) Innovate UK Funding Competitions (https://apply-for-innovation-
            funding.service.gov.uk/competition/search)
                 Description: The Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
                     (BBSRC) and Innovate UK jointly fund a number of competitions to support
                     collaboration between academia and businesses with the aim of developing
                     innovative technologies and processes. The rules of the individual
                     competitions vary, with some being geared to SMEs, some to all businesses,
                     and others to any institution (including non-profit and academic)
                 We code any programs that fit our criteria together (which in this case, turns
                     out to be only the Biomedical Catalyst Competition) and exclude the other
                     competitions
·   Policies where there is a clear primary financing type (e.g., equity programs with a small loan
    piece attached or loan programs that mention a guarantee). In these cases, we classify and
    code the policy where the primary financing is
        o Example:           (Loan)       US      Small      Business       Investment     Company
            (https://www.sba.gov/partners/sbics)
                 SBICs use their own capital, together with funds borrowed with an SBA
                     guarantee, to make investments in small businesses. Since the guarantee is not
                     a distinct credit guarantee scheme or guarantee fund, however, we include this
                     policy in loans but do not additionally code it as a credit guarantee




                                              50
Appendix 3: Definitions of the Entrepreneurial Finance Policy Variables


     Variable                  Description                                    Value
 1   Policy ID                 Unique ID assigned to each program.            ID

 2   Policy Country            Country implementing the program.              Country

 3   Agency Name               Name of the government agency                  Name
                               implementing the program.

 4   Policy Name               Name of the policy.                            Name

 5   Policy Type               Form of financing to the program's             Credit Guarantee,
                               targeted companies.                            Loan, Grant,
                                                                              Equity,
                                                                              Mezzanine, Angel
                                                                              Investment, R&D
                                                                              Tax Credit,
                                                                              Innovation
                                                                              Voucher

 6   Website                   Website of the policy (if available).          Website

 7   Drop                      We focus on national government policies       Drop; non-finance,
                               that aim to finance SMEs or                    regional, non-
                               entrepreneurial firms. Policies with a         SME/Ent targeted,
                               regional, transnational, or municipal reach,   non-government
                               as well as non-financing policies (such as
                               policies that provide mentorship services
                               only) are dropped. If a policy does not
                               satisfy these criteria, we mark it as "drop"
                               and provide the reason.

 8   Start Year                The year the program was initiated. If the     Year
                               policy existed in multiple phases, we use
                               the earliest year.

 9   End Year                  The year the program ended. We code a          Year; not ended
                               "not ended" if the program has not ended,
                               or a future year if the program states the
                               expected year of completion.




                                                51
10 Screener               The level of private sector involvement in     Public, private,
                          screening the application. Indicates           public-private
                          whether the screening entity is fully
                          public, fully private (i.e., government
                          outsources to private board), or public-
                          private (i.e., committee comprised of
                          representatives from both private and
                          public parties).

11 Due Diligence          The level of private sector involvement in     Public, private,
                          the appraisal of an application or             public-private
                          investment.

12 Investment Committee   The level of private sector involvement in     Public, private,
                          the final investment or application            public-private
                          decision.

13 Disbursed Budget       Disbursed program budget.                      Amount

14 Allocated or           Allocated or appropriated program budget       Amount
   Appropriated Budget    if actual disbursement is not available.

15 Min Budget             If the available budget information is a       Amount
                          range only, report the lower end of the
                          range; otherwise NA.

16 Max Budget             If the available budget information is a       Amount
                          range only, report the upper end of the
                          range; otherwise NA.

17 Years Budget           The years associated with the allocated        Year
                          budget, disbursed budget, or min/max
                          budget.

18 Currency               The currency in which the program's            Currency
                          monetary amounts are quoted from the
                          available sources. All monetary amounts
                          are ultimately converted to inflation-
                          adjusted US dollars.

19 Budget USD             Annual budget flow of the program in US        Amount in USD
                          dollars. Average of the most recent three
                          years of the program, if possible. For
                          policies for which this information is not
                          available, we use the average of the two
                          most recent years or, failing that, the most

                                           52
                           recent year. If available budget
                           information is a cumulative amount over a
                           longer period, we take the annual average.




20 Max Budget per          The program's maximum possible                   Amount
   Project                 disbursement of funds per company or
                           project, if available.

21 Objective               The purpose of the program as stated by          Text
                           the government agency. Most objectives
                           within a program type have similar goals,
                           e.g. to facilitate access to financing for
                           small businesses, or similarly to boost
                           exports, competitiveness, or job growth.
                           Programs that have less common
                           objectives, such as those that service
                           specific government needs, or those aimed
                           at entrepreneur diversity, are additionally
                           flagged (see below).

22 Objective - Diversity   An indicator for whether the program's           0/0.5/1
                           goal is to boost diversity. Coded as partial
                           (0.5) if this is one of multiple goals or full
                           (1) if diversity is the primary or sole goal.

23 Objective -             An indicator for whether the program's           0/0.5/1
   Government Need         goal is to meet the government's direct
                           need. A program's objective is not
                           included under Government Need or Non-
                           Traditional unless there is an explicit
                           alternative goal; programs solely focused
                           on an industry from which there may be
                           positive social spillovers (e.g., cleantech)
                           are not counted. Coded as partial (0.5) if
                           one of multiple goals or full (1) if primary
                           goal.

24 Objective - Non-        An indicator equal to 1 if the program goal 0/0.5/1
   Traditional             is neither diversity nor a direct
                           government need, but also not traditional.
                           Coded as partial (0.5) if one of multiple
                           goals or full (1) if primary goal.



                                             53
25 Intermediary       An indicator for whether the program          0/0.5/1
                      involves a non-governmental
                      intermediary. This includes loan
                      guarantees to banks, funds of funds, loans
                      to PE groups, and subsidies to non-
                      government owned VCs or incubators.
                      Takes a value of 0 if the program involves
                      government funds to companies as direct
                      investments or co-investments, or if the
                      government (or government-owned
                      corporation) operates a VC fund or
                      incubator that directly funds companies.
                      Takes a value of 0.5 if the program has
                      elements of both direct and intermediated
                      investments.

26 Matched            An indicator equal to 1 if the program        0/1
                      involves a co-investment with the private
                      sector or contains an explicit matching
                      requirement. Takes a value of 0 if the
                      program involves a direct investment or
                      loan to companies with no matching
                      requirement. Requirements on minimum
                      levels of net worth or employee numbers
                      are not counted as matching requirements.

27 Size               A categorical variable indicating whether     SME only, SME
                      the program is aimed at SMEs only,            partner,
                      require an SME as a partner in a              individual, any
                      collaboration, or allows for both SMEs
                      and larger businesses. Also indicates if a
                      policy is aimed at individual
                      entrepreneurs. Exact thresholds to qualify
                      as a small business may vary by country.

28 Targeted Sectors   Sectors that are explicitly targeted by the   Healthcare,
                      program, if applicable.                       technology,
                                                                    industrials,
                                                                    extractive,
                                                                    agriculture,
                                                                    sustainability, sin,
                                                                    financial

29 Excluded Sectors   Sectors that are explicitly excluded from     Healthcare,
                      the program, if applicable.                   technology,
                                                                    industrials,
                                                                    extractive,

                                       54
                                                                         agriculture,
                                                                         sustainability, sin,
                                                                         financial

30 Foreign Partnership      Does participation in the program require    Y/N
                            partnership with foreign companies?

31 Export/Import oriented   Does the target company have to be           Y/N;
                            import/export-oriented to be eligible? If    Export/import
                            yes, also indicates whether it should be
                            focused on import or export.

32 Academia Partnership     As part of eligibility, does the program     Y/N
                            require partnership with academic
                            institutions?

33 IP sales restrictions    Does the program have restrictions on the    Y/N
                            sale of any IP to be eligible for the
                            program?

34 Age                      Maximum age of the entrepreneur for          Age, NA
                            program eligibility, if applicable.

35 Gender                   Gender of the entrepreneur for program       Male, female, NA
                            eligibility, if applicable.

36 Income                   Maximum income of the entrepreneur for       Amount, NA
                            program eligibility, if applicable.

37 Targeted Stage           Targeted stage of the program's              Seed, venture,
                            investment.                                  growth

38 Sources                  List of sources containing program           Link
                            information. For cases where the primary
                            website and its sub-pages have all the
                            information, only the main page is listed.




                                             55
Appendix 4: Definitions of Country-Level Variables

 Variable        Units      Level      Description                                      Source
                                                                                        Primarily Economist
                                                                                        Intelligence Unit.
                                       The total of all economic activity in one        Supplemented with data
                 USD        Country-
 GDP                                   country, regardless of who owns the              from the CIA Factbook,
                 billions   Year
                                       productive assets.                               UN Data, and the
                                                                                        government website of
                                                                                        the respective country.
                                       United Nations' continent classification:        UN Stats Geographic
 Region          Dummy      Country
                                       Africa, Americas, Asia, Europe, Oceania          Regions
                                                                                        Primarily Economist
                                                                                        Intelligence Unit.
                                                                                        Supplemented with data
                            Country-
 Population      Millions              Total population of a country                    from the CIA Factbook,
                            Year
                                                                                        UN Data, and the
                                                                                        government website of
                                                                                        the respective country
                                       The income grouping measured using gross
                                       national income per capita in US dollars. The
                                       economics are divided into four income
                                       groups: low, lower-middle, upper-middle,         World Bank's World
                                       and high. Income groups for a year are           Bank Country and
                            Country-
 Income group    Category              determined using the income from the fiscal      Lending Groups
                            Year
                                       year. For the year 1994, the income per          Historical Database for
                                       capita cutoffs for the four categories were      the year 1994
                                       $725 or less; between $726 and $2,895;
                                       between $2,896 and $8,955; and $8,956 and
                                       above, respectively.
                                                                                        World Intellectual
                                       The total number of patent applications filed
 Patent                     Country-                                                    Property Organization's
                 Count                 annually by the country of residence of the
 applications               Year                                                        Intellectual Property
                                       applicant.
                                                                                        Statistics Database
                                       Venture capital investment in a country by
                                       both domestic and foreign VC firms across
                                                                                        National and regional
                 USD        Country-   all industries. Excludes Buyout, Fund of
 VC funding                                                                             associations & SDC
                 Millions   Year       Funds, Generalist Private Equity, Mezzanine,
                                                                                        Platinum's VentureXpert
                                       Other Investor (Non-Private Equity), Other
                                       Private Equity, and Real Estate investments
                                       Venture capital investment in a country by
                                       both domestic and foreign VC firms across
                                       eight industries based on 4-digit sic industry
                                       classification. The eight industry categories
                                       are:
                                       1. Healthcare: Life sciences, Bio-, Medical,
                                       Pharma
                            Country-
 VC funding by   USD                   2. Manufacturing: Aerospace, Defense,            SDC Platinum's
                            Year-
 industry        Millions              Machinery, Industrial, Transport, Aviation       VentureXpert
                            Industry
                                       3. Extractive: Mining, Energy
                                       4. Agriculture: Agriculture, Forestry,
                                       Fishing, Agri-food, Aqua-culture, Agri-
                                       business
                                       5. Technology: Electronics, Software, AI, IT,
                                       TMT, Blockchain, Digital tech
                                       6. Financial, insurance, and real estate

                                                     56
                                     industries
                                     7. Sin: Gambling, Betting
                                     8. Sustainability: Sustainable tech, Climate,
                                     Environment, Clean energy, Renewables,
                                     Clean-tech
                                     Note that we exclude Buyout, Fund of
                                     Funds, Generalist Private Equity, Mezzanine,
                                     Other Investor (Non-Private Equity), Other
                                     Private Equity, and Real Estate investments




                                     Government effectiveness captures
                                     perceptions of the quality of public services,
                                     the quality of the civil service and the degree
                                     of its independence from political pressures,
                                     Rule of law captures perceptions of the
                                     extent to which agents have confidence in
                                     and abide by the rules of society, and in
Government
                                     particular the quality of contract                World Bank's
effectiveness             Country-
                  Index              enforcement, property rights, the police, and     Worldwide Governance
and rule of law           Year
                                     the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime    Indicators 2019
indices
                                     and violence. The data are composite
                                     governance indicators based on over 30
                                     underlying data sources. The six aggregate
                                     indicators are reported in two ways: (1) in
                                     their standard normal units, ranging from
                                     approximately -2.5 to 2.5 , with higher
                                     values corresponding to better outcomes.
                                     The ease of doing business score helps assess
                                     the absolute level of regulatory performance
                                     over time. It captures the gap of each
                                     economy from the best regulatory
                                     performance observed on each of the
                                     indicators across all economies in the Doing
                                     Business sample since 2005. The enforcing
Ease of doing
                                     contracts indicator measures the time and
business and              Country-                                                     World Bank's Doing
                  Index              cost for resolving a commercial dispute
enforcing                 Year                                                         Business 2020
                                     through a local first-instance court, and the
contracts
                                     quality of judicial processes index,
                                     evaluating whether each economy has
                                     adopted a series of good practices that
                                     promote quality and efficiency in the court
                                     system. The scores scaled from 0 to 100,
                                     where 0 represents the lowest and 100
                                     represents the best performance.
                                     Initial public offerings with non-zero global
                                     proceeds across all markets. Excludes IPOs        SDC Platinum's
                                     that were withdrawn, rejected, or postponed.      Platinum Global New
Number of
                  Count   Country    Also excludes ADRs, unit offerings, offers        Issues Database,
IPOs
                                     with warrants, closed-end funds, and REITs,       Bloomberg, and S&P
                                     spin-offs, investment trusts, private             Capital IQ
                                     placements, and financial firms.



                                                   57
                                      Global proceeds raised in IPOs across all
                                      markets, excluding those that were
                                                                                     SDC Platinum's
                                      withdrawn, rejected, or postponed. Also
                                                                                     Platinum Global New
                 USD                  excludes ADRs, unit offerings, offers with
Total proceeds              Country                                                  Issues Database,
                 Millions             warrants, closed-end funds, and REITs, spin-
                                                                                     Bloomberg, and S&P
                                      offs, investment trusts, private placements,
                                                                                     Capital IQ
                                      and financial firms. Also excludes offerings
                                      with zero or missing proceeds.




                                                   58
Appendix 5: Details on Construction of the U.S. Patent Dataset
To implement the methodology, we identified all U.S. utility patents awarded between 1976 and 2019
that were both in Clarivate's Derwent Innovation and PatentsView databases. While there are other
classes of patents, such as design and plant awards, utility patents represent about 90% of the awards
and are typically the focus of economic analyses.

We explain first why we used both databases. It should be noted that approximately 25 thousand
patents were in Derwent and not in PatentsView. These appear to overwhelmingly have been
"withdrawn patents," and not included in many other patent compilations either, such as Google
Patents.14 (In addition, a small number of non-withdrawn patents may be missing from PatentsView
because they were apparently omitted from the bulk files provided by the USPTO, as discussed at
https://community.patentsview.org/forum/8/topic/127.)

We extracted from PatentsView the name and nationality of each inventor and the patent class. (In
general, the PatentsView data regarding assignee location was considerably cleaner than that of
Derwent, which had much missing or miscoded information.) We assigned patents to countries based
on the location of the inventor denoted in the patent. In cases of where nations no longer existed, we
used the successor countries, such as assigning patents from the German Democrat Republic to the
Federal Republic of Germany. We used the WIPO mapping schemas at
https://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/pct/guide/en/gdvol1/annexes/annexk/ax_k.pdf           to    help
identify these shifts. In 1944 of the 7.4 million patent-assignee pairs, the assignee nations were
missing from PatentsView or assigned an abbreviation unassociated with the current or former codes
used by WIPO. These cases where not included in the analysis.

Also using the USPTO's PatentsView database, we also identified the primary four-digit patent class
associated with the patent using the Combined Patent Classification scheme, which the U.S. adopted
in 2013 (henceforth referred to as CPC class). For patents awarded prior to 2013, we again used the
CPC class, as determined by the USPTO concordance between the new and earlier (U.S. Patent
Classification) scheme. We also used PatentsView to identify all citations to these patents, as of the
end of September 2020.

We accessed from Derwent the patent number, application and award date, and assignee name. We
wanted to identify new patentees, whether public or privately held, and thus compilations such as the
NBER Patent Database and the UVA Darden Global Corporate Patent Dataset (both of which focus
on publicly traded firms) were insufficient. We instead used Derwent's standardized version of the
assignee names at issue. This standardized version of the name is applied by Derwent editors and
seeks to ensure that names are applied consistently.



14
             These            patent           numbers             are            listed           at
https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/data/misc/data_cd.doc/custom_extract_dvd/BAS
IC_BIB_15/DOC/WITHDRAWN_63_15_PN.TXT. Allowed U.S. patent applications may be
withdrawn prior to issue by either the applicant or the USPTO. Common reasons for withdrawal
requests include the discovery of new prior art, an error in the application or an interference. The
procedures              are            described              in             detail             here:
https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/mpep/s1308.html#sect1308.
                                                 59
Derwent data, like PatentsView, sometimes appends the inventors' names to the list of assignees,
even when they are not assigned the patent (see the discussion of this issue in Lerner et al. 2021). So
we focus on the identity of the first-listed assignee to minimize this issue. We define awards to "new"
inventors in a given year as those issued to Derwent-cleansed first assignees that did not have an
award (a) granted between 1976 and 2019 and (b) filed before the end of the fifth calendar year prior
to the filing of the year of the observation.

We determine academic citations in patents using Marx and Fuego (2019).

References Not Cited in the Paper:


Josh Lerner, Amit Seru, Nicholas Short, and Yuan Sun, "Financial innovation in the 21st century:
Evidence from U.S. patents," Unpublished working paper, Harvard University, 2021.

Matt Marx and Aaron Fuegi, "Reliance on science: Worldwide front-page patent citations to scientific
articles." Research Paper No. 3331686, Boston University Questrom School of Business,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3331686, 2019.




                                                  60
Table A-1. Key summary statistics of sources that were used to identify policies.

Panel A: Year of publication of the academic papers or the reports.

 Year of publication Count of sources Percent
 1998                        1          0.5%
 1999                        1          0.5%
 2001                        1          0.5%
 2003                        2          1.1%
 2004                        1          0.5%
 2005                        3          1.6%
 2006                        2          1.1%
 2007                       11          5.8%
 2008                        5          2.6%
 2010                       20         10.5%
 2011                        8          4.2%
 2012                        6          3.2%
 2013                       25         13.2%
 2014                       17          8.9%
 2015                       15          7.9%
 2016                       12          6.3%
 2017                       41         21.6%
 2018                       13          6.8%
 2019                        6          3.2%
 Total                     190        100.0%


Panel B: Year of publication of the academic paper or the report in five-year buckets.

 Year of publication Count of sources Percent
 1995-1999                   2          1.1%
 2000-2004                   4          2.1%
 2005-2009                  21         11.1%
 2010-2014                  76         40.0%
 2015-2019                  87         45.8%
 Total                     190        100.0%




                                                 61
Panel C: Publisher of the report. If it is an academic paper.

                    Publisher of the Report            Count of sources Percent
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development       139         73.2%
 Academic papers                                              21         11.1%
 European Union                                                5          2.6%
 World Bank                                                    3          1.6%
 MTI                                                           2          1.1%
 United Nation                                                 2          1.1%
 African Development Bank Group and OECD                       1          0.5%
 CapGemini Consulting                                          1          0.5%
 ERIA                                                          1          0.5%
 European Civil Society Platform                               1          0.5%
 European Investment Bank                                      1          0.5%
 Finnish Ministry of Trade and Industry                        1          0.5%
 Foster Care Work Group                                        1          0.5%
 Government of the United Kingdom                              1          0.5%
 Inter-American Development Bank                               1          0.5%
 International Monetary Fund                                   1          0.5%
 Institut zur Zukunft der Arbeit                               1          0.5%
 Institute for Public Policy Research                          1          0.5%
 Manpower Group                                                1          0.5%
 Migration Policy Institute                                    1          0.5%
 Price Waterhouse Coopers                                      1          0.5%
 Swedish Entrepreneurship Forum                                1          0.5%
 The Finance Project                                           1          0.5%
 World Economic Forum                                          1          0.5%
 Total                                                       190        100.0%

Panel D: Type of source.

    Type of source      Count of sources Percent
 Country-level reports        127         66.8%
 Cross-national reports        42         22.1%
 Academic                      21         11.1%
 Total                        190        100.0%




                                                  62
Panel E: Country of focus for the reports. Note the count here is 140 (this includes 127 reports by
country type and 13 academic papers with a country focus).

 Country of focus (if any) Count of sources Percent
 United States                    11         7.9%
 Italy                            10         7.1%
 Mexico                           10         7.1%
 Poland                            9         6.4%
 Canada                            8         5.7%
 Germany                           8         5.7%
 Russia                            8         5.7%
 Indonesia                         7         5.0%
 Hungary                           6         4.3%
 Israel                            5         3.6%
 Netherlands                       5         3.6%
 United Kingdom                    5         3.6%
 Portugal                          4         2.9%
 Thailand                          4         2.9%
 Bulgaria                          3         2.1%
 Denmark                           3         2.1%
 Ireland                           3         2.1%
 Kazakhstan                        3         2.1%
 Spain                             3         2.1%
 Sweden                            3         2.1%
 Belgium                           2         1.4%
 Chile                             2         1.4%
 China                             2         1.4%
 Finland                           2         1.4%
 Greece                            2         1.4%
 Slovenia                          2         1.4%
 Austria                           1         0.7%
 Czech Republic                    1         0.7%
 Estonia                           1         0.7%
 France                            1         0.7%
 Libya                             1         0.7%
 Malaysia                          1         0.7%
 Nigeria                           1         0.7%
 Slovak Republic                   1         0.7%
 Switzerland                       1         0.7%
 Tunisia                           1         0.7%
 Total                           140        100.0%

                                                 63
Table A-2. Construction of the final sample of programs. This table describes the specifics of the construction of the final sample of
programs that were active between 1995-2019. We identify public entrepreneurial finance programs from 190 sources published between
1998 and 2020, summarized in Table A-1. We keep programs implemented at the national level only, dropping policies with a solely local
or regional focus within a country, as well as programs implemented by international bodies such as the European Union, unless the
international body is involved for funding purposes only. Similarly, we drop policies focused specifically on other markets and not on the
country in which they are initiated, such as programs initiated by wealthy nations to promote entrepreneurship in emerging economies. We
exclude any policies that provide non-financing support only, such as training, mentoring, or similar activities, as well any programs without
a focus on SMEs or entrepreneurial firms. Listed programs that are either duplicates of other programs or umbrella designations that
encompass multiple programs already included in the sample are dropped as well. We exclude programs for which no details on program
design or implementation can be found, as well as any programs started in 2020 or with designated future start years.

                                       Equity             Debt              Grant             Total
                                 Dropped Remaining Dropped Remaining Dropped Remaining Dropped Remaining
 Starting Sample                    --        351     --       315      --        660     --        1326
 Regional                          63         288    33        282     39         621    135        1191
 International                     36         252     8        274     24         597     68        1123
 Non-Financing                      2         250    15        259     28         569     45        1078
 Non-SME/Ent targeted              12         238    25        234     67         502    104         974
 Non-Government                    24         214    10        224      0         502     34         940
 Duplicate or Subprogram           13         201    48        176     45         457    106         834
 Insufficient Information          10         191    15        161      5         452     30         804

 Not Active during 1995-
 2019                               17          174          8            153         22         430           47         757
 No Country Data                     0          174          2            151          0         430            2         755
 Final Sample                                                                                                  --         755




                                                                     64
Table A-3. Construction of venture capital activity by nation and year. This table describes the
specifics of the construction of the sample of venture capital activity from Refinitiv VentureXpert
used in the analysis, which is used in conjunction with the data from national and regional venture
capital associations., Columns (1) and (2) characterize the number of deal-investor pairs, while
Column (3) reports the number of associated deals.

                                               (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                Deal-Investor Pairs          Associated
                                            Dropped         Remaining          Deals
         Starting Sample                                      741,650         342,832
         Missing investment                  99,117           642,533
         Zero investment                        13            642,520
         Buyouts                             85,824           556,696
         Fund of Funds                        5,816           550,880
         Generalist Private Equity           46,375           504,505
         Mezzanine                            3,516           500,989
         Other Investor (Non-Private
                                                             498,480
         Equity)                              2,509
         Real Estate                          2,206          496,274
         Final Sample (VC)                                   496,274          204,446




                                                65
Table A-4: Cross-sectional analysis of weighted new venture policies. Observations consist of each
country in the sample. The dependent variable is the budget-weighted number of policies introduced
between 1995 and 2019 in a given nation. The independent variables include the natural logarithm of
population and per capita GDP in 1994, the budget-weighted number of policies active in 1994, and
an indicator if the country was in the top quartile of VC activity in 1994. The standardized beta of the
initial top VC nation indicator measures the percent change in the dependent variable relative to its
mean with being a top VC nation.

                                                   (1)                (2)
 Initial top VC nation indicator                9.190***           8.562***
                                                (2.914)            (2.957)
 Initial ln (Population)                        0.605***           0.687***
                                                (0.208)            (0.214)
 Initial ln (Per capita GDP)                                         0.334
                                                                   (0.288)
 Initial weighted programs                       0.0655             0.0498
                                                 (0.224)           (0.227)
 Constant                                        0.0285             -0.448
                                                 (0.203)           (0.413)
 Adjusted R2                                      0.285              0.284
 Std. beta Initial top VC nation indicator        437.5              407.6
 Observations                                      205                204
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                  66
Table A-5. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies. Observations are annual ones of each
country in the sample between 1995 and 2019. The dependent variable is the budget-weighted number
of policies active in that year in a given nation. The independent variables include the natural
logarithm of population, per capita GDP, and lagged venture capital investment, as well as country
and year fixed effects. Policies are divided by whether they are equity, debt, or grant in orientation.
The standardized beta ln(VC investments in prior year) measures the percent change in the dependent
variable relative to its mean with a one standard deviation increase in ln(VC investments in prior
year).

                                              (1)             (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)       (6)
                                             Equity         Grant        Debt     Equity    Grant      Debt
 ln (VC investments in prior                 0.041          0.400*      0.188**   0.029     0.353*     0.129
 year)
                                             (0.027)        (0.210)     (0.093)   (0.025)   (0.206)   (0.086)
 ln (Population)                              0.035          0.076       0.405    -0.238    -1.021*   -0.948*
                                             (0.044)        (0.089)     (0.344)   (0.159)   (0.595)   (0.520)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                                              -0.005     0.098     -0.173
                                                                                  (0.042)   (0.256)   (0.113)
 Constant                                     0.009          0.218       0.027     0.337     1.376    1.803***
                                             (0.060)        (0.201)     (0.494)   (0.209)   (0.835)   (0.658)
 Adjusted R2                                  0.605          0.751       0.762     0.611     0.756      0.766
 Std. beta ln(VC investments in               88.58         117.20       49.87     62.59    103.37      34.32
 prior year)
 Country FE                                   YES            YES         YES       YES       YES       YES
 Year FE                                                                           YES       YES       YES
 Observations                                 5125           5125        5125      5112      5112      5112
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           67
Table A-6. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies, with alternative quality of government
measures. The panel is the equivalent of Table 6 but now using scores for the ability to enforce
contracts and the ease of doing business rather than the effectiveness of governance and rule of law
scores. See the table in the paper for a detailed description.

                                                     (1)            (2)         (3)        (4)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                  0.379          0.368     -2.549**   -2.278**
                                                   (0.439)        (0.419)    (1.147)    (1.061)
 Score-Enforcing contracts                         -0.005         -0.006
                                                   (0.024)        (0.024)
 ln (Lagged VC activity) * Enforcing                0.001          0.000
 contracts
                                                   (0.008)        (0.008)
 Score-Ease of doing business                                                 0.019     -0.003
                                                                             (0.029)    (0.030)
 ln (Lagged VC activity) * Ease of                                           0.043**    0.038**
 doing business
                                                                             (0.019)     (0.017)
 ln (Population)                                   -0.504        -4.163***   -0.445     -2.702***
                                                   (0.492)        (1.497)    (0.353)     (0.983)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                               0.851**        -0.494     0.564**     -0.257
                                                   (0.346)        (0.378)    (0.230)     (0.201)
 Constant                                           0.818         8.577**    -0.513      5.068**
                                                   (1.527)        (3.463)    (1.680)     (2.564)
 Adjusted R2                                        0.880          0.885      0.886       0.889
 Country FE                                         YES            YES        YES         YES
 Year FE                                                           YES                    YES
 Observations                                        3940          3940       4340        4340
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                            68
Table A-7. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies and neighboring country activity. The
table is the equivalent of Table 7 of the paper, without the venture capital independent variable. See
the tables in the paper for detailed descriptions.

                                                     (1)            (2)       (3)        (4)
 Weighted policies active in                       0.085**        0.070**   0.062**    0.061**
 bordering countries (prior year)
                                                   (0.033)        (0.032)   (0.030)    (0.031)
 ln (Population)                                    0.788         -1.395    -2.507**   -2.677**
                                                   (0.850)        (1.284)   (1.047)    (1.227)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                               0.947                0.226
                                                                  (0.581)              (0.587)
 Constant                                          -0.599          0.456    5.299***   4.941**
                                                   (1.685)        (1.542)   (1.809)    (1.908)
 Adjusted R2                                        0.771          0.774     0.775      0.775
 Std. beta Weighted policies active in              81.11          67.34     59.27      58.20
 bordering countries (prior year)
 Country FE                                          YES            YES      YES        YES
 Year FE                                                                     YES        YES
 Observations                                       4,325          4,325     4,325      4,325
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                            69
Table A-8. The determinants of private sector participation in public entrepreneurial finance
programs, with alternative quality of government measures. The panel is the equivalent of Panel A of
Table 8 but now using scores for the ability to enforce contracts and the ease of doing business rather
than the effectiveness of governance and rule of law scores. See the table in the paper for a detailed
description.

                                                     (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)
                                                   Ordered        Ordered     OLS       OLS
                                                    logit          logit

 ln (VC investments in prior year)                 0.081**         0.042      0.023     0.010
                                                   (0.038)        (0.041)    (0.018)   (0.017)
 Enforcing contracts score                         0.019**                   0.007**
                                                   (0.008)                   (0.003)
 Ease of doing business score                                     0.035***             0.013***
                                                                  (0.013)              (0.005)
 ln (Population in prior year)                     -0.095          -0.082    -0.019     -0.016
                                                   (0.086)        (0.081)    (0.035)   (0.032)
 ln (GDP in prior year)                                                       0.051      0.040
                                                                             (0.055)   (0.063)
 Constant                                                                     0.045     -0.338
                                                                             (0.306)   (0.363)
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.026      0.029
 Observations                                        533            536        533        536
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           70
Table A-9. The determinants of private sector participation in public entrepreneurial finance
programs. The observations are public entrepreneurial finance program introduced between 1995 and
2019 with the requisite data. The dependent variable in the three panels are measures of whether the
program had a matching fund requirement, the involvement of the private sector in the investment
decision-making process, and if it financed financial intermediaries. The independent variables
include the natural logarithms of venture capital investment, population, and per capita GDP in the
year immediately prior to the program introduction, and scores for the effectiveness of government
and rule of law. The first two specifications in each panel employ a probit specification; the second
two, an ordinary least squares one.

Panel A: Did the program have a matching fund requirement?
                                          (1)         (2)                     (3)        (4)
                                       Ordered     Ordered                    OLS        OLS
                                         logit       logit

 ln (VC investments in prior year)                  -0.002        -0.024      -0.010    -0.011
                                                   (0.053)        (0.053)    (0.014)    (0.014)
 Effectiveness of government score                 0.715***                  0.125***
                                                   (0.191)                   (0.044)
 Rule of law score                                                0.713***              0.141***
                                                                  (0.177)               (0.038)
 ln (Population in prior year)                     -0.025          0.018      0.009      0.013
                                                   (0.109)        (0.116)    (0.026)    (0.028)
 ln (GDP in prior year)                                                      0.111**     0.075*
                                                                             (0.043)    (0.045)
 Constant                                                                    -0.044      0.071
                                                                             (0.145)    (0.161)
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.064      0.067
 Observations                                        683            636        683        636
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           71
Panel B: Did the program finance financial intermediaries?
                                            (1)         (2)                   (3)        (4)
                                          Probit      Probit                  OLS        OLS

 ln (VC investments in prior year)                  0.034          0.026     0.014*      0.009
                                                   (0.042)        (0.045)    (0.007)    (0.007)
 Effectiveness of government score                 -0.346**                  -0.021
                                                   (0.148)                   (0.021)
 Rule of law score                                                -0.159                -0.003
                                                                  (0.144)               (0.017)
 ln (Population in prior year)                     -0.123*        -0.076     -0.030**   -0.017
                                                   (0.073)        (0.081)    (0.011)    (0.011)
 ln (GDP in prior year)                                                      -0.089**   -0.062*
                                                                             (0.034)    (0.032)
 Constant                                         -0.934***      -1.298***   0.416***   0.285**
                                                   (0.225)        (0.254)    (0.122)    (0.117)
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.028      0.006
 Observations                                        684            637        684        637
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

Panel C: Did the program involve the private sector in the investment decision-making process?
                                           (1)           (2)        (3)         (4)
                                          Probit       Probit      OLS          OLS

 ln (VC investments in prior year)                -0.110***      -0.094***   -0.020**   -0.018**
                                                   (0.035)        (0.035)    (0.008)    (0.009)
 Effectiveness of government score                 0.646***                  0.162***
                                                   (0.178)                   (0.045)
 Rule of law score                                                0.541***              0.144***
                                                                  (0.167)               (0.041)
 ln (Population in prior year)                     0.128**         0.130*    0.033*      0.037*
                                                   (0.062)        (0.067)    (0.019)    (0.021)
 ln (GDP in prior year)                                                      -0.007      -0.007
                                                                             (0.033)    (0.031)
 Constant                                         -1.026***      -0.948***    0.050       0.063
                                                   (0.222)        (0.214)    (0.127)    (0.124)
 Adjusted R2                                                                  0.060       0.066
 Observations                                        584            540        584         540
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                           72
Table A-10. New venture policy introduction and innovation outcomes. This table reports the coefficients
from the following specification:

                                                  =4

        =  +  +   1{   - 5} +   1{ =  + } +   1{   + 5} +  + 
                                                 =-4


The specification includes country and year fixed effects, as well as country-year specific controls  ,
specifically ln(Population), ln(Per capita GDP), and ln(Lagged venture capital activity).  is the year of
the first introduction of an entrepreneurial finance program observed in the sample period of 1990-2019 by
country i. This analysis corresponds to Method 1 described in Section 6 of the text. The year prior to initiation
is the omitted baseline, normalized to 0. The construction of the patent outcome variables is described in the
Data section of the text. All outcome variables are log transformed.

                                                        (1)               (2)        (3)          (4)
                                                                        Highly                   New
 VARIABLES                                          All patents          cited   Basic class   inventor

 <=5                                                  -0.1000        0.0314       -0.0913       -0.0890
                                                     (0.0902)      (0.0734)      (0.0803)      (0.0845)
 -4                                                   -0.0627        0.0340        0.0226       -0.0134
                                                     (0.0772)      (0.0783)      (0.0791)      (0.0712)
 -3                                                   -0.0680       -0.0236       -0.0401       -0.0572
                                                     (0.0587)      (0.0581)      (0.0738)      (0.0533)
 -2                                                   -0.0185       -0.0191       -0.0404       -0.0364
                                                     (0.0454)      (0.0621)      (0.0566)      (0.0506)
 0                                                   0.114**       0.166**         0.0831        0.0687
                                                     (0.0561)      (0.0672)      (0.0663)      (0.0601)
 1                                                     0.0541      0.143**         0.0153        0.0257
                                                     (0.0630)      (0.0575)      (0.0690)      (0.0656)
 2                                                     0.0881      0.164***        0.0836        0.0316
                                                     (0.0659)      (0.0620)      (0.0680)      (0.0737)
 3                                                   0.217***      0.195**         0.135*      0.168**
                                                     (0.0707)      (0.0773)      (0.0776)      (0.0722)
 4                                                   0.254***      0.282***      0.253***      0.230***
                                                     (0.0750)      (0.0723)      (0.0860)      (0.0822)
 >=5                                                 0.425***      0.396***      0.280***      0.216**
                                                     (0.0963)      (0.0900)      (0.0915)      (0.0901)
 ln (Population)                                        0.243         0.126        0.202*        0.317*
                                                      (0.185)      (0.0773)       (0.111)       (0.170)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                 0.0905*         0.0406        0.0444      0.0832*
                                                     (0.0507)      (0.0271)      (0.0282)      (0.0439)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                   0.0463*       0.0429*       0.0460**        0.0144
                                                     (0.0247)      (0.0223)      (0.0184)      (0.0222)

  Observations                                         5,928            5,928      5,928        5,928
  R-squared                                            0.959            0.942      0.949        0.948
  Country FE                                            YES             YES        YES          YES
  Year FE                                               YES             YES        YES          YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


                                                              73
Table A-11. New venture policy introduction and innovation outcomes. This table reports the coefficients
from the following specification:
                                                  =4

        =  +  +   1{   - 5} +   1{ =  + } +   1{   + 5} +  + 
                                                 =-4


The specification includes country and year fixed effects as well as country-year specific controls  ,
specifically ln(Population), ln(Per capita GDP), and ln(Lagged venture capital activity).  is the
initiation year of an entrepreneurial finance program, including all first initiations as well as initiations without
an introduction in the five years prior, observed in the sample period of 1990-2019 by country i. This analysis
corresponds to Method 2 described in Section 6 of the text. The year prior to initiation is the omitted baseline,
normalized to 0. The construction of the patent outcome variables is described in the Data section of the text.
All outcome variables are log transformed.

                                                           (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)
 VARIABLES                                             All patents      Highly cited   Basic class    New inventor

 <=5                                                    -0.0948           -0.0138        -0.0973         -0.0777
                                                       (0.0835)          (0.0688)       (0.0705)        (0.0769)
 -4                                                     -0.0101           -0.0370         0.0219          0.0261
                                                       (0.0711)          (0.0731)       (0.0601)        (0.0718)
 -3                                                     -0.0564           -0.0512        -0.0328         -0.0291
                                                       (0.0531)          (0.0546)       (0.0617)        (0.0504)
 -2                                                      0.0169           -0.0607        -0.0383         0.00153
                                                       (0.0427)          (0.0536)       (0.0509)        (0.0480)
 0                                                      0.0963*            0.114*         0.0662          0.0693
                                                       (0.0511)          (0.0599)       (0.0528)        (0.0534)
 1                                                       0.0610           0.0908*         0.0294          0.0383
                                                       (0.0503)          (0.0482)       (0.0567)        (0.0525)
 2                                                       0.106*           0.123**         0.109*          0.0748
                                                       (0.0549)          (0.0582)       (0.0597)        (0.0595)
 3                                                     0.241***          0.192***       0.163**         0.178***
                                                       (0.0679)          (0.0732)       (0.0679)        (0.0633)
 4                                                     0.262***          0.251***      0.221***         0.224***
                                                       (0.0637)          (0.0711)       (0.0724)        (0.0690)
 >=5                                                   0.383***          0.312***      0.218***          0.189**
                                                       (0.0879)          (0.0807)       (0.0719)        (0.0762)
 ln (Population)                                         0.229             0.115          0.185*          0.306*
                                                        (0.182)          (0.0745)        (0.108)         (0.167)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                    0.0918*            0.0416         0.0452         0.0840*
                                                       (0.0509)          (0.0272)       (0.0283)        (0.0441)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                     0.0506**          0.0463**      0.0504***          0.0175
                                                       (0.0250)          (0.0225)       (0.0184)        (0.0224)

  Observations                                           5,928             5,928         5,928            5,928
  R-squared                                              0.959             0.942         0.949            0.948
  Country FE                                             YES               YES           YES              YES
  Year FE                                                YES               YES           YES              YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01


                                                            74
Table A-12. New venture policy introduction and innovation outcomes. This table reports the coefficients
from the following specification:
                                               =4

        =  +  +   1{   - 5} +   1{ =  + } +   1{   + 5} +  + 
                                              =-4
The specification includes country and year fixed effects as well as country-year specific controls  ,
specifically ln(Population), ln(Per capita GDP), and ln(Lagged venture capital activity).  is the
initiation year of an entrepreneurial finance program, including all first initiations as well as initiations without
an introduction in the five years prior, observed in the sample period of 1990-2019 by country i. Countries
with I such "clean" initiations appear in the data I times. This analysis corresponds to Method 3 described in
Section 6 of the text. The year prior to initiation is the omitted baseline, normalized to 0. The construction of
the patent outcome variables is described in the Data section of the text. All outcome variables are log
transformed.

                                                        (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)
 VARIABLES                                          All patents     Highly cited      Basic class     New inventor

 <=5                                                -0.142**          -0.0535           -0.121*          -0.0848
                                                    (0.0672)         (0.0620)          (0.0645)         (0.0647)
 -4                                                  -0.0353          -0.0577          0.00736            0.0145
                                                    (0.0701)         (0.0742)          (0.0593)         (0.0717)
 -3                                                  -0.0690          -0.0616           -0.0412          -0.0346
                                                    (0.0521)         (0.0541)          (0.0612)         (0.0506)
 -2                                                  0.00648          -0.0674           -0.0453         -0.00368
                                                    (0.0424)         (0.0536)          (0.0513)         (0.0486)
 0                                                   0.103**          0.119**            0.0698           0.0731
                                                    (0.0496)         (0.0591)          (0.0524)         (0.0533)
 1                                                    0.0690         0.0966**            0.0305           0.0420
                                                    (0.0487)         (0.0477)          (0.0555)         (0.0520)
 2                                                   0.112**          0.123**          0.0962*            0.0761
                                                    (0.0533)         (0.0565)          (0.0550)         (0.0594)
 3                                                  0.231***         0.200***          0.139**          0.173***
                                                    (0.0633)         (0.0723)          (0.0635)         (0.0618)
 4                                                  0.258***         0.256***         0.224***          0.220***
                                                    (0.0608)         (0.0689)          (0.0692)         (0.0683)
 >=5                                                0.425***         0.347***         0.253***          0.215***
                                                    (0.0894)         (0.0799)          (0.0732)         (0.0798)
 ln (Population)                                      0.227            0.121             0.204*           0.321*
                                                     (0.185)         (0.0800)           (0.115)          (0.170)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                 0.0935*           0.0378            0.0413          0.0850*
                                                    (0.0501)         (0.0275)          (0.0283)         (0.0433)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                   0.0419*          0.0364*         0.0485***           0.0149
                                                    (0.0233)         (0.0212)          (0.0173)         (0.0206)

Observations                                          6,392            6,392            6,392             6,392
R-squared                                             0.961            0.945            0.950             0.950
Country FE                                            YES              YES              YES               YES
Year FE                                               YES              YES              YES               YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses;
clustered at the country level
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

                                                         75
Table A-13. New venture policy introduction and innovation outcomes. This table reports the coefficients
from the following "stacked" specification:
                                                 =4

                           =  +  +   1{ =  + } +  + 
                                                =-4
Country and year fixed effects are interacted with indicators for treatment cohort, where each cohort Gg is
comprised of units first treated in period g. Only country-year observations within the -5 and +5 event window
are included. The analysis stacks, for each cohort, the treated countries and clean control countries for the
relevant event window. Clean controls consist of both never-treated countries and pre-treatment countries, so
long as the pre-treatment countries have no program initiation within a 10-year window.  is the
initiation year of an entrepreneurial finance program, including all first initiations as well as initiations without
an introduction in the five years prior, observed in the sample period of 1990-2019 by country i. This analysis
corresponds to Method 4 described in Section 6 of the text. The year prior to initiation is the omitted baseline,
normalized to 0. The construction of the patent outcome variables is described in the Data section of the text.
All outcome variables are log transformed.
                                                        (1)            (4)           (3)            (2)
 VARIABLES                                            Patents      Highly cited   Basic class   New inventor

 -5                                                 -0.190***        -0.0994*     -0.132***       -0.125**
                                                     (0.0522)        (0.0573)      (0.0502)       (0.0550)
 -4                                                   -0.0770         -0.101*       -0.0675        -0.0359
                                                     (0.0507)        (0.0600)      (0.0522)       (0.0559)
 -3                                                 -0.0982**        -0.0750*       -0.103*       -0.0788*
                                                     (0.0458)        (0.0414)      (0.0545)       (0.0439)
 -2                                                  0.00736         -0.0723*      -0.0827*        -0.0298
                                                     (0.0337)        (0.0404)      (0.0444)       (0.0412)
 0                                                   0.156***       0.153***         0.0687        0.0854*
                                                     (0.0528)        (0.0511)      (0.0486)       (0.0479)
 1                                                   0.143***       0.146***         0.0405         0.0706
                                                     (0.0500)        (0.0422)      (0.0485)       (0.0494)
 2                                                   0.204***       0.195***        0.128**        0.117**
                                                     (0.0535)        (0.0527)      (0.0539)       (0.0560)
 3                                                   0.325***       0.251***      0.167***       0.211***
                                                     (0.0632)        (0.0614)      (0.0615)       (0.0596)
 4                                                   0.341***       0.310***      0.218***       0.248***
                                                     (0.0685)        (0.0641)      (0.0657)       (0.0683)
 5                                                   0.354***       0.345***        0.168**      0.223***
                                                     (0.0745)        (0.0671)      (0.0651)       (0.0669)
 ln (Population)                                       0.0539          0.0285        0.0253         0.0838
                                                      (0.115)        (0.0438)      (0.0642)        (0.111)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                 -0.00557        -0.00580      -0.00355        -0.0167
                                                     (0.0205)       (0.00460)     (0.00824)       (0.0141)
 ln (VC investments in prior year)                   0.0168*          0.00784     0.0273***      -4.92e-05
                                                    (0.00855)       (0.00763)     (0.00923)      (0.00893)

  Observations                                        40,943            40,943      40,943        40,943
  R-squared                                            0.957            0.957       0.946         0.941
  Country x Cohort FE                                   YES              YES         YES           YES
  Year x Cohort FE                                      YES              YES         YES           YES
Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered at the country level
*
  p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01

                                                           76
Table A-14. Cross-sectional analysis of weighted new venture policies, with a control for government
expenditures. Observations consist of countries in the sample, akin to Table A-4. The dependent
variable is the budget-weighted number of policies introduced between 1995 and 2019 in a given
nation. The independent variables include the natural logarithm of population and per capita GDP in
1994, the budget-weighted number of policies active in 1994, government expenditures as a fraction
of GDP (multiplied by 100) in 1994, and an indicator if the country was in the top quartile of VC
activity in 1994.


                                                     (1)       (2)


 Initial top VC nation indicator                9.311***  8.539***
                                                 (2.953)   (3.049)
 Initial ln (Population)                        0.822***  0.907***
                                                 (0.286)   (0.283)
 Initial ln (Per capita GDP)                                 0.457
                                                           (0.326)
 Initial (Government expenditure / GDP)          0.00743   0.00774
                                                (0.00649) (0.00577)
 Initial weighted programs                        0.0368    0.0172
                                                 (0.227)   (0.229)
 Constant                                        -0.621*  -1.280**
                                                 (0.365)   (0.540)

 Observations                                      178         178
 R-squared                                        0.315       0.319
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                77
Table A-15. Panel analysis of active weighted venture policies, with a control for government
expenditures. Observations are annual ones of countries in the sample between 1995 and 2019, akin
to Table 4. The dependent variable is the budget-weighted number of policies active in that year in a
given nation. The independent variables include the natural logarithm of population, per capita GDP,
lagged venture capital investment, and government expenditures in the prior year, and country and
year fixed effects.

                                                      (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)


 ln (VC investments in prior year)                  0.598**   0.594**   0.538**   0.538**
                                                    (0.243)   (0.245)   (0.260)   (0.260)
 ln (Population)                                     -1.434    -1.189    -2.382   -2.727*
                                                    (1.048)   (1.145)   (1.461)   (1.482)
 ln (Per capita GDP)                                           0.309               -0.370
                                                              (0.425)             (0.233)
 ln (Govt expenditure in prior year)                1.172**    0.938    -0.0233    0.201
                                                    (0.499)   (0.623)   (0.714)   (0.755)
 Constant                                            0.701     0.224    3.684*    4.383**
                                                    (1.050)   (1.223)   (2.068)   (2.020)

 Observations                                        4,386     4,386     4,386     4,386
 R-squared                                           0.786     0.786     0.791     0.791
 Country FE                                          YES       YES       YES       YES
 Year FE                                                                 YES       YES
 Robust standard errors in parentheses; clustered
 at the country level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                      78
