                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CONCENTRATION IN PRODUCT MARKETS

                                     C. Lanier Benkard
                                       Ali Yurukoglu
                                     Anthony Lee Zhang

                                     Working Paper 28745
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w28745


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2021




Ali Yurukoglu has a consulting relationship with Compass Lexecon aiding their clients in
antitrust and commercial litigation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by C. Lanier Benkard, Ali Yurukoglu, and Anthony Lee Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Concentration in Product Markets
C. Lanier Benkard, Ali Yurukoglu, and Anthony Lee Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 28745
April 2021
JEL No. L1,L4

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses new data to reexamine trends in concentration in U.S. markets from 1994 to
2019. The paper's main contribution is to construct concentration measures that reflect narrowly
defined consumption-based product markets, as would be defined in an antitrust setting, while
accounting for cross-brand ownership, and to do so over a broad range of consumer goods and
services. Our findings differ substantially from well established results using production data. We
find that 42.2% of the industries in our sample are "highly concentrated" as defined by the U.S.
Horizontal Merger Guidelines, which is much higher than previous results. Also in contrast with
the previous literature, we find that product market concentration has been decreasing since 1994.
This finding holds at the national level and also when product markets are defined locally in 29
state groups. We find increasing concentration once markets are aggregated to a broader sector
level. We argue that these two diverging trends are best explained by a simple theoretical model
based on Melitz and Ottaviano (2008), in which the costs of a firm supplying adjacent geographic
or product markets falls over time, and efficient firms enter each others' home product markets.


C. Lanier Benkard                                Anthony Lee Zhang
Stanford Graduate School of Business             School of Business
655 Knight Way                                   University of Chicago
Stanford, CA 94305                               anthony.zhang@chicagobooth.edu
and NBER
lanierb@stanford.edu

Ali Yurukoglu
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
ayurukog@stanford.edu
1     Introduction
Industry concentration measures are a key input used in antitrust enforcement, and
a barometer that many economists employ for assessing the level of competition in a
market. A prominent and growing literature has documented economy-wide increases in
industry concentration in the U.S. in the last three decades.1 Increasing concentration has
been linked to declining labor and capital shares,2 declining investment and productivity
growth,3 and rising markups.4 This paper uses new data to reexamine these trends.
The central innovation in the paper is to construct concentration measures that reflect
narrowly defined product markets as would be defined in an antitrust setting, while
accounting for cross-brand ownership, and to do so over a broad range of consumer
goods and services and a long time frame.
   The evidence for broad-based increases in concentration is well established. The
most widely cited evidence comes from establishment-level data from the U.S. Economic
Census.5 Similar trends have been demonstrated using firm-level data for public firms
from Compustat.6 The perception of broad-based increases in concentration is also
commonplace among politicians and in the popular press.7
   However, as outlined in detail in Shapiro (2018), there are many problems with
drawing antitrust conclusions from the Census data. For antitrust purposes, economists
are concerned with the ability of firms to raise prices. Antitrust markets are thus defined
based on product substitutability for consumers, using own and cross price elasticities.
In contrast, the Census lumps products together that are physically similar and that
are produced using similar processes, anywhere in the U.S. A good example of the
    1 Peltzman  (2014), CEA (2016), Barkai (2016), Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017), Grullon, Larkin and
Michaely (2019), Autor et al. (2020), Ganapati (2020), Covarrubias, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2020)
   2 Autor et al. (2020), Barkai (2016)
   3 Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017)
   4 CEA (2016), Barkai (2016), Grullon, Larkin and Michaely (2019), De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger

(2020)
   5 Peltzman (2014), CEA (2016), Economist (2016), Barkai (2016), Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) Grullon,

Larkin and Michaely (2019), Autor et al. (2020), Ganapati (2020), Covarrubias, Gutiérrez and Philippon
(2020)
   6 Autor et al. (2020), Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017)
   7 See Shapiro (2018) for an excellent discussion. Early examples include CEA (2016) and Economist

(2016).


                                                    1
difference in the two definitions is metal cans, glass bottles, and plastic bottles. Since
Census industries are defined based on production and not consumption, all metal cans
are in the same Census industry, including soda cans, aerosol cans, paint cans, and many
others. Meanwhile, all glass bottles are a separate industry, and plastic bottles a third.
These groupings do not make sense for antitrust purposes because paint cans are not a
substitute for soda cans, but plastic and glass soda bottles are. Census industries also tend
to be too broad. Even at the six-digit level, for example, NAICS 325620 contains at least 42
different industries, including after-shave, deodorant, mouthwash, cosmetics, sunscreen,
and hair dye. NAICS 336120 includes all of heavy trucks, buses, garbage trucks, tractors,
fire engines, and motor homes.8 Finally, as noted in Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Trachter
(2020), Census industries are defined nationally, but many products are delivered locally
and are not transportable. Cable TV is a good example in which national concentration
has increased dramatically over the past few decades, but this is misleading because
local concentration, the relevant statistic for assessing market power to consumers, has
decreased just as dramatically. All of these issues are even more present in the Compustat
data, which only covers public firms.
    Peltzman (2014) says, "One clear question for further research is whether concentration
in economic markets has increased... along with the increased concentration in Census
Bureau industries." This paper examines exactly this issue. We utilize respondent level
data for 1994-2019 from an annual consumer survey available from MRI-Simmons (MRI).
The MRI data reports consumers' brand choices across 466 product markets, representing
both goods and services.
    We have already described some of the difficulties with measuring market concentra-
tion across many product markets and a long time horizon in a consistent and meaningful
way. The U.S. Horizontal Merger Guidelines suggest identifying the smallest market
within which a hypothetical monopolist could impose a "small but significant non-
transitory increase of price" (SSNIP). Such an exercise requires a detailed analysis of
product level data on quantities and prices over time, and would be extremely costly to
implement across such a large number of markets. Instead this paper employs markets
   8 Chad  Syverson pointed out to us that the trailing zero in NAICS codes 325620 and 336120 indicates
that these codes are equivalent to five-digit codes. These are the narrowest industry definitions available in
NAICS for these industries, a common issue in NAICS.


                                                      2
defined by a prominent market research data firm whose data are widely used in industry.
The market definitions seem close to what might result in an antitrust setting (more
details below). Because the survey data contain location data for each consumer, we are
also able to measure concentration in geographic sub-markets, an important distinction
for products that are delivered and consumed locally.
   Another difficulty in measuring concentration across many markets and such a
long time period is accounting for joint corporate parent ownership of brands. Many
firms own multiple brands in a given product market, and brand ownership changes
over time with corporate divestiture and M&A activity, so measuring corporate brand
ownership is important to accurately estimate the levels and time trends of product
market concentration. We solve this problem by merging the MRI survey data with newly
assembled data on brand ownership over time.
    These data lead to several interesting findings. Figure 1 presents the median HHI
concentration measure over time for four market definitions that differ in their level of
geographic and product aggregation. Our central finding is that we document a decrease
in median product market concentration across a broad range of goods and services
since 1994. This result lies in distinct contrast to the findings from production data in
the Census. The level of concentration is higher when accounting for the geographic
location of consumers in 29 state-groups, but decreases at a similar rate to national
concentration. The latter result confirms the main finding in Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte
and Trachter (2020), who show that local market concentration has decreased in the
establishment data from NETS. However, Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Trachter (2020) find
increased national concentration in the NETS data even for the most narrow industry
classifications, in contrast to our findings.9
    When product markets are aggregated into broader sectors, our findings reverse: we
find increases in concentration over time. After accounting for geographic location at the
state level, the rise in concentration at the sector level is small. We find little evidence of
firms entering adjacent geographies, as can be seen by the fact that the trends in local and
national HHIs are nearly identical. Instead, the joint finding of rising sector concentration
and decreasing product market concentration implies that firms are expanding into
   9 Smith and Ocampo (2021) also document increasing concentration at both the local and national levels
in retail markets.

                                                   3
                 Figure 1: Median HHI over time, by market definition




Notes. Local markets are defined as product markets in each of 29 state groups. Sectors
are defined by aggregating related national product markets. Product market measures
are on the left hand side axis. Sector level measures are on the right hand side axis. Error
bars are 95% CIs, based on standard errors from a nonparametric bootstrap.




                                             4
adjacent product markets within the same sector. Our sector level measurements are
more consistent with the results in existing work using establishment-level data,10 likely
because the sector level of market aggregation matches the establishment data more
closely.
    While we find broad-based decreases in concentration over time, using our market
definitions, concentration levels are much higher than in the establishment-level data. In
our data the median HHI over all periods is 2180, with 42.2% of industries having an
HHI above 2500, the level that is considered "highly concentrated" in the U.S. Horizontal
Merger Guidelines. Thus, using this (admittedly too simple) antitrust screen, our data
suggests that market power is potentially much higher than previously thought in a
large fraction of U.S. product markets. Applying the same simple antitrust screen to
the Census data would lead to the opposite conclusion that market power is generally
low in U.S. product markets. Autor et al. (2020) report average HHIs from the Census
ranging from a low of about 85 in the Services sector in 1987 to a high of 950 in
manufacturing in 2007. Even the stricter pre-2010 merger guidelines labeled all of these as
"unconcentrated".11 Our findings on concentration levels parallel Affeldt et al. (2021), who
show that concentration levels are much higher than in production data using a sample
of market-years in Europe that experienced a merger investigation by the European
Commission.
   However, while we find high concentration levels, we reiterate that we find no evidence
that market power has been getting worse over time in any broad-based way. On the
contrary, concentration in the most concentrated industries has fallen as fast as the median
industry. In our data the number of industries in the "highly concentrated" range fell
from 44.4% in 1994 to 36.6% in 2019. This finding is particularly interesting because it
contradicts the prevailing popular opinion (Shapiro, 2018). We speculate that popular
perception may be driven by a few prominent large firms, such as Facebook, Apple,
Amazon, and Google, which have grown enormously in recent years, as well as high
profile mergers in industries such as hospitals (Gaynor, 2018) and airlines.12
  10 Grullon,     Larkin    and    Michaely    (2019),    Barkai   (2016),  Autor     et    al.   (2020),
Covarrubias, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2020)
  11 In 2010 the "unconcentrated" range was raised from <1000 to <1500 to reflect practice as detailed in

Shapiro (2010).
  12 The US domestic air travel industry saw mergers between US Airways and America West in 2005, Delta



                                                   5
   We employ a simple theoretical model based on Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) to explain
our main findings. We show that the only force in the model capable of explaining
both the product market and sector trends is a reduction in "trade costs", the costs of a
firm supplying adjacent product markets. Declining trade costs is also consistent with
the well documented increases in corporate profits reported in BEA data13 and Barkai
(2016). The reduction in trade costs could be driven by increasing similarity of production
processes, or an increasing importance of logistics and distribution in the production
process. As trade costs decrease, efficient firms enter and compete in each others' "home"
product markets. For example, in our data Unilever, Proctor and Gamble, and Johnson
and Johnson now compete in a vast array of consumer health and cleaning products.
    An important implication of our model is that these effects are welfare improving.
While sector level concentration increases, the increase is driven by efficiency considera-
tions and consumers benefit. Autor et al. (2020) describe an alternative model in which
technological change directly favors more efficient firms. Changes in industry concen-
tration are similarly driven by increasing efficiency and also yield improving welfare.
However, their model implies increasing concentration at both the product market and
sector levels, whereas our model predicts decreasing concentration at the product market
level.
    Given the novelty of our data and the contrast between our results and the Census
data, we have attempted to verify the external and internal validity of our findings. A
weakness of the MRI data is that it is focused on consumer facing product markets,
including some services. Purely intermediate goods are largely missing. To evaluate the
extent to which our findings are driven by market coverage, we compare our results to
those from a subsample of the Census data that is industry matched to the MRI data.
Concentration in the subsample has the same overall trend as that in the complete Census
data, suggesting that our different findings are due to market definitions and not market
coverage. Another weakness of the MRI data is that they are based on surveys rather
than actual transactions. To validate the survey data we compared the MRI data with
detailed data from industry sources for two industries: airlines and automobiles. For
and Northwest in 2008, United and Continental in 2010, Southwest and Airtran in 2011, American and US
Airways in 2014, and Alaska Airlines and Virgin America in 2018.
  13 https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/W273RE1A156NBEA




                                                 6
both industries concentration in the MRI data closely matches the industry sources in
both levels and trends, which gives us confidence that our results are not driven by
idiosyncrasies in the survey.
     Another potential issue is the product market definitions. Product markets in the
MRI data are defined to suit the needs of the client firms who purchase data on their
competitors' sales. Close inspection of the data yields the conclusion that the market
definitions appear to be reasonable facsimiles of what might result from an antitrust
proceeding. The only feature that stands out is that a few of the market definitions are
quite narrow. For example, domestic and imported beer are different product markets
in the MRI data, as are diet and regular sodas. If the MRI market definitions are too
narrow then that could bias us toward finding higher concentration levels overall, but
it is not obvious that it would systematically affect the estimates of trends. Moreover, it
seems plausible that formal antitrust proceedings might result in these narrow market
definitions.
    Finally, our model rules out changes in market power due to changes in vertical
relationships. It is theoretically possible that large firms like Johnson and Johnson can
extract more rents from stores like CVS/Walgreens/Safeway in bargaining if they supply
a broader range of products, even if those products are in unrelated product markets
(Dafny, Ho and Lee (2019)). If this effect is helping drive the observed trends in market
and sector concentration, then there would be an additional force causing market power
to increase that is unaccounted for in our model. In that case the welfare effects of the
increase in sector concentration would depend on which force is quantitatively more
important.




                                            7
2      Data

2.1      Extracting product information from MRI-Simmons survey

We use respondent level data from the annual "Survey of the American Consumer"
available from MRI-Simmons, a market research firm.14 We use data from 1994 to 2019.
MRI surveys approximately 25000 consumers per year in a rolling fashion.
   From the survey, we extract all questions that ask consumers to report brands that
they purchase. For example, under "Motor oil" in the 2006 survey, the MRI data allows
consumers to report purchases of 24 different brands of motor oil, such as Valvoline,
Castrol, Amoco, Havoline, and Chevron, as well as an "Other" option. In total, we extract
brand purchase information for 337 products; we will call these "product markets".
We divide these product markets into 17 broader groups, such as "Home products ­
Food" or "Airlines"; we will call these broader groups "sectors". Table 1, which we
describe below, lists all the sectors in our data, the number of product markets in each
sector, and examples of product markets within each sector. We also distinguish between
"manufacturing" and "non-manufacturing" sectors. The manufacturing sectors tend to
have a larger number of product markets.
   In addition to brand purchase information, the survey asks respondents for demo-
graphic information, in particular, the state group that respondents live in. There are
29 state groups; large states are reported separately, but some less populated states that
are close together are grouped together, such as Minnesota/Iowa, Nebraska/Kansas,
Arkansas/Louisiana/Oklahoma. We use state group information so that we can calculate
product purchases at the level of stategroup-markets. Further details of data cleaning are
described in appendix A.
    MRI data are well known in industry and commonly employed in media planning.
Gentzkow and Shapiro (2011) use the MRI data to measure ideological segregation in
news consumption. Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) use the MRI data to estimate demand
for cable television services. Bertrand and Kamenica (2018) use the MRI to document
similarity in consumption between different demographic groups over time.
    14 The
       firm administering the survey has undergone several changes in ownership and has been previously
known as Mediamark Research Inc (MRI) and GfK MRI.


                                                  8
2.2    Brand ownership information from Kantar Adspender

We derive brand ownership information by merging MRI brand names to Kantar Ad-
spender. Kantar Adspender is a database that tracks brands' advertising expenditures
across different advertising media. We digitized hard copies of Kantar Adspender for
the years 1992, 1997, 2001, 2003, 2006, and downloaded data from Kantar Adspender in
2017 and 2020.15 Kantar Adspender contains data on advertising expenditures; the brand
name advertised, and the ultimate parent company of the brand. For the pre-2016 data,
only a single parent company name is available. For the 2017 and 2020 data, there are
a number of different ownership fields: "ultimate parent", "parent", "subsidiary", and
"advertiser". We use the "ultimate parent" field.
   For each of the years in which we see Kantar Adspender, we merge the corresponding
year of the MRI data to Kantar Adspender. The only exceptions are that we merge the
1992 Adspender to the 1994 MRI and the 2020 Adspender to 2019 MRI. We merge the
Adspender by brand name using a two-stage fuzzy string-matching algorithm that we
describe in detail in appendix A.2. We are able to match over 80% of brands in most
sectors to an ultimate parent, and over 90% of market share for all sectors other than pet
products (see table 1). The brand matching allows us to tell when different brands are
owned by the same ultimate owner. For example, while the 2006 data reports 24 different
brands of motor oil, most of these brands are owned by three companies: Chevron-Texaco,
Exxon Mobil, and Royal Dutch Shell.
    There is a nontrivial amount of brand co-ownership in our data. The average brand
owner in our data set owns 2.88 brands. The brand ownership distribution is highly
skewed, with 76.289% of owners owning only one brand, whereas the largest brand
owner owns 253 brands. Ownership across product markets is also nontrivially large:
the average owner owns brands across 2.11 product markets. 26.43% of brand owners
own brands across at least 2 markets. Tables 2 and 3 show the largest brand owners for
different years, for manufacturing and non-manufacturing separately. For manufactures,
some of the largest owners are Procter & Gamble, Kraft Heinz, Unilever, Johnson &
  15 Kantar Adspender has historical information about advertising expenditures, but brand ownership
information is backfilled: brands advertised in earlier years are assigned to their most recent ultimate
owner. Using historical hard copies of Adspender allows us to circumvent this problem. However, the hard
copies are unavailable after 2006.


                                                   9
Johnson, and Clorox. For non-manufactures, largest owners include Visa, State Farm, and
Blue Shield.


2.3   Computing market shares

The MRI data contains indicators for whether consumers have purchased a given brand,
but typically does not provide quantity or expenditure information. As a workaround,
we compute market shares assuming that if a customer purchases multiple products in
one market, she purchases the same quantity of each product.
    Let Bmo represent the set of brands owned by owner o, let Is represent the set of
customers living in state s, and let I represent the set of all consumers. The market share
of owner o in state s, market m, time t, is:

                                            bBmo    iIs eibmt
                            somst =                                                     (1)
                                       o     bBmo    iIs eibmt

where eibmt is an indicator variable, for whether customer i reports purchasing brand b
in market m at time t, multiplied by the sampling weight on customer i. The national
market share of owner o in market m, time t, is:

                                            bBmo    iI eibmt
                             somt =                                                     (2)
                                        o    bBmo     iI eibmt

We can also aggregate to the higher level of sectors, which we will index by k. Let Mk
represent the set of markets in sector k. The national market share of owner o in sector k,
time t is:
                                      mMk     bBmo     iI eibmt
                         sokt =                                                        (3)
                                    o   mMk     bBmo    iI eibmt

Using each of these market shares, we can then compute concentration metrics at the
level of stategroup-markets, markets, stategroup-sectors, and sectors.
   The MRI data includes a number of choices such as "Other" or "Store brand," that may
correspond to multiple brands; treating these as single brands may lead to overestimating
market concentration. We take the opposite approach, which is conservative for estimating


                                             10
concentration levels: we include "Other" and "Store brand" in the denominator when
calculating the shares (1), (2) and (3), but do not include them as owners.16 Essentially,
this is like assuming that "Other" and related options constitute a continuum of infinitely
small brands.


2.4       Computing HHIs

The HHI is a convex function of market shares, which introduces an upward bias to HHIs
calculated using unbiased finite-sample estimates of market shares. To account for this,
all HHIs we report in the paper are adjusted using a nonparametric bootstrap procedure
to correct for finite-sample bias, which we describe in appendix A.3. The bias adjustment
reduces the estimates of stategroup-product market HHIs (the lowest level of aggregation)
by around 150 points (out of 10,000), but has negligible effects on HHI estimates at other
levels of aggregation.


2.5       Summary of Sectors

Table 1 describes the sectors we analyze. Our main results focus on a balanced panel
of the set of product markets that appear in each year from 1994 to 2019. A non-trivial
number of product markets appear in only a subset of years. For example, wireless
handsets were not measured prior to 2004. In appendix B we also report results separately
for the unbalanced panel consisting of all product markets that appear in the data.
   We categorize sectors into manufacturing and non-manufacturing. The non-manufacturing
sectors are airlines, car rental, financial, hotels, insurance, retail, and restaurants. The
data tend to cover many product markets within manufacturing sectors, and fewer
within non-manufacturing sectors. Our main results include both the manufacturing
and non-manufacturing sectors. For robustness, we also report results separately for the
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors.
  16 Inaddition, treating "Other" or "Store brand" as single brands increases measured concentration levels
slightly but does not have a large affect on measured trends.




                                                    11
                                                              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics



                                                                    Matched       Matched
     Sector               # Markets     # Brands      # Owners                                       Example markets
                                                                    brands %      marketshare %
     Airlines             2             28.3          20.1          95.7          99.3               DomesticTravelAirlinesused, ForeignTravelAirlinesUsed
     Apparel              2             40.9          31.1          89.1          96.3               AthleticShoesBrandsBought, WomensLingerieUndergarments
     AutoProducts         15            196.9         97.6          86.7          96.7               AirFilters, WindshieldWipers
     Automobile           2             52            29.1          89.5          98.8               AutomobilesAndOtherVehiclesManufacturer, MotorcyclesMake
     Beverages            39            531.3         176.9         83.6          95.1               BottledWaterSeltzer, Vodka
     CarRental            3             20.6          7             100           100                CarRentalBusinessUse, TruckTrailerRentalCompanies
     Electronics          5             78.1          46.3          89.0          96.4               Batteries, TelevisionSetsBrands




12
     Financial            3             42.6          26.9          92.7          99.1               CreditCards, RealEstateWhichAgentUsed
     Health               62            1, 127.9      239.7         86.8          94.1               AdhesiveBandages, WartRemovers
     HoProdChild          17            103.3         31.4          93.6          98.5               BabyBathWashAndSoap, VitaminsForChildren
     HoProdFood           126           1, 700.7      445           83.0          93.8               AmericanPasteurizedProcessedCheese, Yogurt
     HoProdNonfood        43            511.1         170.6         81.3          93.0               AirFreshenersCarpetRoomDeodorizers, WritingInstrumentsBrands
     HoProdPets           7             118.3         41.4          76.5          86.6               CannedWetCatFood, PackagedDryDogFood
     Hotels               1             34.4          17.1          96.3          98.0               HotelsMotelsWhereStayed
     Insurance            4             102.3         56.7          91.4          98.4               AutoInsurance, MedicalInsuranceCompanies
     Restaurants          2             114.4         92.7          88.5          94.8               FamilyRestaurantsSteakHouses, FastFoodDriveInRestaurants
     Retail               4             74.4          64.7          89.7          97.0               ApplianceHardwareElectronicsStoresTimesShopped, FurnitureStoresTimesShopped


     Notes. Summary statistics by sector. All numbers are averaged by year. "# markets" is the number of product markets in the sector. "# brands" and "# owners" are
     respectively the total number of brands and owners within a sector. "Matched brands %" and "Matched marketshare %" are, respectively, the number of brands
     and fraction of market share matched to owners. "Example markets" shows examples of markets within the sector
          Table 2: Top 10 brand owners by year, manufacturing sectors



  rank     1994                     2003                    2017
     1     procter & gamble co      altria group inc        procter & gamble co
     2     philip morris cos inc    procter & gamble co     kraft heinz co
     3     unilever nv              unilever                unilever
     4     conagra inc              general mills inc       general mills inc
     5     johnson & johnson        conagra foods inc       johnson & johnson
     6     nestle sa                clorox co               conagra brands inc
     7     campbell soup co         pepsico inc             clorox co
     8     johnson sc & sons inc    johnson & johnson       nestle sa
     9     general mills inc        reckitt benckiser plc   sc johnson & son inc
    10     clorox co                nestle sa               jm smucker co
       Notes. Top 10 largest brand owners by year for manufacturing sectors.




        Table 3: Top 10 brand owners by year, non-manufacturing sectors



rank    1994                       2003                   2017
   1    sears roebuck & co         state farm mutual auto visa usa inc
   2    state farm mutual auto     wal-mart stores inc    state farm mutual auto
   3    k mart corp                visa usa inc           blue cross & blue shie
   4    visa international         home depot inc         home depot inc
   5    wal-mart stores inc        blue cross & blue shie mastercard intl inc
   6    pepsico inc                allstate corp          lowes cos inc
   7    blue cross & blue shie     mcdonalds corp         wal-mart stores inc
   8    southland corp             cendant corp           berkshire hathaway inc
   9    mcdonalds corp             mastercard intl inc    allstate corp
  10    mastercard internation     ito-yokado co ltd      seven & i holdings co
  Notes. Top 10 largest brand owners by year for non-manufacturing sectors.




                                         13
3      Results
Figure 2 shows the distribution of HHI's in our data at the stategroup-market ("local
market"), market, stategroup-sector ("local sector"), and sector level over time. The DoJ-
FTC 2010 Horizontal Merger Guidelines define industries with HHI's between 1500 and
2500 as "moderately concentrated," and above 2500 as "highly concentrated." According
to the guidelines, mergers that raise the HHI in moderately or highly concentrated
industries often warrant scrutiny.17
    We find much higher concentration levels than those measured using production data.
The median HHI in local product markets during the whole period is 2180, with an
average of 42.2% of industries falling in the "highly concentrated" range. For comparison,
Keil (2017) reports a median HHI of 450 between 1990 and 2012 using data from the
Economic Census. Autor et al. (2020) report average HHIs from the Census ranging from
a low of about 85 in the Services sector in 1987 to a high of about 950 in manufacturing
in 2007. Accounting for brand co-ownership also makes a large difference. While not the
main focus of their paper, Neiman and Vavra (2018) report average HHIs of about 30 for
categories in the Nielsen scanner data, not accounting for multi-product firms.
    Still focusing on local product markets, the most noticeable change in the distribution
of HHIs is that concentration has fallen over time ­ the median HHI fell from 2265 in
1994 to 1945 in 2019. Importantly, concentration fell as much in the most concentrated
industries as in the median industry. The 90th percentile HHI fell from 5325 in 1994 to
4570 in 2019, while the 75th percentile fell from 3561 to 3171. Figure 3 shows that the
fraction of firms in the "highly concentrated" range fell from 44.4% in 1994 to 36.6% in
2019. Thus, while we find high concentration levels, particularly in 1994, according to
our data there has been substantial improvement over time. These findings are in conflict
with the prevailing popular opinion that increases in market power in the U.S. have been
large and widespread (Shapiro, 2018).
   The levels and trends in national product market HHIs are close to local product
market HHIs at all percentiles. We infer that there is little evidence in our data of firms
entering more local geographic markets over time. Our finding of decreasing local market
    17 Nockeand Whinston (2020) demonstrate that changes, rather than levels, in HHI are more informative
for unilateral merger effects in commonly used demand and conduct models.

                                                   14
             Figure 2: HHI percentiles at different market levels over time




Notes. Percentiles of HHI over time, at the stategroup-product market (top left), product
market (top right), state group-sector (bottom left), and sector (bottom right) levels.




                                           15
                  Figure 3: Fraction of local markets by concentration




Notes. The fraction of local markets by their level of concentration: highly concentrated
(HHI higher than 2500), moderately concentrated (HHI between 1500 and 2500), and
unconcentrated (HHI lower than 1500).




                                           16
concentration confirms the main finding in Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Trachter (2020).
However, Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Trachter (2020) find increasing national concentration,
even for the most narrow industry definitions. The differences could be explained by the
fact that the NETS data in Rossi-Hansberg, Sarte and Trachter (2020) is measured at the
establishment or plant level (point of production),18 whereas the MRI data is observed at
the consumer level (point of consumption). While establishment data would accurately
reflect consumer retail competition, for goods that are produced in a small number of
plants and sold nationally, establishment data would show a skewed local market share
relative to national market share even if local and national consumption market shares
were similar.
   On the other hand, aggregating product markets into broader sectors presents a
qualitatively different story. At this higher level of aggregation, the 50th, 75th, and
90th percentiles all experience clear increases in concentration over time. The difference
between product level and sector level HHI is evident at both the local and national
levels. The joint finding of rising sector concentration and decreasing product market
concentration implies that firms are expanding into "adjacent" product markets within
the same sector. While this could be achieved through a combination of mergers and
de novo entry, in concert with horizontal mergers and exit, our data do not allow us
to distinguish the precise mechanisms behind the increase because the data contain
numerous name changes for both firms and brands that make it difficult to link them
over time. Our sector level measurements are more consistent with the results in existing
work on the establishment data,19 likely because the sector level of market aggregation
matches the establishment data more closely.
   While our findings above well represent the overall trends for the whole economy,
every individual product market and sector is different. Figure 4 shows local market HHI
trends by sector. HHI in new automobiles, which account for roughly 3% of consumer
expenditure, fell from 2508 to 1322. The largest increase in HHI is in the car rental market,
where HHI grew from 1937 to 3677. More generally, we see many manufacturing sectors
experiencing a decrease in local market HHI, whereas most non-manufacturing sectors
  18 See
       Crane and Decker (2019) for details on the reliability of the NETS sales data.
  19 Grullon,  Larkin     and    Michaely    (2019),      Barkai     (2016),   Autor    et   al.   (2020),
Covarrubias, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2020)


                                                   17
experience no substantive change (exceptions being Financial and Car Rental).
    Figure 5 plots the local product markets that experienced the largest changes. The
markets with the largest HHI decreases generally experienced growth in new brands or
a shift of market share to store brands rather than spreading of share among existing
brands. For example, in glue, Gorilla Glue entered the market in 1999 and increased its
market share to above 30% in 2019, accounting for a large fraction of the decrease in share
by the dominant brands Elmer's and Krazy, both owned by the same parent. We also
observe the parent of the Gorilla Glue company entering into other product markets such
as skin care by 2019. The decrease in concentration in rubber gloves is due to entry by
Proctor and Gamble with the introduction of Mr. Clean brand gloves.20 By 2019, this
brand took a significant market share from market leader Playtex brand.
    The largest increase markets include increases due to merger activity as well as a
concentration of share into the highest selling brands. For example, among the largest
increasing markets are car rental, dry cake mixes, and condoms. Doane et al. (2018)
documents a series of mergers in the car rental industry. The increase in concentration for
dry cake mixes is driven by the 2000 acquisition of Pillsbury by General Mills group.21
The driver in condoms was through growth of the share of the top brand Trojan during
this time period.


3.1   External validity checks

Given the novelty of our data and the contrast between our results and those from the
production data, we have made several attempts to check the external validity of our
findings. The biggest threats to external validity are market coverage, market definitions,
and the survey nature of the data. We address these issues first.
  20 https://www.core77.com/posts/22044/international-home-housewares-show-2012-mr-cleans-new-

line-of-cleaning-gloves-22044
   21 https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB963782500794995149




                                               18
                    Figure 4: Local market HHI over time, by sector




Notes. HHI over time, at the stategroup-product market level. Each line shows the
expenditure-weighted average of HHIs, for all stategroup-markets in a given sector. The
left panel shows results for manufacturing, the right panel for food, beverage, and health
products, and the bottom panel shows results for non-manufacturing. Appendix figure
A.6 replicates this figure for different levels of aggregation.




                                           19
                       Figure 5: Largest Changes in local HHI




Notes. HHI over time, at state group level, for the 10 product markets with the largest
decreases and increases in HHI. Each line shows the expenditure-weighted average of
HHIs, for all local markets in a given market.




                                          20
3.1.1     Market coverage

A number of other papers have shown that in the Census data concentration in production
has increased over time even at the six-digit NAICS level. The MRI data covers fewer
markets than the Census and the selection is not random because it systematically omits
purely intermediate goods, so in this section we check to see if the differences could be
driven by sample selection. We recalculate concentration in the Census data, generate a
subsample of Census data that best matches the MRI product market sample, and confirm
that concentration rises in the subsample of the Census data. We clean the raw Census
data following Barkai (2016) to get a year-industry panel for 1997 to 2012 corresponding
to 2012 six-digit NAICS codes. Then, we hand-match product markets from MRI to the
six-digit NAICS codes. In general, this is a many-to-many mapping. We then use the
Census weights to recompute HHIs.
   Figure 6 plots changes in C4, which has better availability than HHI in the Census
data. We verify the findings of other papers: using the Census six-digit NAICS codes
as definitions of product markets, concentration is increasing over time. The matched
subsample of markets from MRI has higher C4 than the unmatched markets, but the
trend in concentration is the same.22


3.1.2     Comparison to industry specific measures

One downside of the survey data is that they do not reflect actual transactions. Re-
spondents may not remember what they purchased or may not face strong incentives to
accurately report what they purchased. To check the accuracy of market shares from our
dataset, we compare our results to two industry specific datasets.
   For automobiles, we use sales information to construct product market HHI using
Ward's Automotive Research data as used in Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995). Refer to
Grieco, Murry and Yurukoglu (2020) for a detailed description of the cleaning process.
The results are shown in the left panel of figure 7. Both the levels and trends are very
similar between the two datasets: HHI declines from around 2200-2500 in 1994 to around
  22 Inappendix B.1 we also use a regression technique that allows us to include in the comparison
industries whose NAICS industry definition changed over time, with similar results.



                                               21
                             Figure 6: Census concentration




Notes. Median C4s using 2012 Census six-digit NAICS codes. All Census industries
(black), and subsample of Census industries matched to MRI (red).

1200 in 2018.
   For airlines, we use the Airline Origin and Destination Survey from the Bureau of
Transportation Statistics (BTS). This survey is a 10% sample of airline tickets from all US
domestic carriers and includes origin, destination and ticket details. We aggregate total
revenues by carrier group which include airlines that operate under different brands but
under common ownership. Using the BTS data, we can construct both local and national
HHI measures. To calculate local HHIs, for comparability to the MRI, we aggregate
the BTS data, by total revenue, to the level of MRI state-groups, and then we calculate
HHIs at the stategroup level. We define stategroups by origin airport states, but we have
verified that the results hold for destination airports states as well. For national HHIs, we
aggregate BTS data to the national level to construct market shares by total revenue.


                                             22
   We show the results in the right panel of figure 7. As with the automobile data, the
two datasets are very similar in both levels and trends, at both the local and national
level.

                 Figure 7: Automobile and Airlines Robustness Check




Notes. The left panel shows the estimated automobile market HHI from the MRI (blue),
against the estimated national HHI for the car market, from Ward's. The right panel
shows the estimated HHI from the MRI, for domestic airlines, at the local market (blue)
and national market (purple) levels, against BTS airline data local (red) and national
(green) HHIs. For local concentration we take median HHIs.



3.2   Robustness Checks

We have also computed concentration using several alternative concentration measures
and market definitions. The details of these analyses can be found in appendix B. Our
results hold if we measure concentration using C2 and C4 instead of HHIs. The results
reported above are for a balanced panel of industries, but they also hold for the full unbal-
anced panel and under alternative assumptions about industries that change definition
over time. Our results also hold when we re-weight sectors according to expenditure
shares from the Consumer Expenditure Survey. We also examine concentration at two
intermediate levels of market aggregation between product markets and sectors, and we


                                             23
find that the general trend continues to hold: concentration is increasing over time at
higher levels of aggregation, and decreasing at lower levels of aggregation.



4    Model
To rationalize the empirical results, we use a simple version of the Melitz and Ottaviano
(2008) model to study the determinants of concentration at different levels of market
definition. We derive analytical expressions for HHIs in the model, and show which
changes in model primitives are consistent with the trends we observe in the data.
   In the model there are two identical markets, 1 and 2, indexed by j. These markets
have two alternative interpretations. They can be thought of as two geographic regions,
such as US states. A firm that is headquartered in one state can export to another state,
but at a higher marginal cost. Alternatively, the two markets could be different product
markets within the same sector, such as orange juice and soda. Each firm specializes in
one product (its "home" product market), and can also produce the other product, but at
a higher marginal cost.
   Each market contains a unit mass of consumers. Preferences are defined over a
continuum of differentiated varieties, where each firm, indexed by i  , produces a
single variety. There is a numeraire good, q0 . Consumers' utility is:
                               ^              ^                          ^            2
                                       1                   12
                    U = q0 +    qi di -          (qi ) di -                   qi di
                              i        2       i           2              i

with a larger  implying a stronger taste for variety.
   We assume that there is an infinite measure of potential firm entrants in each market.
Each entrant must pay some irreversible fixed cost fE to enter. Once a firm i has entered,
the firm draws a marginal cost c, distributed as:

                                                             k
                                                        c
                                         G (c) =
                                                       cM

           1                                                 1
That is,   c   is Pareto distributed, with lower bound      cM ,   and shape parameter k   1. Firms


                                                  24
can produce in their local market at constant marginal cost c. Firms can also "export" to
the other market. The marginal cost a firm faces for producing in the export market is c,
where  > 1. Thus, when  is low, firms have similar production costs in both markets;
when  is high, a firm based in one market faces a high marginal cost of producing in the
other market.
    The interpretation of  differs depending on whether markets represent geographic
regions or product markets. If the two markets are interpreted as geographies,  can
be thought of as representing product trade costs, such as physical transportation costs,
or increased operational costs of advertising and selling across state borders. If the two
markets are interpreted as product markets within a sector,  can be thought of as the
additional costs that a specialized firm faces when it produces a different product. Firms
specializing in orange juice might have a higher marginal production cost for soda due to
accumulated experience from learning-by-doing, or technological factors like production
equipment that is better suited to orange-juice production. The benefits to specialization
may also vary across sectors and over time depending on technology and the composition
of marginal costs. Certain costs, such as transportation, logistics, and marketing costs, are
more likely to be common within a firm across different product markets. In sectors and
time periods where these factors make up a larger share of marginal costs,  would tend
to be lower.
   In equilibrium, firms enter until the expected profits from entry equal fE for entrants
in both markets. There will be some cost cutoff cD such that firms who draw costs c
higher than cD will choose to produce nothing. The following proposition characterizes
the measure of firms that enter, the cutoff cost for production, and the domestic and
export quantities produced by firms in the unique equilibrium of the model.

Proposition 1. There is a unique equilibrium of the model. The production cost cutoff satisfies:

                                                                  1
                                                           k     k+2
                                   2 (k + 1) (k + 2) (cM ) fE
                            cD =                 1
                                                                                             (4)
                                             1+ 




                                               25
The number of varieties produced in each market, by domestic producers as well as exporters, is:

                                         2 (k + 1)   - cD
                                    N=                                                        (5)
                                                     cD

In equilibrium, firms produce in their local market if c < cD . The quantity produced by a firm
with cost c in the local market j is:

                                                 1
                                     qj (c) =      (cD - c)                                   (6)
                                                2

Firms export positive quantities if c < cD . The quantity produced by a firm with cost c in the
export market j is:
                                               1
                                    qXj (c) =    (cD - c)                                   (7)
                                              2
Consumer welfare is:
                                     1             k+1
                               1+      ( - cD )  -     cD                                     (8)
                                    2              k+2

    We build on Melitz and Ottaviano by calculating market shares and Herfindahl-
Hirschman indices (HHIs) at the local market and sector level and showing how they
vary with model primitives. Define the total quantity in market j as the integral over all
firms' production in market j:         ^
                                      Qj          qj (ci ) di
                                             i

We can then define the market share of a firm i in market j, sj (i), as the ratio of quantity
produced by firm i in market j to the total quantity in market j, and the aggregate market
share s (i) as i's total quantity across both markets, divided by aggregate market quantity.
That is:                                                    m
                                        qj (ci )            j=1 qj (ci )
                              s j ( i)           , s ( i) =   m                           (9)
                                          Qj                  j=1 Qj

These are the natural continuous analogs to market shares with a discrete number of
firms. We can then define HHIs at the market and aggregate level as follows.




                                                26
Definition 1. Define the local HHI in market j as:
                                            ^
                                                                 2
                                   HHIj =             s j ( i)       di                 (10)
                                            i

and the aggregate HHI as:                   ^
                                    HHI =            (s (i))2 di                        (11)
                                                i

    As noted above, local and aggregate markets can be interpreted either geographically,
as state-group and national market shares, or as product markets and sectors. Since we
are primarily interested in the convergence between market and sector HHIs, we will
describe local HHIs as "market" and aggregate HHIs as "sector" HHIs. The following
proposition characterizes market and sector HHIs in the model.

Proposition 2. Market HHIs are:

                                                1 2 + 2k
                                      HHIj =                                            (12)
                                                N 2+k

Sector HHIs are:

  HHI = HHIj -
           k+1                1                         1      2        2 - 2
                           1 - k (k + 1) (k + 2)          -          +                  (13)
    N 1 + 1        (k + 2)    2                        kk (k + 1) k+1 (k + 2) k+2
          k



The market HHI is strictly increasing in . The difference between the market and sector HHIs,
HHIj - HHI, is also strictly increasing in .

   Proposition 2 shows that the market HHI is a function of the number of firms that
enter in equilibrium and k, which controls the dispersion in firms' marginal cost draws.
Product market HHIs are always increasing in . Intuitively, this is because, when 
decreases, productive firms have an easier time competing in markets besides their home
market, which always increases product market competition in equilibrium.
   From (13), the sector HHI is always lower than the product market HHI. The difference
between sector and market HHIs is also increasing in . Intuitively, when  is high many

                                                27
firms produce in only one market and markets may be quite concentrated, even if the
total number of entrants across both markets is fairly large. On the other hand, when  is
low most firms produce similar amounts in both markets, so sector and product market
concentration are similar.


4.1       Comparative statics and interpretation of results

Figure 8 shows how changes in model primitives impact market and sector HHIs and
consumer welfare. The left column shows the result of varying trade costs, . As in
proposition 2, when trade costs decrease, market HHIs tend to decrease and sector HHIs
tend to increase.23 When trade costs are low, productive firms enter and compete in
more export markets and this additional competition decreases market HHIs. However,
entering in more markets also makes firms larger at the sector level, increasing sector
HHIs.
    The middle and right columns of figure 8 show how HHIs change with other model
parameters. The middle column shows that higher entry costs, fE , tends to increase
concentration at both the market and sector levels simultaneously, without a large effect
on the difference. The right column shows the effect of varying k, which controls the
dispersion in firm productivity draws; lower values of k correspond to more dispersion
in productivity.24 In order to isolate the effect of changing productivity dispersion, as we
vary k we simultaneously vary the entry cost, fE , so that the firm entry cutoff cD remains
fixed. Similar to fixed costs, decreasing k tends to increase both market and sector HHIs
simultaneously. Aghion et al. (2019) and Hsieh and Rossi-Hansberg (2019) present related
models in which falling overhead costs of entering additional markets increases aggregate
measures of concentration.
    Comparing the results from the model with the observed trends in figure 1, and
interpreting the two markets in the model as different product markets within a sector,
we see that the only force in the model capable of explaining both increasing sector
  23 Infigure 8, the sector HHI is not monotone in : when trade costs are very low, decreasing  further
tends to decrease the sector HHI. However, the difference between market and sector HHIs is always lower
when  is lower.
  24 Formally, the variance of productivity, 1 , is decreasing in k for k > 2. When k 2, the variance of
                                             c
productivity does not exist.

                                                  28
                    Figure 8: Comparative statics: HHI and welfare




Notes. Comparative statics of product market and sector HHI (top row) and household
welfare (bottom row), as we vary trade costs  (left), fixed entry costs fE (middle), and
                                1               1
firms' productivity dispersion, k (right). When k is higher, firms' productivity draws are
more long-tailed. We vary  and fE holding all other parameters fixed. When we vary k,
we vary fE to hold cD fixed.




                                           29
concentration and decreasing product market concentration is falling trade costs, .
Increasing sector concentration can also be explained by increasing fixed costs fe or by
increasing productivity dispersion ­ the latter explanation being similar to the "superstar
firms" hypothesis of (Autor et al., 2017) ­ and it is possible or even likely that multiple
forces are at work. However, both of those forces would also tend to increase product
market concentration. To get decreasing product market concentration requires falling
trade costs.
    Decreasing trade costs could be driven by several factors. It may be that production
technologies are becoming more general, perhaps due to increasing use of software
in production, making it easier to produce different products in the same plant. It
could be that differences in productivity are increasingly driven by general factors
such as automated production processes, supply chain efficiency and distribution, and
advertising effectiveness, rather than product specific factors. Atalay, Hortaçsu and
Syverson (2014) provide evidence that integration into non-competing markets is used to
facilitate intangible inputs.
   Distinguishing between different drivers of concentration changes is important because
they have different implications for consumer welfare. The bottom row of figure 8 graphs
welfare with respect to each model primitive. The figure shows that decreases in trade
costs and increases in productivity dispersion both lead to higher consumer welfare,
while increases in firms' entry costs lead to lower welfare. The model then suggests that
the observed trends may be welfare-improving for consumers. Consumers do not care
directly about sector-level concentration so, if productive firms are increasingly able to
enter multiple product markets, consumers are better off.
    Finally, it is a well established fact that corporate profits have been increasing over the
last few decades (Barkai (2016), Covarrubias, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2020),De Loecker,
Eeckhout and Unger (2020)). Increasing profits could be caused by increasing market
power, but our finding of falling concentration in product markets casts some doubt
on this explanation. Figure 9 explores how average profits (of surviving firms) in the
model vary with respect to model primitives. The figure shows that, according to the
model, decreasing trade costs also cause profits to increase. Thus, qualitatively anyway,
it is possible that decreasing trade costs could explain both the observed trends in


                                              30
                          Figure 9: Comparative statics: Profits




Notes. Comparative statics of firms' expected profits conditional on survival, as we vary
                                                                                        1
trade costs  (left), fixed entry costs fE (middle), and firms' productivity dispersion, k
               1
(right). When k  is higher, firms' productivity draws are more long-tailed. We vary  and
fE holding all other parameters fixed. When we vary k, we vary fE to hold cD fixed.

concentration and the observed trend in profits. Increasing profits can also be driven by
increasing fixed costs (fE ) and increasing productivity dispersion ("superstar firms"), so
there may also be multiple forces at work.



5    Conclusion
In conclusion, this paper attempts to measure long term trends in local product market
concentration across a wide swath of the U.S. economy, using market definitions that
more closely reflect consumption-based economic markets. We find that concentration
levels are high in nearly half of the industries covered in our sample, suggesting that
market power may be more widespread than previously thought.
   We also find that product market concentration has been decreasing over time, partic-
ularly in the most concentrated industries. This finding is the opposite of well known
results from production data. We do find increasing concentration when product markets
are aggregated into sectors, which is consistent with the production data.
    An economic model featuring increasing correlation of costs across product markets


                                            31
explains these two trends. Efficient firms in single product markets enter each others'
"home" product markets, thereby increasing aggregate concentration while reducing
product level concentration. The model suggests that this process is welfare improving
for consumers. While it is possible, or even likely, that multiple forces are at work, this
simple model can also explain observed trends in corporate profits.
    Trends in product market concentration are an important input to a myriad of litera-
tures in economics. While we have attempted to verify the internal and external validity
of our results, confirming them using other consumption-based data sources seems like a
pressing issue.




                                            32
References
Affeldt, Pauline, Tomaso Duso, Klaus Peter Gugler, and Joanna Piechucka. 2021. "Mar-
  ket Concentration in Europe: Evidence from Antitrust Markets."

Aghion, Philippe, Antonin Bergeaud, Timo Boppart, Peter J Klenow, and Huiyu Li.
 2019. "A theory of falling growth and rising rents." National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Atalay, Enghin, Ali Hortaçsu, and Chad Syverson. 2014. "Vertical integration and input
  flows." American Economic Review, 104(4): 1120­48.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van
 Reenen. 2017. "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms." Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23396. DOI: 10.3386/w23396.

Autor, David, David Dorn, Lawrence F Katz, Christina Patterson, and John
 Van Reenen. 2020. "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms*."
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 135(2): 645­709.

Barkai, Simcha. 2016. "Declining labor and capital shares." The Journal of Finance.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. "Automobile Prices in Market
  Equilibrium." Econometrica, 63(4): 841­890.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Emir Kamenica. 2018. "Coming apart? Cultural distances in
  the United States over time." National Bureau of Economic Research.

CEA. 2016. "Benefits of competition and indicators of market power." Issue Brief.

Covarrubias, Matias, Germán Gutiérrez, and Thomas Philippon. 2020. "From Good
 to Bad Concentration? US Industries over the past 30 years." NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual, 34(1): 1­46.

Crane, Leland Dod, and Ryan Decker. 2019. "Business Dynamics in the National Estab-
  lishment Time Series (NETS)."



                                           33
Crawford, Gregory S, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2012. "The welfare effects of bundling in
  multichannel television markets." American Economic Review, 102(2): 643­85.

Dafny, Leemore, Kate Ho, and Robin S Lee. 2019. "The price effects of cross-market
 mergers: theory and evidence from the hospital industry." The RAND Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 50(2): 286­325.

De Loecker, Jan, Jan Eeckhout, and Gabriel Unger. 2020. "The rise of market power and
 the macroeconomic implications." The Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Doane, Michael, Luke Froeb, Gregory Werden, and David Zimmer. 2018. "Hertz-Dollar
 Thrifty: Fixing a Merger to Avoid Litigation." The Antitrust Revolution: Economics,
 Competition, and Policy . 7 ed. Oxford University Press.

Economist, The. 2016. "Corporate concentration: the creep of consolidation across Amer-
  ica's corporate landscape."

Ganapati, Sharat. 2020. "Growing Oligopolies, Prices, Output, and Productivity." Work-
 ing Paper.

Gaynor, Martin. 2018. "Examining the Impact of Health Care Consolidation." State-
 ment before the Committee on Energy and Commerce, Oversight and Investigations
 Subcommittee, U.S. House of Representatives.

Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M Shapiro. 2011. "Ideological segregation online and
 offline." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4): 1799­1839.

Grieco, Paul, Charles Murry, and Ali Yurukoglu. 2020. "The Evolution of Market Power
 in the US Auto Industry." Working Paper.

Grullon, Gustavo, Yelena Larkin, and Roni Michaely. 2019. "Are US industries becom-
 ing more concentrated?" Review of Finance, 23(4): 697­743.

Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon. 2017. "Declining Competition and Invest-
 ment in the US." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2019. "The industrial revolution in
 services." National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                          34
Keil, Jan. 2017. "The trouble with approximating industry concentration from Compustat."
 Journal of Corporate Finance, 45: 467 ­ 479.

Melitz, Marc J, and Gianmarco IP Ottaviano. 2008. "Market size, trade, and productivity."
 The Review of Economic Studies, 75(1): 295­316.

Neiman, Brent, and Joseph Vavra. 2018. "The rise in household spending concentration."
 Available at SSRN 3137782.

Nocke, Volker, and Michael D Whinston. 2020. "Concentration screens for horizontal
 mergers." National Bureau of Economic Research.

Peltzman, Sam. 2014. "Industrial concentration under the rule of reason." The Journal of
  Law and Economics, 57(S3): S101­S120.

Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban, Pierre-Daniel Sarte, and Nicholas Trachter. 2020. "Diverging
 Trends in National and Local Concentration." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2020, volume
 35. University of Chicago Press.

Shapiro, Carl. 2010. "The 2010 horizontal merger guidelines: From hedgehog to fox in
  forty years." Antitrust LJ, 77: 49.

Shapiro, Carl. 2018. "Antitrust in a Time of Populism." International Journal of Industrial
  Organization, 61: 714­748.

Smith, Dominic, and Sergio Ocampo. 2021. "The Evolution of US Retail Concentration."

Wasi, Nada, and Aaron Flaaen. 2015. "Record linkage using Stata: Preprocessing, linking,
 and reviewing utilities." The Stata Journal, 15(3): 672­697.




                                            35
                            Internet Appendix

A     Data Appendix

A.1   Cleaning Kantar Adspender

From the Kantar Adspender data, we observe brand names, ultimate parents, and product
categories. Product category verbal descriptions and codes are available for the years
1994, 2003, and 2017. For the other years, only Kantar's category "codes" are available.
The codes appear to be consistent for nearby years, so we impute verbal descriptions for
the 1997 data using the 1994 data, and for the 2001 and 2006 data using the 2003 data.


A.2   Merging MRI-Simmons and Kantar Adspender

We use a fuzzy merging algorithm to match brands from the MRI-Simmons data to the
Kantar Adspender data. The MRI-Simmons data contain approximately 450 product
markets per year, which are relatively stable over time. Kantar Adspender is also divided
into around 550 categories, which change somewhat over time. We do the match entirely
separately for each year of the dataset.
    Data cleaning. We begin by cleaning both datasets, standardizing brand names.
We replace accented characters with their closest alphabetic equivalents, remove all
non-alphanumeric characters, remove excess whitespace, and lowercase all brands. Ad-
ditionally, we remove common words such as "and", "any", and "or". Second, from
Adspender brands, we remove categorizing words such as "auto" and "corp", which
allows longer Adspender brands ("audi auto corp") to match with shorter MRI-Simmons
brands ("audi"). Many brands in the Adspender data are very long, including "brand"
words followed by "product descriptors", such as "OSCAR DE LA RENTA DRESSES
WOMEN". We thus trim brands with many words, by removing either 1 or two words
from the end of the brand string; we never trim brands down to less than 3 words.
   We manually edit the match, removing around 350 words that are specific enough
that they are used for matching by the fuzzy merge algorithm, but are not brand words,

                                           36
and thus induce bad matches. We also manually delete a few owners and brands which
seem to match poorly.
   Fuzzy merging. We then merge brand names from the two datasets using a two-step
process. We first match MRI-Simmons product markets to Kantar product categories,
then run the Stata reclink2 package, created by Wasi and Flaaen (2015), to match MRI
brands to Kantar brands. Reclink2 is a fuzzy text merging algorithm, which calculates
the distance between strings using a modified bigram algorithm: roughly speaking, this
calculates the ratio of the number of common two consecutive letters of the two strings
and their average length minus one.
   In the first stage, we construct a one-to-many match of MRI-Simmons product markets
to Kantar product categories. We first naively fuzzy-merge the full list of MRI-Simmons
brands to the full list of Kantar brands. We then check, for each MRI-Simmons product
market, the Kantar categories which are matched to the product market most often.
We hand-check this merge, adding and subtracting some associations which are not
well-captured by the algorithm.
    Next, once we have constructed the MRI-Simmons to Kantar category crosswalk,
we re-run reclink2, matching brands from MRI-Simmons to Kantar brands within the
matched categories. Since the lists of brands to be matched are smaller, false positives are
less likely, so we can use a lower match score cutoff.
    We use a few more post-processing steps for the merge. In some cases, an MRI-
Simmons brand is matched to the same Kantar owner for, for example, 1997 and 2003, but
not 2001; this is likely to be a false negative for 2001, so we assign the brand in 2001 to
its 1997 and 2003 owner. To improve on the missed matches for brands that have a high
market-share, in some cases we manually check brand information using web searches
and company websites to assign an owner.
    For brands where we are unable to impute an owner using Kantar, we group together
brands within the same product category that start with the same first word together;
this largely allows us to capture minor products which have the same owner, for example,
"Lipton Decaffeinated Iced Tea", "Lipton Iced Tea Mix" and "Lipton Tea & Honey". We
then restrict attention to MRI-Simmons product markets for which we are able to impute
owners for at least 60% of market share, for all 6 years in our dataset. This reduces the


                                            37
sample from 466 product markets to 337 product markets. In subsection B.3, we also
report results for the unbalanced panel, including all 466 product markets.


A.3   Adjusting HHI estimates for finite-sample bias

The HHI is a convex function of market shares. Thus, if we calculate HHIs by plugging in
unbiased estimators of market shares, the HHI estimates will tend to be biased upwards.
However, this bias can be estimated, allowing us to construct approximately unbiased
estimates of the HHI.
   Suppose we wish to estimate the market share soj of owner o in market j. j could
represent any level of aggregation, from stategroup-product market, to national sector.
Suppose we have some unbiased estimator s  ^ oj of soj , that is:

                                                 ^ oj = soj
                                               E s

We wish to estimate the HHI in market j, which is:

                                           HHIj =                 s2
                                                                   oj
                                                              o


                                                                                   ^2
If we simply estimate the HHI using the sum of squares of estimated market shares, s oj ,
this will tend to be upwards biased. To see this, note that:

                                               2
                         ^2
                       E s        ^ oj
                           oj = E s                      ^ oj = s2
                                                   + Var s                ^ oj
                                                                 oj + Var s


Hence,

              E         ^2
                        s oj   =       s2
                                        oj +               ^ oj = HHIj +
                                                       Var s                               ^ oj
                                                                                       Var s
                   o               o               o                               o

Note that, rearranging, we have:


                               HHIj = E                ^2
                                                       s oj   -             ^ oj
                                                                        Var s                             (14)
                                                   o               o


Hence, we can construct an unbiased estimator for HHIj by subtracting                             o Var   ^ oj ,
                                                                                                          s

                                                        38
the sum of sample variances of the market shares s                               ^2
                                                   ^ oj , from the sample HHI, o s oj . We
calculate these sample variances using a nonparametric bootstrap. In each year of the
original survey, we draw 100 samples of users with replacement from the original sample.
We calculate market shares at each level of aggregation using these resampled datasets,
and take the variance in all market shares over the bootstrap samples. We then use
these variances to adjust sample HHIs, using expression (14). All HHI estimates from
MRI-Simmons data in the paper include the adjustment in (14).
    To illustrate how much the bias correction affects our estimates, figure A.1 compares
our HHI estimates from figure 1 to raw HHIs without the adjustment in (14). At the
local product market level, the adjustment is fairly large, shifting the estimated median
HHI by approximately 130 (out of 10,000). This is because the number of respondents
in each local product market is not large ­ around a few hundred on average ­ so local
product market shares have fairly high sample variances, making the adjustment term in
(14) fairly large. In contrast, the adjustment term is essentially negligible at the national
product market, local sector, and national sector levels.

                   Figure A.1: Effect of finite-sample HHI adjustment




Notes. Effect of the finite-sample HHI bias adjustment, (14), on our HHI estimates. Lines
labelled "unadj." are the raw sample HHIs, o s   ^2
                                                  oj . The other lines are identical to those
from Figure 1.



                                             39
B     Robustness checks
Subsection B.1 does a more detailed comparison of our results to the Census data,
accounting for changing definitions of NAICS codes over time. Subsection B.2 uses top-2
and top-4 market shares, instead of HHIs, as our measure of concentration. Subsection
B.3 uses the entire unbalanced panel of product markets, instead of dropping markets to
balance the panel. Subsection B.4 weights sector HHIs by expenditure shares from the
Consumer Expenditure Survey. In all three cases, our baseline results are qualitatively
and quantitatively unchanged. Finally, subsection B.5 analyzes concentration at two
intermediate levels of aggregation between product markets and sectors, and finds that
the general trend continues to hold: concentration is increasing over time at higher levels
of aggregation, and decreasing at lower levels of aggregation.


B.1   Market coverage ­ accounting for changing NAICS definitions

In the main text of the paper we show that C4 rises over time at the 6-digit NAICS level
for a subsample of Census industries matched to the MRI-Simmons data. One issue with
this simple comparison is that NAICS code definitions are changing over time. (Note
that this issue is also present in previous work measuring concentration in the Census
data. The typical solution in that literature is to drop markets whose definitions changed
during the sample period.) To show that NAICS code redefinitions are not driving our
results, we conduct the following exercise. We run a simple regression:

                                   HHIjt = µt + j +    jt                               (15)

where j indexes NAICS codes, t indexes periods of 5 years, and jt is an error term
that is independent of µt and j . If a NAICS code is ever affected by a split or merger,
we treat it as a separate NAICS code pre- and post-merger. We are interested in the µt
coefficients from specification (15). Effectively, (15) is a fixed-effects specification: the
time fixed effects µt estimate changes in concentration, using only variation within given
NAICS codes, over time periods where that code is not affected by code merger events.
Specification (15) is a simple way to use all the variation in concentration over time in the


                                             40
               Table A.1: Census HHI over time, fixed effects specification

                 (1)              (2)                 (3)                  (4)
                 All     All unchanged codes    Matched codes   Matched unchanged codes
  µ2002       2.550            2.715               3.652                3.671
               (0.361)          (0.369)             (0.987)              (0.903)

  µ2007       3.797             3.854               3.928               4.253
               (0.374)           (0.379)             (0.978)             (0.942)

  µ2012       4.479             4.789               3.238               4.016
               (0.420)           (0.416)            (1.232)              (1.020)

  Constant    32.12             32.11               42.52               42.77
               (0.301)           (0.310)             (0.809)             (0.760)
  N             3429              2737                 392                 376
  R2            0.930             0.934               0.911               0.932
  Standard errors in parentheses
    p < 0.05,  p < 0.01,  p < 0.001
Notes. Columns 1 and 2 show the regression results for the entire census sample. Columns
3 and 4 show the results for census codes that we matched to MRI-Simmons product
markets. For columns 2 and 4, we also drop any NAICS industry codes that change in
the time series.

Census that is not affected by NAICS code redefinitions. The results of specification (15),
for various subsets of the data, are shown in table A.1. For all census subsamples, we
find that the fixed effects µt are increasing uniformly from 1997 to 2012.


B.2    C2 and C4 concentration measures

Figure A.2 replicates figure 1 using two alternative measures of concentration: the sum of
the top two owner market shares (C2), and the sum of the top four owner market shares
(C4). The trends are similar to using HHI.




                                               41
            Figure A.2: Median C2 and C4 over time, by market definition




Notes. Local markets are defined as product markets intersected with 29 stategroups.
Sectors are defined by aggregating related national product markets. rh indicates right-
hand axis.

B.3   Unbalanced panel

Figure A.3 shows the result of figure 1 using all 466 markets we observe in the sample;
thus, brand merge rates are lower, and the composition of product markets shifts over
time. Nonetheless, the basic pattern that concentration is decreasing at the market level,
and somewhat increasing at the sector level, is still present.


B.4   CEX weighting

One concern with our baseline result is that the weights on categories do not reflect
consumers' expenditures in these product categories. We attempt to address this by
re-weighting results to reflect expenditure shares across broad product categories from
the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). To do so, we manually match each item in
CEX to a MRI-Simmons sector. For example, we match "Cereals and bakery products" to
"HoProdFood" and "Nonalcoholic beverages" to "Beverages". This is a many-to-1 match:
CEX items are available in fine subitems, so in general there are many CEX items within


                                           42
    Figure A.3: Median HHI at different market levels over time, unbalanced panel




Notes. Median HHI over time, at the state-market, market, state-sector, and sector levels,
for the unbalanced panel dataset. "rh" indicates right-hand axis.

each MRI-Simmons sector. We then aggregate expenditure shares from the 2018 CEX
table to MRI-Simmons sector level, and we use these expenditure shares to weight sectors
in our baseline result.
   The results are shown in figure A.4. The results are qualitatively quite similar to
results in figure 1 in the main text. Local and national market-level concentration both
decline substantially. Local sector-level concentration increases slightly, while national
sector-level concentration rises and then falls, so it is essentially flat over the entire time
horizon.




                                              43
                              Figure A.4: CEX Weighting




Notes. Equivalent of figure 1, where we re-weight sectors, so they reflect expenditure
shares from the CEX. Each line shows the CEX-expenditure-weighted median of HHIs.
"rh" indicates right-hand axis.

B.5   Alternative levels of market aggregation

One weakness of our main data is that we only have two market definitions: markets, and
sectors. However, the Kantar dataset, for 2017, has multiple levels of market aggregation:
"majors" and "industries", which are somewhat lower-level than MRI-Simmons sectors.
While we only have these aggregation variables for a single year of the Kantar data, if
we hold fixed the mapping from markets to majors and industries over time, we can
use this to analyze concentration at different levels of market aggregation. That is, we
first match MRI-Simmons markets to fine Kantar product categories; we then impute
Kantar "majors" and "industries" using the 2017 Kantar definitions. This gives us two
more levels of aggregation for analyzing concentration: in the balanced panel, we have

                                           44
337 MRI-Simmons product markets, 120 Kantar majors, 46 Kantar industries, and 17
MRI-Simmons sectors.
    In figure A.5, we show how concentration varies at each of these levels of aggregation.
MRI-Simmons markets are the finest level of aggregation, followed by Kantar majors,
Kantar industries, and MRI-Simmons sectors. The "divergence" trend is relatively uniform.
Concentration is decreasing over time at the MRI-Simmons market level, roughly flat
at the Kantar major and industry levels, and increasing over time at the MRI-Simmons
sector level.

         Figure A.5: Median HHI including Kantar major and industry levels




Notes. Equivalent of figure 1, including Kantar major (green) and industry (blue) levels.
MRI-Simmons product markets (red) and MRI-Simmons sectors (purple) are identical to
figure 1. rh indicates right-hand axis.




                                            45
B.6     HHI by sector and aggregation level

To complement figure 4, local product market HHI over time by sector, figure A.6 shows
national product market, local sector HHI, and national sector HHI over time by sector,
in addition to local product market HHI.



C       Proofs for section 4

C.1     Proof of proposition 1

The proof essentially follows directly from Melitz and Ottaviano. Expression (4) for
                                                                                  1
the cost cutoff is (29) in Melitz and Ottaviano, with Ll = 1, and using that        . The
technology parameter, , is defined on page 304 of Melitz and Ottaviano. Expression (5)
is exactly (16) of Melitz and Ottaviano, which applies in the both the single-market and
the two-market case. Expressions (6) and (7) are expression (20) of Melitz and Ottaviano,
with Ll = 1 and Lh = 1 and symmetric trade costs.


C.2     Proof of proposition 2

We prove proposition 2 in a few steps. First, claims 1 and 2 characterize two properties of
HHIs in the continuous case.


C.2.1    Renormalization properties of HHIs

Claim 1 illustrates how the continuous HHI is analogous to the familiar discrete HHI.
                                                                1
If all firms produce identical quantities, the HHI is simply N    , so it is decreasing in the
measure of firms which produce. Holding fixed N, the HHI is higher when the dispersion
of firms' quantities, measured by the coefficient of variation of q (c), is larger. Expression
(16) also holds for discrete HHIs. Thus, the continuous HHI behaves in a way that is
qualitatively quite similar to its discrete analog.
Claim 1. Let H (c) represent the distribution of costs among firms producing positive
quantities, and let N represent the number of firms producing in a given market. We

                                             46
have:
                                                                                            2
                                                    1                 SD (q (c))
                                    HHIj =                1+                                                     (16)
                                                    N                  E [q (c)]

Proof. It will be useful to work with, rather than the measure space i, the distribution of
costs among firms producing strictly positive amounts in each markets. Suppose there
are N firms ­ domestic firms and exporters ­ which produce positive quantities in each
market. We can disregard firms which produce zero quantity, as they contribute nothing
to the HHI integral.
   Defining the probability distribution H (c) of costs of firms who produce positive
quantities, and G (c) the distribution of costs among firms that produce, we have, for any
function f (·), that:         ^                 ^                          
                                         f (c (i)) di = N                     f (c) dG (c)                       (17)
                                                                       0
Hence, we can write the HHI in terms of the firm cost distribution as:
                                ^       N
                                                                                ´N                      2
                                                             2                     0       qj (c (i))       di
                   HHIj =                   sj (c (i))           dG (c) = ´                                  2
                                    0                                       N
                                                                                       0   qj (c (i)) di

                           ´ cM                     2                   ´c         2
                       N    0           q j ( c)        dG (c)         1 0 M qj (c) dG (c)
                   =        ´ cM                                 2
                                                                     =   ´
                        N               qj (c) dG (c)                  N cM qj (c) dG (c) 2
                                0                                              0
                                                                                   2
                                                       1 E q j ( c)
                                                HHIj =                                 2
                                                                                                                 (18)
                                                       N E q j ( c)

Expression (18) expresses HHIj in terms of the first and second moments of the quantity
distribution among producing firms, and the total number of producing firms N. We can
further rearrange (18) to:

                      1 (E [q (c)])2 + Var (q (c))   1                                      Var (q (c))
                  =                         2
                                                   =                                   1+
                      N         (E [q (c)])          N                                       (E [q (c)])2

                                                                                       2
                                                1                SD (q (c))
                                            =           1+
                                                N                 E [q (c)]

                                                                 47
as desired.


C.2.2       The SVI

First, we show that the difference between the HHI of an aggregated market, and the
weighted average of HHI's in submarkets, is related to the variance of market share
vectors in submarkets. In particular, consider the following quantity.

Definition 2. Define the continuous SVI (submarket variation index) as:

                                           ^   N       Qj                          2
                               SVI                          s j ( i) - s ( i)          di                               (19)
                                           0       j   j Qj

Intuitively, equation (19) calculates, for each firm, the Qj -weighted average of deviations
of the firm's market shares in each market from the firm's sector average market share,
then we take the integral of this average across all firms. Claim 2 states that the submarket
variation index is equal to the Wj -weighted average of product market HHIs, minus the
sector HHI. The SVI is thus a simple measure of the divergence between product market
and sector HHIs.
Claim 2. The quantities SVI, HHIj , and HHI satisfy:
                                                                      
                                                       Qj
                                   SVI =                    HHIj  - HHI                                                 (20)
                                                   j   j Qj


Proof. Take the RHS of (19), and substitute for s (i) using (9), to get:

                               ^   N
                                                                                       2
                                               Qj                     j Q j s j ( i)
                           =                           s j ( i) -                          di
                               0       j       j Qj                        j Qj

Expanding, we have

  ^
                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                 2
             Qj            2           Qj                     j Q j s j ( i)           Qj       j Q j s j ( i)
                  sj (i)       -2           s j ( i)                           +                                      di
   i    j    j Qj                      j Qj                         j Qj               j Qj        j Qj
                                                                                                                        (21)

                                                        48
This simplifies to:

                        ^                                                  ^
                                                                   
                                                                                                               2
                                       Qj         2                                       j Q j s j ( i)
                                           sj (i)  di -                                                            di
                        i               Q
                                       j j                                     i                  j Qj
                                   j


Now, recalling that the definition of s (i) in (9), we have:

                            ^                           2          ^
                                       j Q j s j ( i)
                                                            di =          (s (i))2 di = HHI
                               i          j Qj                        i


And,

         ^                                                                ^
                                         
                      Qj         2                             Qj                             2                     Qj
                          sj (i)  di =                                             s j ( i)       di =                   HHIj
          i            Q
                      j j                                      j Qj        i                                        j Qj
                 j                                      j                                                  j


This proves (20), and thus claim 2.


C.2.3   Computing product market HHIs

We know that the distribution of costs (inclusive of trade costs) among producing firms,
both domestic firms and exporters, is such that 1    c is Pareto distributed, with shape
                            1
parameter k and minimum cD . Also, the quantity qj (c) is proportional to the difference

                                                            cD - c

Expression (18) implies that HHIj is invariant to scaling qj (c); that is, if we multiply
all firms' quantities by some constant k, HHIj is unchanged. We will thus scale firms'
quantities such that a firm with cost 0 has quantity 1. We can also change variables to
work with indexed costs
                                              c
                                         x
                                             cD
if 1                                     1              1
   c is Pareto distributed with minimum cD , then  = x is Pareto distributed, with
minimum 1 and shape parameter k. Thus, define the rescaled quantity q
                                                                    ~ (); a firm with



                                                             49
productivity  has rescaled quantity:

                                                           1
                                           ~ ( ) = 1 -
                                           q
                                                           

Thus, we have:

                                   2
                               1                   2                1    1
                   E    1-             =                     , E 1-   =
                                           ( 1 + k) ( 2 + k)            1+k

thus, plugging into (18), we have:

                                                    2 1+k
                                           HHIj =                                     (22)
                                                    N2+k

Where N is the number of firms producing in a given market, including both domestic
firms and exporters. This proves (12) of proposition 2.
   Now, let M be the number of entering firms with cost below cD in one market; this is:

                                                        Gc c D
                                       N = M 1+
                                                        Gc (cD )

In renormalized space, we have:

                    Gc c D
                                                1                                 1
                 1+                =   1 + Gc            = 1 + (1 - G ()) = 1 +
                    Gc (cD )                                                      k

Hence, the product market HHI is:

                                                    1        2 + 2k
                                   HHIj =                                             (23)
                                             M 1 + 1          2+k
                                                   k



where M is the measure of domestic firms that produce positive quantities in each market.
Note that M < N, since N counts both domestic and exporting firms. In particular,
since the N firms active in a given market consist of importers as well as a fraction 1
                                                                                      k of




                                                 50
exporters; hence, we have:
                                                                                    1
                                                        N = M 1+                                                                         (24)
                                                                                    k
Plugging (24) into (23), we get (12) of Proposition 2. To show that product market HHIs
are always increasing in , note that from (4) of Proposition 1, an increase in  causes to
cD to increase. From (5), and increase in cD causes N to decrease. From (12), a decrease
in N causes HHIj to increase.


C.2.4    Computing the SVI

First, the SVI expression simplifies in the two market symmetric case. This is because:
                  ^       2M                                                       ^    2M                                      2
                                    Qj                            2                            1              s1 (i) + s2 (i)
        SVI                              s j ( i) - s ( i)            di =                   2     s 1 ( i) -                       di
                      0             j Qj                                            0          2                     2
                               j

                                                           ^     2M
                                                1
                                          SVI =                       (s1 (i) - s2 (i))2 di
                                                4            0
Applying (17) from the proof of claim 1, we can express this as:

             ^
                                                                                                                          2
                 cD
         1            ´                  q1 (c)                                                    q2 (c)
SVI =                                                                      -´                                              2MdG (c)
         4   0                 q1 (c) M 1 +       1
                                                            dG (c)                     q2 (c) M 1 +         1
                                                                                                                 dG (c)
                                                  k                                                         k


Now, by symmetry, the distributions of q1 and q2 are identical, so we can write this as:
                                                                           ^       cD
                                                  1
                          SVI =                        2
                                                                                        (q1 (c) - q2 (c))2 dG (c)                        (25)
                                               1                       2       0
                                    2M 1 +     k
                                                           (E [q1 ])

Analogous to (18), expression (25) expresses SVI in terms of moments of the joint
distribution of q1 and q2 . It is also invariant to scaling, so we will again scale firms'
quantities to have maximum 1, and index firms by their cost index,   cc    D
                                                                             , to get:
                                                                       ^       
                                              1
                      SVI =                        2
                                                                                              ~ 2 ())2 dG ()
                                                                                    ~ 1 ( ) - q
                                                                                   (q                                                    (26)
                                             1                     2       0
                                   2M 1 +    k
                                                       (E [q1 ])


                                                                       51
                                                                                                              cD
where  is Pareto distributed, with shape k and minimum 1. Firms export only if c <                              ,
which is equivalent to  > .
     Now, the value of the SVI integrand,

                                                           ~ 2 ())2
                                                 ~ 1 ( ) - q
                                                (q

differs depending on whether a firm is an exporter or not. For firms in region 1 that do
not export, we have
                                           1
                              ~ 1 ( ) = 1 - , q
                              q               ~ 2 ( ) = 0
                                           
For firms that do export, we have

                                                      1                 
                                    ~ 1 ( ) = 1 -
                                    q                   , q
                                                          ~ 2 ( ) = 1 -
                                                                        

We can thus write (26) as:

                    1
  SVI =                 2
          2M 1 + 1
                 k          (E [q1 ])2
                        ^                   2                  ^                                2
                                      1                                        1            
                                   1-           dG () +                   1-       - 1-             dG ()
                            1                                                               

We can write this as:

                    1
  SVI =                 2
          2M 1 + 1
                 k          (E [q1 ])2
 ^                                    2                ^                  2             ^                2
             1                                                        1                              1
          1-      - 1-                    dG (x) +                 1-         dG () -           1-           dG ()
                                                        1                                            




                                                        52
                    1
 SVI =                   2
          2M 1 + 1
                 k  (E [q1 ])2
            ^                   ^ 
                   1 2                                                               1               
                1-      dG () -    1-                                        2 1-          - 1-         dG (x)
             1                                                                                       

Now, by properties of the Pareto distribution, we have:
                                    ^     
                                                     1                         1
                                             1-              dG () =
                                      1                                       k+1
                             ^                   2
                                             1                                 2
                                      1-             dG () =
                             1                                          (k + 1) (k + 2)
hence,
                                                             ^    
             (k + 1)                      (k + 1)2                                          1           
SVI =               2
                                  -                      2
                                                                        1-           2 1-        - 1-          dG (x)
                1                                    1                                                  
         M 1+   k
                        (k + 2)       2M 1 +         k
                                                                                                                (27)
Factoring, and using (24), we get:
                                                                  ^     
             k+1               1                                                                 1          
SVI =                       1 - (k + 1) (k + 2)                              1-          2 1-        - 1-        dG (x)
         N 1 + 1    (k + 2)    2                                                                            
               k

                                                                                                                (28)
Applying claim 2, we get (13) of proposition 2.
   To prove that SVI is increasing in , we have:

                                                         1                               2 - 2
                         1-                  2 1-                 - 1-               =
                                                                                           2

which is weakly negative for  1. Hence, as  increases, the (negative) integral term in
(28),                         ^ 
            1                                  1            
              (k + 1) (k + 2)    1-     2 1-       - 1-          dG (x)
            2                                               




                                                             53
decreases in magnitude. Also, the coefficient term

                                         k+1
                                  N 1 + 1
                                        k ( k + 2)

decreases in magnitude. Thus, the SVI is increasing in . This completes the proof of
proposition 2.



D    Data coverage
Table A.2 shows the names of each MRI-Simmons product market in the balanced panel.
Product market and sector names are defined by MRI-Simmons.




                                          54
                                 Table A.2: Balanced panel product market coverage
Product market                          Sector         Product market                              Sector        Product market                        Sector
DomesticTravelAirlinesused              Airlines       AdhesiveBandages                            Health        InfantCereal                          HoProdChild
ForeignTravelAirlinesUsed               Airlines       AftershaveLotionCologneForMen               Health        PainRelieversFeverReducersForChildren HoProdChild
AthleticShoesBrandsBought               Apparel        AthletesFootFootCareProducts                Health        PreMoistenedBabyWipes                 HoProdChild
WomensLingerieUndergarments             Apparel        BathShowerAdditivesWomen                    Health        TeethingRemedies                      HoProdChild
AirFilters                              AutoProducts   BleachAndDepilatories                       Health        VitaminsForChildren                   HoProdChild
AntiFreezeCoolant                       AutoProducts   BlusherWomen                                Health        AmericanPasteurizedProcessedCheese    HoProdFood
CarBatteriesBrands                      AutoProducts   BodyPowder                                  Health        ArtificialSweeteners                  HoProdFood
CarWaxPolish                            AutoProducts   ColdSinusAndAllergyRemediesNonprescr        Health
                                                                                                                 BaconAndBreakfastStrips               HoProdFood
Gasoline                                AutoProducts   ComplexionCareProducts                      Health
                                                                                                                 BakingChips                           HoProdFood
GasolineAdditives                       AutoProducts   CondomsBought                               Health
                                                       ContactLensCleaningWettingSolutions         Health        BakingCoconut                         HoProdFood
LeatherAndVinylProtectants              AutoProducts                                                             BakingMixesExcludingCakeMixes         HoProdFood
MotorOil                                AutoProducts   CoughSyrupNonprescription                   Health
                                                       DentalFloss                                 Health        BakingPowderAndSoda                   HoProdFood
MotorOilAdditives                       AutoProducts                                                             BarBakingChocolate                    HoProdFood
                                                       DentureAdhesivesFixatives                   Health
MufflersBrands                          AutoProducts                                                             BottledBarbecueSeasoningSauces        HoProdFood
                                                       DentureCleaners                             Health
OilFilters                              AutoProducts
                                                       DeodorantsAndAntiperspirants                Health        BoxedChocolates                       HoProdFood
ShockAbsorbersStruts                    AutoProducts   DisposableRazors                            Health        Bread                                 HoProdFood
SparkPlugs                              AutoProducts   ElectricShavers                             Health        BreadCrumbsCoatingMixes               HoProdFood
Tires                                   AutoProducts   EyeLinerWomen                               Health        BreakfastCerealGranolaBars            HoProdFood
WindshieldWipers                        AutoProducts   EyeShadowWomen                              Health        BreakfastCerealsCold                  HoProdFood
AutomobilesAndOtherVehiclesManufacturer Automobile     EyeWashAndDrops                             Health
MotorcyclesMake                         Automobile
                                                                                                                 BreakfastCerealsHot                   HoProdFood
                                                       FacialMoisturizersWomen                     Health
BottledWaterSeltzer                     Beverages                                                                BrownieCookieMixes                    HoProdFood
                                                       FeminineHygieneDeodorantCleansingProducts   Health
Bourbon                                 Beverages                                                                Butter                                HoProdFood
                                                       FeminineMedicatedProductsWomen              Health
Brandy                                  Beverages      FoundationMakeUpWomen                       Health        CandyRegularOrKingSize                HoProdFood
CanadianWhisky                          Beverages      HairColoringProductsForUseAtHome            Health        CannedBeansWithSauce                  HoProdFood
ChampagneSparklingWines                 Beverages      HairConditionersForUseAtHome                Health        CannedChicken                         HoProdFood
Cognac                                  Beverages      HairConditioningTreatmentForUseAtHome       Health        CannedOrJarredFruit                   HoProdFood
CordialsLiqueurs                        Beverages      HairSpraysForUseAtHome                      Health        CannedOrJarredSoup                    HoProdFood
DietColaDrinks                          Beverages      HairStylingGelsLotions                      Health        CannedOrJarredSpaghettiMacaroni       HoProdFood
DomesticDinnerTableWines                Beverages      HairTonicOrDressingMen                      Health        CannedOrJarredVegetables              HoProdFood
EnergyDrinks                            Beverages      HandBodyCreamLotionOrOil                    Health        CannedStews                           HoProdFood
EvaporatedCondensedMilk                 Beverages      HeadacheRemediesAndPainRelieversNonprescr   Health        CannedTomatoes                        HoProdFood
FlavoredAlcoholicBeveragesCoolers       Beverages      HemorrhoidRemedies                          Health        ChewingGum                            HoProdFood
                                                       HomePermanentsWomen                         Health        ChickenTurkeyFreshOrFrozen            HoProdFood
FlavoredInstantCoffee                   Beverages
                                                       Laxatives                                   Health
Gin                                     Beverages                                                                Chili                                 HoProdFood
                                                       LipCare                                     Health
GrapefruitJuice                         Beverages                                                                CocoaPowder                           HoProdFood
                                                       LipstickLipGlossWomen                       Health
ImportedBeer                            Beverages                                                                ColdCuts                              HoProdFood
                                                       LiquidSoapsHandSanitizers                   Health
ImportedDinnerTableWines                Beverages      LooseFacePowderWomen                        Health        CookedHams                            HoProdFood
LowCalorieDomesticBeer                  Beverages      MascaraWomen                                Health        CookiesReadyToEat                     HoProdFood
MaltLiquor                              Beverages      MealSupplements                             Health        CottageCheese                         HoProdFood
OtherDietSoftDrinksNotColas             Beverages      MedicatedSkinOintments                      Health        Crackers                              HoProdFood
OtherFruitJuicesDrinks                  Beverages      MedicatedThroatRemedies                     Health        CreamCheese                           HoProdFood
OtherRegularCarbonatedSoftDrinks        Beverages      Mouthwash                                   Health        DinnerMixesAndKits                    HoProdFood
PopularDomesticBeer                     Beverages      NailCareProductsPolishWomen                 Health        DrinkAdditivesHotCocoaAddMilkOrWater HoProdFood
PortSherryDessertWines                  Beverages      NailPolishRemoverWomen                      Health        DryCakeMixes                          HoProdFood
PowderedFruitSoftDrinks                 Beverages      PainRelievingRubsLiquidsNonprescription     Health        DrySoupBouillon                       HoProdFood
PremiumDomesticBeer                     Beverages      PersonalCareSoapsBar                        Health        EggAlternatives                       HoProdFood
PreparedMixedDrinksWithoutLiquor        Beverages      RazorBlades                                 Health
                                                                                                                 EnglishMuffins                        HoProdFood
ReadyToDrinkIcedTea                     Beverages      SanitaryNapkinsAndPantilinersWomen          Health
                                                                                                                 Extracts                              HoProdFood
RegularColaDrinksNotDiet                Beverages      ShampooForUseAtHome                         Health
                                                       ShavingCreamsOrGels                         Health        FishSeafoodFreshOrFrozen              HoProdFood
RegularDomesticBeer                     Beverages
                                                       SleepingTabletsNonprescription              Health        FlavoredSeasonedRice                  HoProdFood
RegularTea                              Beverages
                                                       SuntanSunscreenProducts                     Health        FlourCornmeal                         HoProdFood
Rum                                     Beverages
                                                       TamponsWomen                                Health        FrankfurtersWieners                   HoProdFood
RyeOrBlendedWhiskey                     Beverages
                                                       ToothacheGumCankerSoreRemedies              Health        Frostings                             HoProdFood
ScotchWhisky                            Beverages
SuperPremiumDomesticBeer                Beverages
                                                       Toothbrushes                                Health        FrozenBreadedChicken                  HoProdFood
                                                       Toothpaste                                  Health        FrozenBreakfasts                      HoProdFood
Tequila                                 Beverages
                                                       Toothpolish                                 Health        FrozenCompleteDinners                 HoProdFood
TomatoAndVegetableJuices                Beverages
                                                       VitaminAndMineralSupplements                Health        FrozenDesserts                        HoProdFood
Vermouth                                Beverages      WartRemovers                                Health
Vodka                                   Beverages                                                                FrozenHotSnacks                       HoProdFood
                                                       BabyBathWashAndSoap                         HoProdChild   FrozenMainCourses                     HoProdFood
CarRentalBusinessUse                    CarRental      BabyFoods                                   HoProdChild
CarRentalPersonalUse                    CarRental                                                                FrozenOrangeJuice                     HoProdFood
                                                       BabyLotion                                  HoProdChild
TruckTrailerRentalCompanies             CarRental      BabyNursers                                 HoProdChild
                                                                                                                 FrozenPancakesFrenchToast             HoProdFood
Batteries                               Electronics    BabyOil                                     HoProdChild   FrozenPizza                           HoProdFood
CamerasCamcordersBrands                 Electronics    BabyOintments                               HoProdChild   FrozenRefrigeratedPotatoProducts      HoProdFood
DVDBluRayPlayersBrands                  Electronics    BabyPowder                                  HoProdChild   FrozenVegetables                      HoProdFood
PersonalComputers                       Electronics    BabyShampoo                                 HoProdChild   FrozenWaffles                         HoProdFood
TelevisionSetsBrands                    Electronics    ChildrensColdTabletsLiquids                 HoProdChild   FrozenYogurt                          HoProdFood
CreditCards                             Financial      ChildrensCoughSyrup                         HoProdChild   GelatinAndGelatinDesserts             HoProdFood
InvestmentActivityBrokerageFirms        Financial      CottonSwabs                                 HoProdChild   GratedCheese                          HoProdFood
RealEstateWhichAgentUsed                Financial      DisposableDiapers                           HoProdChild   GravySauceMixesAndCookingSauces       HoProdFood

Notes. MRI-Simmons product market names and sector names in our data.




                                                                                  55
              Table A.2 (continued): Balanced panel product market coverage
                                                        Product market                                   Sector
Product market                             Sector
                                                        WaffleOrPancakeMix                               HoProdFood
GroundCoffee                               HoProdFood   WhippedTopping                                   HoProdFood
HardRollCandy                              HoProdFood   WholeCoffeeBeans                                 HoProdFood
Honey                                      HoProdFood   Yeast                                            HoProdFood
IceCreamBarsSandwichesBonBons              HoProdFood   Yogurt                                           HoProdFood
IceCreamIceMilkSherbet                     HoProdFood   AirFreshenersCarpetRoomDeodorizers               HoProdNonfood
InstantBreakfast                           HoProdFood   AluminumFoil                                     HoProdNonfood
                                                        AutomaticDishwasherDetergent                     HoProdNonfood
InstantIcedTeaMix                          HoProdFood
                                                        Bleach                                           HoProdNonfood
InstantOrFreezeDriedCoffee                 HoProdFood   CarpetAndRugCleaners                             HoProdNonfood
JamsJellies                                HoProdFood   Charcoal                                         HoProdNonfood
KetchupCatsup                              HoProdFood   CharcoalLighterFluid                             HoProdNonfood
LunchCombinationsKits                      HoProdFood   ChewingAndSmokelessTobacco                       HoProdNonfood
Margarine                                  HoProdFood   Cigars                                           HoProdNonfood
MayonnaiseAndMayonnaiseTypeSaladDressing   HoProdFood   DishwashingLiquid                                HoProdNonfood
                                                        DisposableCups                                   HoProdNonfood
MeatSnacks                                 HoProdFood
                                                        DisposablePlates                                 HoProdNonfood
MexicanFoods                               HoProdFood   DrainCleaners                                    HoProdNonfood
Mints                                      HoProdFood   FabricSofteners                                  HoProdNonfood
Mustard                                    HoProdFood   FacialTissues                                    HoProdNonfood
NaturalOrImportedCheese                    HoProdFood   Firelogs                                         HoProdNonfood
Nectars                                    HoProdFood   FloorWaxPolish                                   HoProdNonfood
NonDairyCreamSubstitutes                   HoProdFood   FurniturePolish                                  HoProdNonfood
                                                        GlassAndSurfaceCleaners                          HoProdNonfood
Nuts                                       HoProdFood
                                                        Glue                                             HoProdNonfood
OrangeJuiceNotFrozen                       HoProdFood   HouseholdCleaners                                HoProdNonfood
PackagedFrozenRefrigeratedPasta            HoProdFood   InBowlToiletBowlCleaners                         HoProdNonfood
PackagedInstantPotatoes                    HoProdFood   InTankToiletBowlCleaners                         HoProdNonfood
PackagesOfMiniatureCandy                   HoProdFood   IndoorInsecticides                               HoProdNonfood
PeanutButter                               HoProdFood   IndoorPlantFood                                  HoProdNonfood
PickleRelish                               HoProdFood   InsectRepellents                                 HoProdNonfood
                                                        LaundryPreTreatmentsPreCleaners                  HoProdNonfood
Pickles                                    HoProdFood
                                                        LightBulbs                                       HoProdNonfood
PizzaMixesAndSauces                        HoProdFood   Luggage                                          HoProdNonfood
PizzaShellsCrusts                          HoProdFood   OutdoorInsecticides                              HoProdNonfood
PoppingCornPopcornSnacks                   HoProdFood   OvenCleaners                                     HoProdNonfood
Pretzels                                   HoProdFood   PaintStain                                       HoProdNonfood
PuddingsPieFillings                        HoProdFood   PaperNapkins                                     HoProdNonfood
ReadyToEatDoughnuts                        HoProdFood   PaperTowels                                      HoProdNonfood
                                                        PlasticGarbageBagsTrashCanLiners                 HoProdNonfood
ReadyToEatMuffins                          HoProdFood
                                                        PlasticSandwichFoodStorageFreezerBags            HoProdNonfood
ReadyToEatSweetRollsPastries               HoProdFood   RubberGloves                                     HoProdNonfood
RefrigeratedFrozenBreadAndDoughProducts    HoProdFood   ScouringCleansers                                HoProdNonfood
Rice                                       HoProdFood   SoapDetergentsForFineFabrics                     HoProdNonfood
RiceCakes                                  HoProdFood   SoapDetergentsForRegularLaundry                  HoProdNonfood
SaladOrCookingOil                          HoProdFood   ToiletPaper                                      HoProdNonfood
SaladToppings                              HoProdFood   TransparentTape                                  HoProdNonfood
                                                        WritingInstrumentsBrands                         HoProdNonfood
Salt                                       HoProdFood
                                                        CannedWetCatFood                                 HoProdPets
SaltAlternatives                           HoProdFood   CannedWetDogFood                                 HoProdPets
Sausage                                    HoProdFood   CatLitter                                        HoProdPets
SeasoningsSpices                           HoProdFood   DogBiscuitsOrTreats                              HoProdPets
Shortening                                 HoProdFood   FleaTickCareProductsForDogsCats                  HoProdPets
SnackCakes                                 HoProdFood   PackagedDryCatFood                               HoProdPets
SourCream                                  HoProdFood   PackagedDryDogFood                               HoProdPets
                                                        HotelsMotelsWhereStayed                          Hotels
SoySauce                                   HoProdFood
                                                        AutoInsurance                                    Insurance
SpaghettiPastaSauce                        HoProdFood   HomeownersOrPersonalPropertyInsuranceCompany     Insurance
SprayNonStickCookingProducts               HoProdFood   LifeInsuranceCompanies                           Insurance
SpreadCheeseCheeseSauce                    HoProdFood   MedicalInsuranceCompanies                        Insurance
StuffingMixesAndStuffingProducts           HoProdFood   FamilyRestaurantsSteakHouses                     Restaurants
Sugar                                      HoProdFood   FastFoodDriveInRestaurants                       Restaurants
TableSyrupMolasses                         HoProdFood   ApplianceHardwareElectronicsStoresTimesShopped   Retail
                                                        ConvenienceStoresTimesShopped                    Retail
ToasterProducts                            HoProdFood
                                                        DepartmentClothingSpecialtyStoresTimesShopped    Retail
Vinegar                                    HoProdFood   FurnitureStoresTimesShopped                      Retail

Notes. MRI-Simmons product market names and sector names in our data.
                                     56
              Figure A.6: HHI over time, by sector and aggregation level




Notes. HHI over time, at the state group ­ product market (top), product market (second
row), state group ­ sector (third row), and sector (bottom) levels. Each line shows the
expenditure-weighted average of HHIs, for all local markets (top), markets (second
row), and local sectors (third row) in a given
                                            57 sector. The left column shows results for
manufacturing, the center column for food, beverage, and health products, and the right
column shows results for non-manufacturing.
