                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SCHOOL REOPENINGS, MOBILITY, AND COVID-19 SPREAD:
                           EVIDENCE FROM TEXAS

                                   Charles J. Courtemanche
                                          Anh H. Le
                                       Aaron Yelowitz
                                        Ron Zimmer

                                      Working Paper 28753
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28753


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




We thank SafeGraph, Inc. for making their data available for research. We also thank Jessica
Thomas, Hunter McCormick, Ben Scott, and Yaxiang Song for collecting school districts start
dates and modality of instruction from web searches. Finally, we thank Dan Goldhaber, Joe
Sabia, Richard Buddin, and seminar participants at the Frank Batten School of Leadership and
Public Policy and the School of Education and Human Development at the University of Virginia
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Charles J. Courtemanche, Anh H. Le, Aaron Yelowitz, and Ron Zimmer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
School Reopenings, Mobility, and COVID-19 Spread: Evidence from Texas
Charles J. Courtemanche, Anh H. Le, Aaron Yelowitz, and Ron Zimmer
NBER Working Paper No. 28753
May 2021
JEL No. I18,I28

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the effect of fall 2020 school reopenings in Texas on county-level
COVID-19 cases and fatalities. Previous evidence suggests that schools can be reopened safely if
community spread is low and public health guidelines are followed. However, in Texas,
reopenings often occurred alongside high community spread and at near capacity, making it
difficult to meet social distancing recommendations. Using event-study models and hand-
collected instruction modality and start dates for all school districts, we find robust evidence that
reopening Texas schools gradually but substantially accelerated the community spread of
COVID-19. Results from our preferred specification imply that school reopenings led to at least
43,000 additional COVID-19 cases and 800 additional fatalities within the first two months. We
then use SafeGraph mobility data to provide evidence that spillovers to adults' behaviors
contributed to these large effects. Median time spent outside the home on a typical weekday
increased substantially in neighborhoods with large numbers of school-age children, suggesting a
return to in-person work or increased outside-of-home leisure activities among parents.

Charles J. Courtemanche                           Aaron Yelowitz
Department of Economics                           University of Kentucky
Gatton College of Business and Economics          Department of Economics
University of Kentucky                            225H Business and Economics Building
Lexington, KY 40506-0034                          Lexington, KY 40506
and NBER                                          aaron@uky.edu
courtemanche@uky.edu
                                                  Ron Zimmer
Anh H. Le                                         University of Kentucky
Department of Economics                           Martin School of Public Policy and Administration
Gatton College of Business and Economics          Patterson Office Tower 423
University of Kentucky                            Lexington, KY 40506
Lexington, KY 40506-0034                          ron.zimmer@uky.edu
anh.h.le@uky.edu
       I.      Introduction

            The COVID-19 pandemic has led to gut-wrenching decisions about whether and when to

open schools for in-person instruction. Ideally, these decisions would be made from an evidence-

based cost-benefit analysis. However, initially there was very little evidence to make these

decisions, and only recently has more information become available. On the benefit side, recent

research suggests that remote learning leads to significant learning loss, especially among

disadvantaged populations (Kuhfeld et al., 2020; Kuhfield and Tarasawa, 2020; Maldonado and

Witte, 2020). Remote learning also could lead to delayed social and emotional development and

reduced detection of child abuse as teachers are often at the front lines of detection (Schmidt and

Natanson, 2020). In addition, remote learning could lead families to make difficult decisions

between working and staying home with young children, which could dampen the speed of the

economic recovery (Green et al, 2020; Council of Economic Advisers, 2020). Together, this

suggests that opening schools could improve student learning and social and emotional

development while minimizing the possibility of child abuse.

            On the cost side, there are concerns of health risks for students, staff, and the larger

community as the openings could further spread COVID-19. These concerns have been

championed by teacher unions, which argue that schools should open only when they are safe

(Hurt, Ball, and Wedell, 2020). However, a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)

report examining 17 rural Wisconsin schools using contact tracing found minimal transmission

both within and outside of the schools (Falk et al., 2021). Other investigations of known cases

among students and staff ­ such as Doyle et al.'s (2021) study of Florida and Emily Oster's K-12

COVID-19 dashboard ­ tend to reach similar conclusions. 1 Accordingly, the CDC recently



1
    Oster's dashboard is available at https://covidschooldashboard.com/.

                                                           2
concluded that in-person instruction can be carried out safely as long as masks are worn, social

distancing is maintained, community spread is low, and other community restrictions (e.g., on

restaurants) remain in place (Honein et al., 2021).

       However, contact-tracing-based evidence alone is insufficient to fully understand the

health implications of reopening schools. Contact tracing is widely known to be inadequate in the

U.S. due to insufficient staff and resources to keep up with large numbers of new cases, as well as

resistance to provide information among those contacted. For instance, a National Public Radio

story found that 27 percent of cases and 43 percent of contacts lacked phone numbers in Delaware,

only 44 percent of new cases were reached within 24 hours in New Jersey, and only 4.5 percent

and 25 percent of cases could be traced to known contacts in Washington, D.C. and Delaware,

respectively (Simmons-Duffin, 2020). Moreover, econometric evidence from Dave et al. (2020)

linked more than 100,000 cases to the Sturgis Motorcycle Rally in South Dakota, compared to just

328 identified by contact tracing. This illustrates the potential for contact tracing to substantially

underestimate the total number of cases resulting from a particular event after several rounds of

exponential spread. One missing link in the contact tracing chain prevents the attribution to the

event of any people infected by the missing link, any people those people subsequently infected,

and so on.

       On the other hand, the number of known cases resulting from in-school spread could

overstate the net increase in the number of cases, as it does not account for the counterfactual

activities students and staff would be engaging in if schools were closed. While some students and

staff would stay at home and face little risk, others would go to day care facilities, parks,

restaurants, virtual school pods at friends' houses, or other places where adherence to mitigation

measures could be lower than in schools (Courtemanche et al., 2020).



                                                  3
        Additionally, focusing only on net changes in risk among those attending school misses a

potentially important part of the story: spillover effects on the behaviors of parents or others in the

community. Kids returning to in-person school may allow parents or other caregivers to return to

in-person work or outside-the-home activities, leading to COVID-19 spread in the community

even if there is minimal spread in the schools. Spillovers could even extend beyond families

directly affected by the return to school, as school openings could signal to the community that it

is safe to return to normal activities, again fueling spread (Glaeser et al., 2020). Alternatively,

spillovers could reduce spread if people foresee danger from school reopenings and cut back on

other activities.

        Econometric studies can provide answers to these debates by estimating reduced-form

effects that encompass all mechanisms through which reopening schools influences the spread of

COVID-19. Three concurrent working papers examine the effects of school openings in Germany

(Isphording et al, 2021), Michigan and Washington (Goldhaber et al., 2021, hereinafter we refer

to as CALDER study) and the U.S. as a whole (Harris et al., 2021, hereinafter we refer to as Tulane

study). While the current versions of these studies find little evidence that reopening schools

increases COVID-19 spread on average, the Tulane and CALDER studies find some evidence that

this may not be the case in communities with high levels of preexisting transmission.

        The above discussion highlights a key distinction: the consensus that schools can open

safely with low community spread and proper safeguards is not the same as saying that all schools

are opening safely. To examine what can happen in a less idealized scenario, we focus on the state

of Texas. All of the school districts in Texas reopened for in-person instruction at some point

during the 2020 fall semester. Many did so when COVID-19 rates in the community were




                                                  4
relatively high, generally without staggered or hybrid strategies to limit the number of students

attending at one time.

       We estimate the impact of school reopenings in Texas on COVID-19 spread using hand-

collected information on school districts' instructional modality and start dates combined with

weekly county-level data on confirmed COVID-19 cases and fatalities. Our baseline model is an

event study that separately estimates effects for each week in a four-month bandwidth surrounding

reopenings. This allows us to assess pre-treatment trends while also allowing impacts to emerge

gradually due to incubation periods, testing delays, multiple rounds of subsequent spread, and the

fact that COVID-19 deaths tend not to occur quickly. We find that school reopenings in Texas

gradually but substantially increased the per capita numbers of new weekly COVID-19 cases and

deaths. To illustrate, 95 percent confidence intervals from the baseline regression imply that school

reopenings across Texas led to at least 43,000 additional COVID-19 cases and at least 800

additional fatalities after two months. These magnitudes represent 12 percent and 17 percent,

respectively, of the total numbers of cases and deaths in the state during that period. Results are

qualitatively similar across a wide range of robustness checks, including those that address newly

discovered issues with staggered-treatment-time two-way-fixed-effects research designs. Using

similar event-study models and SafeGraph data (which tracks the movement of individuals aged

16 and older by using cell phone data), we show that time spent outside the home by adults rose

sharply in communities with the largest numbers of children after school reopenings. Some

evidence also suggests increased mobility in communities with large numbers of seniors,

consistent with signaling effects on those not directly affected by the reopenings.

       Overall, we find convincing evidence that opening schools led to community spread, and

was likely facilitated by increased mobility, which could arise both directly in schools but also



                                                 5
indirectly through the behaviors of parents or other adults. Although the recent distribution of

effective vaccines is changing the cost-benefit of the calculations policymakers are making,

difficult decisions about schools will likely continue into the 2021-2022 academic year. Children

under sixteen years old cannot yet be vaccinated, there are broad geographic pockets across the

country with low adult vaccination rates, and the emerging variant B.1.1.7 infects children more

easily than prior strains. 2, 3


    II.      Background

School Reopenings in Texas

          On July 7, 2020, the Texas Education Agency (TEA) issued school reopening guidelines,

which covered topics such as COVID-19 prevention, responses, mitigation, and information

dissemination. 4 These guidelines covered the wearing of masks, reporting of positive cases, and

screening of staff, teachers, and students. Most importantly, it provided the following guidance for

reopening schools: "during a period up to the first four weeks of school, which can be extended by

an additional four weeks by vote of the school board, school systems may temporarily limit access

to on-campus instruction."

          These instructions were further clarified by a July 17, 2020 joint statement from Governor

Greg Abbot, Lt. Governor Dan Patrick, Speaker Dennis Bonnen, Senate Education Chairman

Larry Taylor, and House Education Chairman Dan Huberty. They stated that local school districts

have the constitutional authority to decide when and how schools safely open and noted that local

school boards have the authority to set the start date which could be in in "August, September, or



2
  https://health.usnews.com/health-care/patient-advice/articles/when-will-there-be-a-covid-19-vaccine-for-kids
3
  https://www.nydailynews.com/coronavirus/ny-covid-variants-michael-osterholm-new-york-20210404-
73bhzmgpzremnpr5hirw2eo724-story.html
4
  https://www.wfaa.com/article/news/education/texas-students-must-wear-face-masks-at-school-tea-says/287-
e2ef67ef-6ec7-4827-9a80-43fb83932564

                                                         6
even later." 5 They also noted that local school boards can make these decisions "on advice and

recommendations by local public health authorities but are not bound by those recommendations."

Importantly, the statement also clarified that not only could school districts start the first four

weeks as a "back to school transition" with remote instruction, but school districts could extend

their back-to-school transition an additional four weeks with a vote of the school board and a

waiver from the state. After eight weeks, school districts could ask for an addition extension as the

result of health concerns related to COVID-19 and the TEA will decide those requests on a case-

by-case basis. Finally, the guidance from TEA noted that school districts must provide the option

for families of remote instruction, even if the school district provides in-person instruction.

However, because of the challenges of the logistics of providing both in-person and remote

instruction, school districts could restrict families to switching their choice of instructional

modality only at the end of grading periods.

         With this policy context as background, Figure 1 displays the start date of opening schools

for in-person instruction for school districts in the 2020-21 school year relative to the start date of

opening schools in the 2019-20 school year. 6 About two-thirds of school districts opened schools

in 2020-21 within one week of the start date of 2019-20 in spite of the widely documented surge

in COVID-19 cases in Texas in the summer of 2020. Moreover, less than two percent of school

districts delayed the reopening by more than eight weeks, possibly because of the requirements

imposed by the state to obtain an exemption to remain virtual longer than eight weeks. To the




5
  https://gov.texas.gov/news/post/governor-abbott-lt-governor-patrick-speaker-bonnen-chairman-taylor-chairman-
huberty-release-statement-on-school-re-openings
6
  In most districts, we were able to determine the 2019-20 start date. However, in the cases where we were not able
to identify the 2019-20 start date we either used the prior year start date (e.g., 2018-19) or the median 2019-20 start
date within the county.

                                                           7
extent that state directives trumped local caseloads or politics in influencing reopening decisions,

that would help to alleviate endogeneity concerns in our econometric analysis.


Econometric Evidence on Schools and COVID-19

         As the pandemic began to unfold during the spring of 2020, very little was known about

the likelihood of spread among young populations and whether schools could safely operate with

in-person instruction. Three early studies that controlled for other accompanying restrictions like

restaurant closures and shelter-in-place orders did not find evidence that school closings slowed

the spread of COVID-19 (Courtemanche et al., 2020; Hsiang et al., 2020; Flaxman et al., 2020).

However, a fourth study that did not control for these other restrictions did find evidence of a

sizeable effect (Auger et al., 2020). These prior studies are of limited usefulness for reopening

decisions as almost all the spring school closures in the United States occurred within one week

of each other, leading to little identifying variation and generally imprecise estimates. While

controlling for other types of restrictions is important for causal inference, it further strains the

available identifying variation, perhaps explaining the null findings from studies that did so.

Further, it is not clear that closings and openings should have symmetric effects. Much more was

known about mitigation strategies in fall 2020 compared to spring, but community spread was also

much greater in the fall.

         Only recently has econometric evidence on reopening schools begun to emerge. Isphording

et al. (2020) leveraged variation in the timing of school start dates and found little evidence of

effects on community spread in Germany. 7 However, the relevance of this finding for a U.S.

population with different attitudes toward COVID-19 and different mitigation policies, both inside



7
  This result is consistent with two descriptive studies of small sets of schools in France and Helsinki that also found
little evidence of spread (Dub et al., 2020; Fontanet et al., 2020).

                                                           8
and outside of schools, is unclear. Tulane researchers used national insurance claims data and U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) hospitalization data along with national data on

school reopenings to examine the impact of school reopenings on hospitalization (Harris et al.,

2021). Overall, they found no association between school reopenings and hospitalization.

However, they noted that in areas with higher pre-opening COVID-19 hospitalization rates, the

results are less conclusive with some evidence indicating that in these areas, school openings could

lead to greater hospitalizations. Given that the data for the study was only collected through mid-

fall 2020--prior to much of the national surge of hospitalizations--the study's findings do not

necessarily extrapolate to later in the pandemic. Moreover, the sample period only allows for six

weeks of post-treatment data, which may not be enough time for meaningful increases in

hospitalizations to occur given incubation periods and the potential need for multiple rounds of

spread outward from schools before reaching the vulnerable individuals who are most likely to

require hospitalization.

       Another study, released by a research consortium named CALDER, examined monthly

county level COVID-19 cases using school reopening information provided by Michigan and

Washington's departments of education (Goldhaber et al., 2021). The researchers noted that in

Washington, only 10 percent of districts (almost entirely rural) and only 2 percent of the student

population was attending either a school operating with hybrid or in-person instruction. In

Michigan, the percentages were higher, with 76 percent of schools operating either with hybrid or

in-person instruction. Like the Tulane study, this study examined COVID-19 cases prior to much

of the surge of cases in the winter of 2020-21. The research team found that in-person modality

options are not associated with increased spread of COVID-19 at low levels of pre-existing

COVID-19 cases but did find that cases increase at moderate to high pre-existing COVID-19 rates.



                                                 9
Again, the analysis raises questions as to which set of results are more relevant to the COVID-19

conditions of the winter.

        We complement these other concurrent studies by examining a state where conditions may

have been less than ideal for a safe reopening. First, Texas had relatively high rates of COVID-19

spread in early fall of 2020 that roughly mirrored the national conditions that would emerge toward

the end of the semester. To illustrate, Figure 2 shows weekly COVID-19 cases per 100,000

residents in Texas compared to Washington, Michigan, and the U.S. as a whole during the latter

half of 2020. The vertical lines delineate the weeks of June 20 through October 16 ­ a four-month

period centered on the modal reopening date in our Texas data, and a similar period to that used in

the Tulane and CALDER studies. Texas' rate of new cases was substantially greater than those of

Washington, Michigan, and the overall U.S. during early fall when the bulk of Texas' schools

reopened for in-person instruction.

        Additionally, many states opened schools using hybrid models where only partial numbers

of students attended schools each day to allow for greater social distancing. In contrast, most Texas

schools opened at near capacity. For instance, in reviewing school opening plans of Texas school

districts, our best estimate is that over 90 percent of school districts opened fully in-person without

any staggered or phased-in attendance. This is in contrast to 42 percent nationally (Harris et al.,

2021). In addition, using Texas' Department of State Health Services data on the proportion of

students attending in person by late September, we found that out of the 1,049 school districts, 358

had over 90 percent of their students attending in person with 27 having 100 percent. 8 Moreover,

studies have shown that residents of politically conservative areas ­ such as the majority of Texas

­ are less likely to follow social distancing and mask-wearing recommendations than those in


8
 https://dshs.texas.gov/coronavirus/schools/texas-education-agency/. We excluded charter schools from the
analysis.

                                                       10
politically liberal areas (Milosh et al, 2020). This could influence the impact of reopening schools

on COVID-19 spread in several ways, possibly including weaker enforcement of guidelines at

schools and extracurricular activities, greater increases in mobility among parents, a stronger

signal to the community that life can return to normal, and less willingness to impose compensatory

other aspects of life.

           The Texas context offers other advantages as well. Texas allowed districts more discretion

in when to open schools than many other states, allowing us to examine the effect of variation in

timing of school openings in the context of common statewide mitigation policy, thereby reducing

the possibility of omitted variable bias from other restrictions. 9 In addition, in contrast to the

Tulane and CALDER studies, which observed only a portion of schools open, every school district

in the state eventually opened schools during the time frame of our study. This allows for an

examination of wide-ranging school districts including rural and urban, large and small, and non-

diverse and racially diverse. In the CALDER and Tulane studies, open schools were

disproportionally rural. Finally, Texas has a large number of school districts and counties, which

provides statistical power to detect effects. As a source of comparison, while Texas has 254

counties and 1,049 school districts, 10 Michigan has 83 counties and 810 school districts and

Washington has 39 counties and 286 school districts.


    III.      Data

           To collect information for each school district's start date and modality, we performed

Google searches in which a team of assistants searched for key terms using district name and the




9
  Restrictions can vary within states, but we were unable to find any instances of cities or counties in Texas
imposing or eliminating policies like shelter-in-place orders or mask mandates during our sample period.
10
   One county (Loving) has no schools within the county.

                                                          11
phrase "back to school plan". 11 The vast majority of districts had a back-to-school plan and it often

included both the district's modality plan for instruction and the school district start date. If the

school district started with virtual instruction, the back-to-school plan often listed the planned date

for in-person instruction. 12 In cases in which the start date was not listed, the team of assistants

searched for the school district's academic calendar. In cases where back-to-school plans or

calendars were not available, we also conducted newspaper and Facebook searches to identify this

information through news stories and school district's Facebook posts. 13 Even in cases where a

back-to-school plan and/or academic calendars were available, we often conducted additional

newspaper or Facebook searches to verify the district's start date and modality of instruction.

         Because COVID-19 cases and fatalities are only available at the county level, we need to

aggregate the school reopening variable from the district to the county level, which requires

accounting for the fact that not all districts within a county opened at the same time. In the Tulane

study, the researchers defined treatment as occurring when the first district within a county

reopened. However, for many districts in Texas, this definition would result in a county being

labeled "treated" when only a small fraction of schools is actually open. Consider Bexar County,

a large county that includes San Antonio. Southwest Independent School District (ISD), which



11
   Like the Tulane study, we did not include charter or private schools primarily because they represent a small
minority of the total students in the states and also because it would have been difficult to ascertain this information.
12
   In some cases, districts phased in in-person attendance (e.g., Kindergarten through 3rd grade could attend in person
one week and the following week the rest of the grades could attend in person). In these cases, we used the first date
students were allowed on campus. If the district only allowed special education students on campus, we did not
count this as in-person instruction given the small number of students on campus.
13
   After these steps, there were only 11 school districts in which we could not identify the start date and only 17
school districts we could not identify the modality of instruction. We tried to follow up with each district with a
phone call. Through these phone calls, we were able to identify the start date for seven of the 11 missing dates for
school districts and the missing modality information for 12 of the 17 school districts. Therefore, we had missing
dates for four school districts, which we imputed based on the median start date within their county. For modality,
we had missing dates of five school districts, which we imputed as the majority instructional modality of the school
districts within the county. These are very small districts, with the average size of the missing start date districts
being 78 students and the average size of the districts with missing modality information being 177 students. Since
our data will be population-weighted, these districts are effectively inconsequential to the results.

                                                           12
represents less than 5 percent of the county's student enrollment, was the first district to open

schools on August 24, 2020. However, there were some districts within the county that opened up

schools as late as seven weeks later and six school districts representing 75 percent of the county's

student population opened on September 8, 2020. In this case, defining treatment based on the

earliest opening school district would effectively lead to it being assigned two weeks too early

relative to the most consequential shock. Therefore, our primary treatment definition is the week

in which the county had the largest jump in percentage of county students who could attend a

school in person. In the case of Bexar County, that would be the week of September 8th. 14 We

should also note that treatment begins for our empirical analysis once schools open for any type

of in-person instruction including fully in-person, phased-in (e.g., a subset of grades open for in-

person instruction with gradual number of grades eligible to attend in-person over time), or as a

hybrid model (e.g., students attending in person part of the week and attending virtually the rest of

the week). However, as discussed previously, phased-in and hybrid reopenings were rare in Texas.

         It should also be noted that in opening schools for in-person instruction, districts almost

uniformly allowed families to choose to attend in-person or remotely. However, districts had to

prepare for the possibility that all or nearly all students could attend in person. Therefore, our main

treatment variable could be thought of as "intent-to-treat" (ITT) analysis as a district's decision to

provide in-person instruction is providing the opportunity for all students to attend in person. That

said, schools in Texas tended to open at relatively close to full capacity as nearly 60 percent of all

school districts had 80 percent or more of their students enrolled for in-person instruction by the

end of September. Our analysis is also an ITT analysis in a second way. Once treatment begins by



14
  Later, we present a series of analyses that suggests our results are robust to alternative definitions of treatment
including using the first school district that opened schools in person, 50 percent of the county enrollment is open
for in-person instruction, and 20 percent of the county enrollment is open for in-person instruction.

                                                          13
a school district opening schools for in-person instruction, we consider the school opened

throughout the analysis, even if the school has a temporary shutdown as a result of an outbreak. In

defining treatment in this way, our estimates should be seen as conservative estimates.

         Our COVID-19 data come from the Texas Department of State Health Services

(TDSHS). 15 Numbers of COVID-19 cases, fatalities, and tests are recorded daily at the county

level from May 3, 2020 through January 3, 2021. We use weekly (Sunday through Saturday) data

instead of daily data because not all labs are open daily or do not report daily (e.g., many labs are

not open on weekends) and can have duplicate numbers or reporting errors, which can lead to

oscillating numbers from one day to the next. By using weekly numbers, we are largely able to

smooth out these fluctuations. 16 To account for variations in county population, we calculated

COVID-19 cases, fatalities, and tests per 100,000 residents using 2019 county population estimates

from the Census Bureau. 17 These cases and fatalities variables will be our main outcome variables,

while the testing variable will be a control in the cases regressions.

         To help understand potential spillover effects of school reopenings on adult mobility, we

utilize Social Distancing Metrics (Version 2.1, "SDM") data provided by SafeGraph, Inc., from

May 3, 2020 to January 3, 2021. 18 SafeGraph collects information on almost 45 million cellular

phone users, including about 10 percent of devices in the U.S. The sample correlates very highly

with the true Census populations with respect to distribution by county, educational attainment,




15
   https://dshs.texas.gov/coronavirus/additionaldata.aspx
16
   It should be noted that some data errors within the TDSHS data systems have been discovered over time as
documented by media accounts: https://www.khou.com/article/news/health/coronavirus/texass-record-high-covid-
positivity-rate-falls-after-data-experts-investigate/287-ffc19167-0d47-4be9-8c06-8648229288ef and
https://www.texastribune.org/2020/09/24/texas-coronavirus-response-data/. Corrections to these errors could cause
accumulated cases or tests to decrease over time as the data are corrected. These anomalies should create noise, but
not bias and should largely be accounted for in our analysis using week fixed effects.
17
   https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-counties-total.html
18
   https://www.safegraph.com/blog/stopping-covid-19-with-new-social-distancing-dataset

                                                         14
and income. 19 These data are aggregated from GPS pings provided by cellular devices that have

opted-in to location sharing services from smartphone applications. The device data is aggregated

by Census Block Group (CBG) and day, based on a device's "home" location. 20 In our timeframe,

there were 15,705 CBG's overall in the Texas SDM; on an average day, more than 1.9 million

devices were followed in Texas. For our analysis, we restricted the sample to a balanced panel of

14,580 CBG's (with more than 1.6 million overall devices on an average day). 21 The typical CBG

had approximately 112 devices. We created samples at the weekly level for the full week (Monday

through Sunday), for weekdays (Monday through Friday), and for weekends (Saturday and

Sunday).

         We utilize four of the mobility measures provided in the SDM that are often used in other

studies. The most commonly used measure is the fraction of devices that do not leave their home

location during a given day ("Percent Completely Home"). 22 We also use two "work" measures.

SafeGraph defines "work" as either the fraction of devices that spent more than 6 hours at a non-

home location between 8am-6pm ("Percent Full Time") or fraction of devices that spent between

4-6 hours at a non-home location between 8am-6pm ("Percent Part Time"). 23 Finally, several



19
   https://www.safegraph.com/blog/what-about-bias-in-the-safegraph-dataset
20
   To impute a "home" location for a cellphone user, SafeGraph considers a common nighttime location of each
mobile device. In the entire United States, the SDM is aggregated to approximately 220,000 CBGs. To enhance
privacy, CBG's are excluded if they have fewer than five devices observed in a month.
21
   CBG's were excluded if (a) the CBG was not observed for all days in our sample period, (b) the CBG could not
be merged to demographic information from the 2018 American Community Survey (ACS) 5-year estimates, (c) the
CBG's population ­ according to the 2018 ACS ­ was in the bottom or top 1 percent of the full distribution
(corresponding to 391 and 7150, respectively), or (d) over the course of the panel, relative to the mean device count
in the CBG, any specific CBG-day observation had a device count that more than twice the mean or less than half
the mean. By restricting to CBG's with relatively stable numbers of devices over the long panel, we hope to avoid
complications related to installation and removal of apps, inactive devices, and sample attrition highlighted in some
other studies (Andersen et al., 2020; Allcott et al., 2020). Although Safegraph reports that some apps implement
GPS collection methods that depend on the movement of the device (rather than a fixed time interval), this would
likely affect levels of certain metrics (e.g., completely home all day) but not changes.
22
   See Bailey et al. (2020), Bullinger et al. (forthcoming), Cronin and Evans (2020), Allcott et al. (2020), Dave et al.
(2020a), Simonov et al. (2020), Dave et al. (2021), Friedson et al. (Forthcoming), and Gupta et al. (2020).
23
   See Bullinger et al. (forthcoming) and Simonov et al. (2020).

                                                          15
studies have examined median time spent away from home (or at home). 24 These measures are

based on the observed minutes outside of home (or at home) throughout the day, regardless of

whether these time episodes are contiguous. The time during which a smartphone is turned off is

not counted towards the measures.

         Finally, for some of our analyses, we utilize county-level variables from other sources. The

county's college enrollment is available from the U.S. Department of Education National Center

for Educational Statistics (NCES). 25 Percent of voters who voted for President Trump in the 2016

presidential election comes from the MIT Election and Data Science Lab (2018). We control for

average weekly temperature, precipitation, and snowfall using data collected by the National

Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Global Historical Climatology

Network.

         Our main analysis sample contains a balanced event-time window surrounding treatment,

i.e. the week of the county's largest increase in percentage of students who can attend in-person

school. For the COVID-19 outcomes, we include eight weeks prior to treatment, the treatment

week, and eight weeks after treatment. A lengthy post-treatment period allows for multiple rounds

of spread (e.g. from student to parent to grandparent), incubation periods, time to receive and

obtain results from a test, and the fact that deaths can occur weeks after infection. On the other




24
   See Allcott et al. (2020), Dave et al. (2020a), Cotti et al. (forthcoming), and Gupta et al. (2020).
25
   These data were collected at http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/elsi/.The reporting years of enrollment ranged from 2013-
2017. As part of the data cleaning process, for residential campuses only, we assumed all enrolled students could
attend classes in person and therefore, we calculated the maximum weekly proportion of the total county population
that could be on campus by dividing the number of enrolled students by the county population. To calculate the
daily proportion of college students of the total county population, we assumed that no students were on campus
during the summer (nearly all colleges did online instruction over the summer). We also assumed all residential
colleges had in-person classes for the fall semester. For those colleges with no residential students, we assumed the
colleges were providing instruction either online or had minimal student interactions. Using Google searches of
academic calendars, we identified the start date for each college, which is the day we assumed students began
interacting on campus. In many counties, there are multiple colleges with different start dates, which means the
college proportion changes over time as more and more colleges start their fall sessions.

                                                         16
hand, a long post-treatment period faces a relatively high risk of confounding from other

concurrent shocks. In our case, the holiday break ­ which started in many Texas districts after the

week of December 13 ­ is a particular concern, as schools being "reopened" should not influence

spread when they are not in session. In our view, an eight week post-treatment window best

balances these considerations. It is long enough to plausibly capture much of the dynamics of the

treatment effect. At the same time, it is short enough to avoid sample windows that stretch past the

week of December 13 for all but two small counties (Starr and Zavala) that will have little influence

in our population-weighted sample. For the SafeGraph mobility outcomes, there is not a clear

reason to expect a lag before treatment effects emerge, so we limit the event-time window to six

weeks on each side, thereby ensuring that the sample window does not extend past the week of

December 13 for any county.

       Table 1 shows means and standard deviations for our outcome variables in both the pre-

and post-treatment periods, weighted by population. Interestingly, new cases per capita were about

the same in the pre- and post-treatment periods, while death rates went down by almost 50 percent.

This was in spite of a moderate increase in mobility across all four measures. Of course, numerous

factors affect these flat or downward trends, including better understanding of preventive measures

such as mask-wearing, advancements in treatments, and the average age of cases gradually

becoming younger. A finer-grained econometric analysis is necessary to disentangle the causal

effects of school reopenings from these underlying trends.

       Table 2 shows results from a simple cross-sectional regression of week of reopening

(ranging from 14 to 28, with week 1 being the week of May 3) on several county-level variables

that might be expected to influence reopening decisions: President Trump's 2016 vote share,

percent Hispanic, percent Black, county population, and percent of the SafeGraph sample who



                                                 17
stayed completely at home for the day in the four weeks prior to any schools reopening (a proxy

for compliance with public health guidelines), and average weekly new cases per capita in the four

weeks prior to any schools reopening. We standardize the covariates to allow a direct interpretation

of the magnitudes. Trump vote share is the dominant predictor, which is consistent with previous

research that showed politics drove school opening decisions (Valant, 2020). Each standard

deviation increase in Trump vote share is associated with schools reopening 1.22 weeks sooner. In

contrast, none of the other variables are statistically significant, and none have a magnitude greater

than 0.17 weeks. The coefficient for pre-school-year caseloads is nearly zero, and its p-value is

nearly 0.9. Therefore, reopening decisions appear to have been driven much more heavily by

politics than public health considerations, which may be surprising but is consistent with prior

research (Valant, 2020). This can be seen as favorable for an econometric analysis, as it suggests

that reverse causality from caseloads influencing reopening decisions should not be a concern. We

will be able to account for stable county characteristics such as political views by including county

fixed effects.


    IV.      Econometric Methods

          We aim to identify the causal effects of school reopenings on new weekly COVID-19 cases

and fatalities per 100,000 residents by estimating event-study regression models of the form
                          8

            = 0 +              1 ,- + 2  +  +  +                                         (1)
                      =-8,-1


where the subscripts c and t represent county and week; y is the case or fatality outcome; 

is the reopening indicator;  is a control variable for the number of COVID-19 tests per




                                                 18
100,000 residents, 26 included since differential testing rates across locations and time can be an

important driver of confirmed case numbers;  and  are county and time fixed effects; and  is

the error term. Observations are weighted by county population, and standard errors are robust to

heteroskedasticity and clustered by county.

        The summation term for the treatment variable reflects the inclusion of separate indicator

variables for whether schools will reopen eight weeks after week t, seven weeks after, six weeks

after, etc., down to two weeks after; whether schools reopened exactly in week t; and whether

schools reopened one week before week t, two weeks before, etc., up to eight weeks before. The

variable for whether schools will reopen one week from now is omitted as the reference period.

The "lead" terms (weeks until school reopening) measure pre-treatment trends, while the "lag"

terms (weeks after school reopening) measure the evolution of the treatment effects over time. As

discussed above, we expect the effects on new cases to grow over time because of the incubation

period, the lag between symptom onset and receiving a test, the time required to obtain test results,

and the exponential nature of case growth. For fatalities, we expect an even longer lag since deaths

typically occur after an extended battle with the illness.

        We also estimate a number of variants of our baseline event-study specification as

robustness checks. The first three checks add variables in an effort to address possible omitted

variable bias concerns. Causal inference in our event-study model requires the assumption that

case and death trajectories would have evolved similarly in early versus late reopening counties in

the counterfactual in which schools did not reopen. The pre-treatment trends estimated using the

lead terms in the event-study model are informative as to how case and death trajectories would



26
   Since test results might not be recorded in the same week that the test was conducted, we experimented with
including lags of the testing variable, finding that the contemporaneous value as well as two weekly lags were
statistically significant. We therefore include all three of those variables in the regressions.

                                                        19
have evolved in the counterfactual scenario. However, it is possible that some confounders did not

emerge until the post-treatment period. For instance, most Texas colleges and universities opened

for in-person instruction at the start of the fall semester. If these post-secondary reopenings fueled

COVID-19 spread and if school reopening dates were also systematically correlated with the

prevalence of college students in the county, this could bias our estimators for the school reopening

coefficients. We therefore estimate a model that controls for college and university reopenings in

a dose-response, event-study manner. Specifically, we construct a variable for the proportion of a

county's population that attends an in-session post-secondary institution in a given week. We then

interact this continuous "dosage" measure with indicators for each of the eight weeks before and

after the first college reopening in the county. Our second robustness check controls for time-

varying unobservables more generally by including linear county-specific time trends.

       For our third check, recall that the results from Table 2 showed that vote share for President

Trump was the dominant predictor of reopening week. Residents' political views are presumably

fixed during a two-month sample period, meaning that they are captured by the county fixed

effects. However, it is possible that political views could influence not only levels of new COVID-

19 cases but also trends, and county fixed effects alone would not account for the latter. If heavily

Republican counties opened schools relatively early and also developed steeper COVID-19

trajectories in the fall for reasons besides school reopenings, our estimated effects of reopenings

would be biased upwards. We therefore estimate a model that adds interactions of time-invariant

Trump vote share with each week fixed effect, thereby flexibly allowing for right- and left-leaning

counties to have different COVID-19 trajectories.

       The next series of robustness checks utilize alternate constructions of the key variables.

First, instead of defining reopening as occurring in the week with the largest increase in the



                                                 20
percentage of a county's students who attend schools that reopened for in-person learning, we use

the week during which the county (a) crossed over the 50 percent threshold for students attending

reopened schools, (b) crossed over the 20 percent threshold, and (c) had its first reopening. The

latter is the treatment definition used by the Tulane study. Next, two checks consider alternate

functional forms for the case and fatality outcomes: (a) exponential growth rate in cumulative cases

(computed as the difference in the natural logs of cumulative cases from one week to the next) and

(b) the natural log of the count of new cases.

         Our next two checks vary the way in which we control for COVID-19 testing, since

changes over time in the number of tests performed could be endogenous to the trajectory of new

infections. First, we simply drop the testing variables. Second, we control for the number of new

negative tests per 100,000 residents rather than total tests, as those might arguably reflect availably

of tests rather than level of virus in the community. 27

         The next group of robustness checks varies sample construction. Two checks shorten the

sample window from eight weeks on each side of treatment to six and four, respectively. Next, we

test whether the results could be driven by a small number of unusual counties by dropping (a) the

county of El Paso, which experienced dramatically more COVID-19 spread than any other county

in Texas during our sample period, and (b) all six counties with more than a million residents.

Finally, we consider a different way to ensure that the results are not driven exclusively by large,

urban areas by re-estimating the baseline model without weighting observations by county

population, thereby making the estimates reflective of effects in the average county (with each

county counting equally), as opposed to average effects across Texas as a whole. We also examine




27
  Note that, since we did not control for testing in the baseline fatalities regression, we do not perform the
robustness checks involving testing for that outcome.

                                                           21
the robustness of the findings by re-estimating the main model leaving out one county at a time,

for the six largest counties with population exceeding one million.

        Finally, an emerging literature documents problems with two-way fixed-effects (TWFE)

models with staggered treatment times. 28 First, TWFE regressions give more weight to

observations treated in the middle of the sample period, which can lead to unreliable estimates of

the average treatment effect if treatment effects are heterogeneous. Using the event-study

formulation with a balanced panel and a sample period centered around treatment time rather than

calendar time alleviates this concern. Since each county has exactly eight pre-treatment

observations, one observation during the treatment week, and exactly eight post-treatment

observations, the variance of each treatment variable is identical for each county.

        More troublesome in our context is that, in settings that rely exclusively on variation in

treatment timing for identification as opposed to having control units, two-way fixed effects

models implicitly use early treated units as controls for later treated units. This leads to bias when

treatment effects are dynamic because the response of the early treated units is still evolving at the

time that they are called upon to be controls, effectively leading to a violation of the parallel trends

assumption for those particular late-versus-early comparisons. Event-study models do not

necessarily alleviate this concern. Under the assumption that the treatment effect either strengthens

or stays the same over time, the bias is toward zero and we can conclude that, if anything, our

estimates are conservative. We find this assumption plausible for COVID-19 outcomes; as

discussed above, all the reasons to expect treatment effects to evolve over time point towards them

becoming stronger rather than weaker.



28
  This literature includes Callaway and Sant' Anna (forthcoming), de Chaisemartin and D'Haultfoeuille (2020),
Goodman-Bacon (forthcoming), and Sun and Abraham (2020). Our discussion in the remainder of this section is
based on reviews of this emerging literature by Baker et al. (2021) and Cunningham (2021, pp. 461-510).

                                                       22
         Nonetheless, we conduct two robustness checks that utilize newly developed methods that

address this issue. Both of these methods perform well in simulations and applications conducted

by Baker et al. (2021). First, we employ the "stacked regression" strategy used by Cengiz et al.'s

(2019) study of four decades of state minimum wage increases. This method begins by

constructing new datasets for each treatment event (each county's school reopening) along with

corresponding "clean controls", defined as those counties whose school reopenings did not occur

within eight weeks on either side of the reopening week of the focal county. Then, we combine

the resulting datasets into a single "stacked" sample and re-run the baseline regression, except

adding interactions of indicators for each underlying dataset with each of the county and week

fixed effects (as well as, when COVID-19 cases is the outcome, the testing controls). Standard

errors are clustered by county to prevent the duplication of data from leading to over-rejection of

the null hypotheses. Our other robustness check implements the method of Callaway and Sant'

Anna (forthcoming), which first estimates dynamic treatment effects for units treated at each time

period, then combines them by weighting by sample share rather than treatment variance. This

method also purges the potentially problematic late-treated versus early-treated-as-control

comparisons from the identifying variation. 29,30


    V.       Results


29
   To implement this method, we use the open-source STATA and R packages provided by Jonathan Roth and Pedro
Sant'Anna (footnote: https://github.com/jonathandroth/staggered#stata-implementation). For COVID-19 cases, the
method requires us to drop three counties that are the only county treated in a particular week. For fatalities, we
encounter a problem with singular variance matrix because small counties tend to have weeks in which there were
zero deaths reported. We therefore limit the sample to counties with more than 19,000 residents and shorten the
event study window to seven periods before and after reopening to avoid unbalanced treatment groups.
30
   Note that we do not also present results from the Goodman-Bacon (forthcoming) decomposition because that is
designed for two-way fixed effects models with a single treatment variable, rather than for event-study models like
ours with numerous treatment variables. That said, if we run a basic TWFE regression with a single treatment
variable, the decomposition shows that the treatment effect estimate is driven roughly equally by early-treatment
versus late-treated-as-control and late-treatment versus early-treated-as-control comparisons. The estimated
treatment effect from the former is more strongly positive than that from the latter, consistent with dynamic
treatment effects causing a bias toward zero when early-treated units are used as controls, as discussed above.

                                                        23
       Figure 3 displays the event-study results for the baseline model with new COVID-19 cases

per 100,000 residents as the outcome. The dots indicate the coefficient estimates for each week of

event time relative to the reference period of one week before reopening. The bars represent 95

percent confidence intervals, meaning that a variable is statistically significant at the 5 percent

level if its bar does not cross the horizontal zero line. As a point of reference for evaluating

magnitudes, recall from Table 1 that the pre-treatment sample mean for the dependent variable is

147.7 cases per 100,000.

       The results provide evidence of a positive, large, and causally interpretable effect of

reopening schools on COVID-19 cases per 100,000 residents. The coefficient estimates associated

with the negative event time terms show little evidence of problematic pre-treatment trends. The

line is nearly straight, the point estimates are all negative but never larger than 33.5 (22.7 percent

of the sample mean), and only one of the eight estimates is statistically significant at the 5 percent

level relative to the reference period. The coefficient estimates from the post-treatment period

show that a statistically significant increase in cases emerges two weeks after reopening, consistent

with the expected lag between exposure and confirmation as a case. The effect then grows over

time before stabilizing in weeks six through eight at slightly over 100 new cases per 100,000

residents. This effect size is substantial, as it represents more than two-thirds of the pre-treatment

sample mean. The confidence intervals are large, but even the low end of the 95 percent confidence

interval for the week eight coefficient estimate would represent a non-trivial 17 percent increase

relative to the pre-treatment mean.

       The results from the robustness checks for new cases, shown in Appendix Figures A1

through A7, are broadly similar. In all regressions, the estimated effect of reopening schools is

positive, with magnitudes and levels of statistical significance that exhibit the general pattern of



                                                 24
strengthening over time (although individual coefficient estimates occasionally deviate from that

pattern). In the thirteen robustness checks that have magnitudes that can be compared to those from

the baseline specification (the exceptions being the two with dependent variables that have

different scales), the coefficient estimates eight weeks after reopening range from 75 to 194 new

cases per 100,000. The baseline estimate of 108 is therefore towards the more conservative end of

this range.

       Figure 4 shows the baseline results for weekly deaths per 100,000 residents, which has a

pre-treatment mean of 3.51. As with cases, the results suggest a positive causal effect of school

reopenings. No clear pattern emerges in the pre-treatment period, and none of the eight negative

event time terms are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. A statistically significant

increase in deaths emerges two weeks after reopening, and the effect strengthens over time,

reaching 2.37 after eight weeks. This magnitude again represents more than two-thirds of the pre-

treatment sample mean, and the low end of the 95 percent confidence interval is a still sizeable

0.97, or 28 percent of the pre-treatment mean.

       The results from the robustness checks, presented in Appendix Figures A8 through A13,

are again broadly similar in terms of signs and significance. In the regressions where magnitudes

are directly comparable, the effect after eight weeks ranges from 0.88 to 4.6, putting our baseline

estimate of 2.37 towards the middle. While the general pattern of positive and strengthening effects

persists across specifications, the standard errors tend to be much larger (as a percent of the

outcome mean) for the deaths regressions than the cases regressions, and individual coefficient

estimates therefore lose statistical significance in some of the checks more frequently. In particular,

the standard errors in the late event time periods are extremely large using the Callaway and Sant'

Anna method, making it impossible for plausible effect sizes to be statistically significant.



                                                  25
However, that regression nonetheless produces some of the largest point estimates out of all the

robustness checks, with the increase in deaths per 100,000 residents reaching 4 after eight weeks.

       Finally, in Appendix Figure A14, we show the coefficient on the event study model from

week +8, leaving out one large county at a time for the six counties in Texas with population

exceeding one million. The conclusions for both cases and fatalities are very similar from all

specifications, suggesting that the results are not driven by any one large county.

       In order to help assess the practical significance of the results, we utilize the estimates from

the baseline models for cases and fatalities to predict how Texas' COVID-19 trajectory would

have evolved differently if schools had not reopened. As discussed above, the generally large

confidence intervals associated with our estimates mean that relying exclusively on point estimates

for these calculations could be misleading. We therefore also perform a more conservative

simulation using the low end of the estimates' 95 percent confidence intervals.

       First, we compute the predicted number of cases attributable to school reopenings. Our

point estimates for reopening in the present week, the prior week, two weeks ago, and so on out to

eight weeks ago, are 11.78, 20.96, 58.97, 42.35, 61.68, 58.27, 100.39, 109.91, and 109.99,

respectively. These estimates imply that at the end of the reopening week, there would have been

11.78 fewer cases per 100,000 residents. The first full post-treatment week adds another 20.96

extra cases per 100,000 residents, for a total of 32.74. After eight post-treatment weeks, the

cumulative number of extra cases is the sum of all nine coefficient estimates, which is 574.3 per

100,000 residents. Since our regression is weighted by population, our estimates are interpretable

as average effects across all of Texas. Therefore, the total number of extra cases is given by

multiplying 574.3 by the state's population of 28,995,712 and then dividing by 100,000, yielding

166,521. According to our data, there were a total of 373,323 new cases in Texas in the nine weeks



                                                 26
included in our post-treatment window (including the treatment week itself). Therefore, the point

estimates imply that Texas' caseload would have been almost 45 percent lower during that time

had schools not reopened.

       As stated above, we caution against a literal interpretation of that number given the

relatively wide confidence intervals associated with our estimates. A safer interpretation can be

obtained by instead using the low end of the 95 percent confidence interval to determine the

minimum number of cases attributable to school reopenings implied by our results. The low end

of the 95 percent confidence intervals associated with the variables for the treatment week and

each of the eight post-treatment weeks are -2.88, -13.67, 9.39, -2.72, 12.74, 5.30, 51.12, 55.5, and

33.37, for a total of 148.15. Scaling up to the population of Texas yields a minimum of 42,956

cases attributable to school reopenings in the nine subsequent weeks, or 11.5 percent of the state's

total caseload during that time.

       The same process can be used to compute the number of fatalities attributable to school

reopenings. The baseline regression's point estimates for the treatment week and eight post-

treatment week variables are 0.35, 0.61, 0.91, 1.3, 1.21, 1.51, 1.98, and 2.36, for a total of 2.36

deaths per 100,000 residents, or 3,021 across the state of Texas. The corresponding low ends of

the 95 percent confidence intervals are -0.05, 0.18, 0.35, 0.54, 0.44, 0.61, 0.83, and 1,07, which

sum to 1.07 fatalities per 100,000 residents, or 818 total across the state. During the time frame,

there were 4,796 COVID-19 fatalities in Texas, so the point estimates imply that 63 percent of

them were due to school reopenings, while the confidence intervals imply that at least 17 percent

of them were.

       In sum, even under conservative assumptions, reopening schools had a meaningful impact

on both COVID-19 cases and associated fatalities in Texas. It is noteworthy that the percentage



                                                27
impacts on both outcomes are roughly similar. Ex ante, one might have expected the increase in

deaths to be much smaller proportionally than the rise in cases. COVID-19 mortality rates are

nearly zero for children and are much smaller for the working-age adults who comprise the

majority of school teachers and staff than they are for elderly or vulnerable adults. Our results

therefore suggest that school-reopening-induced COVID-19 spread is reaching more vulnerable

segments of the population. One possible explanation is secondary spread, where infected kids or

employees spread the virus to older, more at-risk individuals. However, this explanation appears

incomplete, as it would imply a several-week lag between new cases and new deaths, which we

do not observe in the data. Another possibility is spillover effects, where schools opening signals

to the community that it is safe to return to normal activities including returning to in-person work,

leading to spread across all segments of the population that may not originate in schools. Such

indirect effects could also help to explain the large effect sizes. The next section explores the

possibility of spillovers more directly.


   VI.      Spillover Effects on Mobility

         We next use SafeGraph data to explore whether changes in mobility patterns among adults

may help to explain the large sizes of the effects of school reopenings on COVID-19 cases and

deaths. Our baseline regression is again an event-study model given by (1), with the reopening

variable defined by the largest potential week-to-week increase in in-person enrollment. However,

we make three small changes in order to customize the approach for mobility outcomes. First, in

contrast to the lags inherent in COVID-19 cases and deaths, effects on mobility can emerge

immediately, and it is not obvious that they will evolve over time. Therefore, we shorten the

window on each side of treatment to six weeks rather than eight, which prevents any counties'

post-treatment windows from extending into the holiday break. The analysis therefore uses 13


                                                 28
weeks of data, and given our numbering convention, goes from -6 weeks to +6 weeks (where we

denote week 0 as the week of school reopening within the county). Second, we now arrange weeks

from Monday to Sunday, rather than Sunday to Saturday as we did in our models for COVID-19

spread, so that we can also examine weekday mobility separately from weekend mobility in some

specifications. Third, instead of omitting the lead one week prior to school reopening as the

reference category, we omit the lead two weeks prior, since preparation for a return to school could

plausibly increase mobility in the week prior to reopening. For example, families may return from

vacations or may engage in more back-to-school shopping.

       There are three primary ways in which school reopenings can lead to spillover effects

beyond the students who attend school and the teachers and staff who work there. First ­ and most

directly ­ in-person learning may increase transmission between students and teachers, ultimately

leading to secondary spread into the larger community. The CDC guidelines emphasize ideal

conditions for in-person learning to succeed, including low initial levels of community spread,

adequate social distancing, vigilant mask wearing, and a host of other steps that are unlikely to be

fully carried out in practice. Second, opening of schools is associated with other indirect changes

for parents due to decreased childcare responsibilities. This could include either greater physical

presence in workplaces or increased outside-the-home leisure activities, both of which could lead

to greater transmission and community spread. Finally, reopening schools could send an incorrect

signal to the larger community that normal activities are safe again, similar to the "learning by

deregulation" concept described in Glaeser et al. (2020). Such a signaling effect could even extend

to those ­ such as seniors ­ with no direct ties to students or school employees.

       We examine SafeGraph mobility data to explore these possible mechanisms. We aggregate

SafeGraph's SDM database to the weekly level (averaging mobility measures across the week),



                                                29
where our unit of observation is a CBG, which we will refer to as a "neighborhood." After a

number of screens to the SDM data (discussed in the data section earlier), we examine 14,580

neighborhoods from 252 of the 254 Texas counties. Our four mobility measures, following

SafeGraph's SDM conventions, are percentage of devices completely at home, percent part-time

work, percent full-time work, and median minutes outside of the dwelling; SafeGraph's

convention is to define part-time (full-time) "work" as spending 3-6 hours (6 or more hours) at

one location other than home between 8 am and 6 pm local time. 31

           Using these SafeGraph definitions, in the weeks prior to reopening, approximately 28

percent of devices were completely home on a given day, and nearly 8 percent were engaged in

part-time work and 4 percent in full-time work on a daily basis. In addition, the median time spent

outside of the home on a given day was 108 minutes.

           The event-study specifications provide evidence of increased mobility. As illustrated in

Figure 5, only one out of sixteen pre-trend coefficients from six to three weeks prior to reopening

are significantly different from the lead term two weeks prior to reopening. There is some evidence

of anticipation effects in the week immediately prior to reopening with significant increases in

work behavior. Starting in the week of reopening, and essentially thereafter, there is strong

evidence of increased mobility. In the first week of school reopening (week 0), there is a reduction

in staying completely home of 0.7 percentage points, increases in part-time and full-time work of

0.4 percentage points, and increases in time outside the home of more than 8 minutes. These results

persist ­ and all grow substantially larger ­ in the subsequent weeks. For example, in week 6, the

mobility results are two to three times as large. and time outside the home increases by 20 minutes.

By the end of the period, relative to the baseline prior to reopening, these are decreases of 5 percent



31
     https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/social-distancing-metrics

                                                           30
in completely at home per day, increases of 12 percent and 21 percent in part and full time work,

and increases of 18 percent in time outside the home.

       Next, we examine these mobility patterns in another way. Schools operate during

weekdays, not weekends. Thus, increases in daily mobility induced by school openings (e.g.,

children at school, parental labor supply) should be more prominent on weekdays. When we run

the same event study models on weekdays only in Figure 6a, the mobility effects are much

stronger, suggesting these mechanisms are operating as expected. To illustrate, in the full-week

model, recall that there was a reduction in staying completely home of 0.7 percentage points in

week 0; when focused on weekdays, there is now a 1.1 percentage point reduction. In the full week

model, time outside the home increased by more than 8 minutes in week 0; when focused on

weekdays, it is now nearly 13 minutes. By week 6, time outside the home increases by 30 minutes

per day, considerably higher than the 20 minutes in the full week model. Relative to the pre-

treatment weekday mean of 116 minutes, this is an increase of 26 percent. When focusing on the

weekend in Figure 6b, we generally find modest reductions in mobility, which may represent an

overall reallocation of activities as the school year begins. For example, time outside the home

falls by between 2 to 5 minutes per day in the weeks after reopening, although many of the

coefficients are insignificant. The overall net effect ­ as represented by the full week ­ is clearly

higher mobility.

       One key benefit of the SDM database is the level of granularity. The typical neighborhood

in our sample has a population of approximately 1,500 people, and was merged to demographic

data from ACS summary files for 2018 (which aggregates microdata from 2014-2018).

Importantly, these neighborhood summary files contain detailed information on the age

distribution. From this, we characterize neighborhoods in two different ways: whether they have



                                                 31
significant numbers of school-age children (fraction of population aged 5 to 17) and whether they

have significant numbers of elderly (fraction of population aged 65 and over). We re-estimate our

models, restricting to neighborhoods in the top quintile of school-age children (neighborhoods

where, on average, approximately 25 percent of the population is comprised of school-aged

children). We also re-estimate models for the top quintile of neighborhoods with elderly (where,

on average, nearly 18 percent of the population are senior citizens). By focusing on neighborhoods

with many children and parents, we expect increases in mobility due to both the resumption of

school and any signaling effects. In contrast, in neighborhoods with large numbers of elderly, the

effects of reopening schools and increased physical work presence should be diminished, although

the general signal that normal activities are safe could still apply.

       The overall patterns in the event-study are somewhat stronger for the top quintile of

neighborhoods with school-age children; as illustrated in Figure 7a, the median time away from

home at 6 weeks after opening is nearly 27 minutes, compared with 20 minutes in the full sample.

The pre-trends for all mobility measures show little change in mobility until school reopening, and

then a highly significant and sizable increase thereafter. In contrast, the overall results are more

muted in the elderly sample in Figure 7b. For example, median time away from home shows no

significant increase after school reopenings, and the magnitude is substantively smaller; at 6 weeks

post, time away insignificantly increases by 7 minutes. There is an increase in "full-time work"

(recall, SafeGraph defines this based on extended stays outside the home, not whether the person

is actually at work), yet the magnitudes are again considerably smaller than in neighborhoods with

many children. Put differently, when focused on a sample that should largely be unaffected from

reopenings or increased physical work presence, we see only limited evidence of mobility

consistent with a signal of returning to normal. The results from this granular analysis would then



                                                  32
suggest mobility-induced increases from opening schools and potential spillovers onto parental

behavior, especially labor supply.

       Finally, we re-examine our main mobility results with a series of robustness checks that

largely mirror the results on COVID-19 in Appendix Figures A15 through A22. Appendix Figure

A15 modifies the event-study specification by additionally including county-specific time trends.

All of the substantive findings remain. For example, 6 weeks after opening, median time away

from home is 20 minutes, virtually identical to the main specification. In Appendix Figure A16,

the specification is amended to include weekly controls for average temperature, precipitation, and

snowfall, factors that have been shown to affect mobility (Kapoor et al., 2020; Wilson, 2020). In

all instances, none of the pre-trends from six to three weeks prior to reopening are different from

the omitted lead of two week; additionally, the results on mobility virtually mirror the baseline,

full-week results. Next, in Appendix Figure A17, we shorten the window to 4 weeks on either side

of the school reopening. The same general patterns emerge as in the baseline specification. For

example, in this specification, time away from home 4 weeks after reopening significantly

increases by more than 15 minutes; in the base specification, it was 17 minutes. In Appendix

Figures A18-A20, we modify the parameterization of school reopenings, by considering a county

to be open if 50 percent, 20 percent, or any students had in-person learning offered to them. As the

figures make clear, how one characterizes school reopening at the county level matters for the

interpretation of the mobility results. In one case (50 percent threshold), there are essentially no

mobility effects (and the pre-trends are generally insignificant). In other cases (20 percent

threshold or greater than 0 percent), the pre-trends for many of the mobility measures are

significant, yet there are no mobility impacts after the "opening". Next, in Appendix Figure A21,

we modify the baseline specification by including an interaction of Trump's 2016 county vote



                                                33
share with week fixed effects. The same general patterns remain as in the baseline, but some of

the estimated impacts are smaller and insignificant. Thus, evolving attitudes of Trump voters

appears to be related both to school openings and increased mobility. Finally, in Appendix Figure

A22, we display the coefficient from week +6 from event study models that leave out the six largest

Texas counties, each with population exceeding one million, one at a time. The estimated impacts

on mobility are quite similar to the exercise, suggesting that none of the large counties are driving

our results.

        Collectively, these results suggest that reopening schools leads to important spillover

effects on adult mobility that may help to explain the large effect sizes for the COVID-19

outcomes. The evidence is consistent with parents going physically back to work and perhaps also

increasing outside-the-home leisure activities. These effects could be due to lessened child care

responsibilities, signaling about the safety of returning to normal activities, or a combination of

both. In contrast, the evidence is not as strong for neighborhoods with large numbers of elderly

residents or for the general population on weekends, which may suggest that the time-use

mechanism is relatively more important than general signaling.


    VII.       Conclusion

        In this study, we examine the impact of opening Texas public schools for in-person

instruction in fall 2020 on community spread of COVID-19 as well as fatalities. In the eight weeks

after reopening, we conservatively estimate, based on lower bounds of confidence intervals, that

there would have been at least 43,000 fewer COVID-19 cases and at least 800 fewer fatalities.

These results hold across a variety of specifications and robustness checks. These results could be

explained both by the direct effect of spread within the schools and the indirect effects of increased

mobility within the community as our analysis of cellphone data suggests that six weeks after


                                                 34
reopening, the median time spent outside of the home increased by 26 percent on weekdays. This

suggests that decision makers need to think strategically about how to encourage behavior to

mitigate spread of COVID-19 not only within schools, but within the community at large.

       On the surface, our empirical findings diverge with several popular narratives that have

emerged about school openings. Some studies ­ including a prominent CDC study from Wisconsin

­ rely on contract tracing efforts to quantify impacts of school reopening. The imperfections of

run-of-the-mill contact tracing efforts ­ including the inability to follow asymptomatic cases or

lack of cooperation in finding all close contacts ­ suggests estimates of in-school spread may be a

lower bound. Importantly, this approach does not account for inevitable, indirect behaviors ­ such

as greater parental mobility including increased physical presence in the workplace ­ which also

may contribute to community spread. Although other recent research teams (Tulane, CALDER)

take methodological approaches closer to our approach and find overall more modest effects on

COVID-19 spread, it is important to emphasize that the initial conditions in Texas were more ripe

for community spread and schools opened more widely, more quickly, and generally, close to full

capacity.

       Although it is beyond the scope of our study to provide a cost-benefit analysis of school

reopenings, our quantitative findings contribute a key input into such an analysis. Recent work by

Kniesner and Sullivan (2020) estimate non-fatal economic losses of about $46,000 per case, and

Department of Transportation apply an $11 million loss per fatality. Such health- and productivity-

related losses from COVID-19 must be weighed against learning losses for children, as well as

other ancillary effects related to child mental health and abuse and these losses could be substantial

but will only become clear over time. Distributional considerations are also important, as benefits




                                                 35
of school closures accrue disproportionately among older individuals, whereas the costs are largely

borne by children.

        Obviously, as vaccinations expand, the cost-benefit calculations of opening schools

changes. As of early April 2021, approximately 33 percent of adults aged 18 and older have been

at least partially vaccinated, and the percentage is considerably higher among the most

vulnerable. 32 To the extent that the spread of new mutations of the virus are mitigated by vaccines,

almost all policies that restrict mobility ­ including school closures ­ will eventually be

unnecessary. Nonetheless, there continue to be pockets of high spread of COVID-19. Furthermore,

among various groups, there is widespread vaccine hesitancy and mistrust of the medical system.

For instance, in a survey conducted in February 2021, among white evangelical adults, 45 percent

stated they would "definitely not" or "probably not" get the COVID-19 vaccine. 33 In addition,

vaccination rates are stubbornly low in both the African-American and Hispanic communities 34,

potentially due to historic mistrust of medical providers (Alsan and Wanamaker, 2018). As of April

2021, Texas lags the national average in both partial and full vaccinations, as do many of the states

in the South. 35 Collectively, this suggests that there will be significant pockets of communities

where lack of restrictions ­ including the opening of schools ­ may still lead to considerable

community spread moving forward. Additionally, the B.1.1.7 variant that is gradually becoming

the dominant strain in the U.S. infects children more easily than prior strains, and children under

sixteen years old cannot yet be vaccinated. 36,37



32
   https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/covid-19-vaccine-doses.html
33
   https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/03/23/10-facts-about-americans-and-coronavirus-vaccines/ft_21-03-
18_vaccinefacts/
34
   https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/issue-brief/latest-data-on-covid-19-vaccinations-race-ethnicity/
35
   https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/covid-19-vaccine-doses.html
36
   https://www.nydailynews.com/coronavirus/ny-covid-variants-michael-osterholm-new-york-20210404-
73bhzmgpzremnpr5hirw2eo724-story.html
37
   https://health.usnews.com/health-care/patient-advice/articles/when-will-there-be-a-covid-19-vaccine-for-kids

                                                      36
       For these reasons, debate about school openings and mitigation strategies will therefore

likely continue to persist into the 2021-2022 school year, and our results provide important

information that can help inform that debate. In particular, the CDC guidelines say that schools

can reopen if community spread is low and considerable precautions are taken. Our study is not

necessarily at odds with that guidance; instead, it simply shows that school reopenings are not

always safe if those conditions are not met.


REFERENCES

Allcott, H., Boxell, L., Conway, J., Gentzkow, M., Thaler, M., & Yang, D. (2020). "Polarization
        and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the coronavirus
        pandemic." Journal of Public Economics 191:104254,
        doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104254

Alsan, M. & Wanamaker, M. (2018). "Tuskegee and the Health of Black Men." The Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 133(1): 407­455, doi:10.1093/qje/qjx029

Andersen, M., Bryan, S., & Slusky, D. (2020). "COVID-19 Surgical Abortion Restriction Did
      Not Reduce Visits to Abortion Clinics." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
      Paper Series, No. 28058. doi:10.3386/w28058

Auger K.A., Shah S.S., Richardson T., et al. (2020) "Association Between Statewide School
      Closure and COVID-19 Incidence and Mortality in the US." JAMA 324(9):859­870.
      doi:10.1001/jama.2020.14348.

Bailey, M., Johnston, D.M., Koenen, M., Kuchler, T., Russel, D., & Stroebel, J. (2020). "Social
        Networks Shape Beliefs and Behavior: Evidence from Social Distancing During the
        COVID-19 Pandemic." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series,
        No. 28234. doi:10.3386/w28234

Baker, A.C., D. Larcker, and C.C.Y. Wang (2021). "How Much Should We Trust Staggered
       Difference-in-Differences Estimates." EGCI Finance Working Paper 736/2021.

Bullinger, L.R., Carr, J.B., & Packham, A. (Forthcoming). "COVID-19 and Crime: Effects of
       Stay-at-Home Orders on Domestic Violence." American Journal of Health Economics,
       doi:10.1086/713787




                                               37
Callaway, B. & Sant'Anna, P.H.C. (Forthcoming). "Difference-in-Differences With Multiple
      Time Periods." Journal of Econometrics. doi:10.1016/j.jeconom.2020.12.001

Cengiz, D., A. Dube, A. Lindner, and B. Zipperer (2019). "The Effect of Minimum Wages on

       Low-Wage Jobs." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134 (3), 1405-1454.

Council of Economic Advisers. (2020). Reopening Schools Is Key to Unlocking the Full
      Potential of America's Children. The White House.
      https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/reopening-schools-key-unlocking-full-potential-
      americaschildren/

Cotti, C., Engelhardt, B., Foster, J., Nesson, E., & Niekamp, P. (Forthcoming). "The relationship
        between in-person voting and COVID-19: Evidence from the Wisconsin primary."
        Contemporary Economic Policy, doi:10.1111/coep.12519

Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J., & Yelowitz, A. (2020). "Strong Social
      Distancing Measures in the United States Reduced the COVID-19 Growth Rate." Health
      Affairs 39(7): 1237­1246. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608

Cronin, C.J., & Evans, W.N. (2020). "Private Precaution and Public Restrictions: What Drives
       Social Distancing and Industry Foot Traffic in the COVID-19 Era?" National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 27531. doi:10.3386/w27531

Cunningham, S. (2021). Causal Inference: The Mixtape. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Dave, D., Friedson, A. I., Matsuzawa, K., & Sabia, J. J. (2021). "When Do Shelter-In-Place
       Orders Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across states and Adoption Time."
       Economic Inquiry 59(1): 29­52. doi:10.1111/ecin.12944

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., Sabia, J.J., & Safford, S. (2020a). "Black Lives
       Matter Protests and Risk Avoidance: The Case of Civil Unrest During a Pandemic."
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 27408.
       doi:10.3386/w27408

Dave, D., McNichols, D., & Sabia, J.J. (2020b). "The contagion externality of a superspreading
       event: The Sturgis Motorcycle Rally and COVID19" Southern Economic Journal 87(3):
       769­807. doi:10.1002/soej.12475

de Chaisemartin, C. & D'Haultfoeuille, X. (2020). "Two-Way Fixed Effects Estimators with
       Heterogeneous Treatment Effects." American Economic Review 110(9): 2964­96.
       doi:10.1257/aer.20181169


                                               38
Doyle T, Kendrick K, Troelstrup T, et al. (2021). "COVID-19 in Primary and Secondary School
       Settings During the First Semester of School Reopening -- Florida, August­December
       2020." MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70:437­441.
       doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7012e2

Dub, T., Erra, E., Hagberg, L., Sarvikivi, E., Virta, C., Jarvinen, A., Osterlund, P., Ikonen, N.,
       Haveri, A., Melin, M., Lukkarinen, T. J., & Nohynek, H. (2020). "Transmission of
       SARS-CoV-2 following exposure in school settings: Experience from two Helsinki area
       exposure incidents." MedRxiv, 2020.07.20.20156018. doi:10.1101/2020.07.20.20156018

Falk, A., Benda, A., Falk, P., Steffen, S., Wallace, Z., & Høeg, T.B. (2021) "COVID-19 Cases
       and Transmission in 17 K­12 Schools -- Wood County, Wisconsin, August 31­
       November 29, 2020." MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2021;70:136­140.
       doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7004e3

Flaxman, S., Mishra, S., Gandy, A. et al. (2020). "Estimating the effects of non-pharmaceutical
      interventions on COVID-19 in Europe." Nature 584:257­261. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-
      2405-7

Fontanet, A., Grant, R., Tondeur, L., Madec, Y., Grzelak, L., Cailleau, I., Ungeheuer, M.N.,
       Renaudat, C., Pellerin, S. F., Kuhmel, L., et al. (2020). "SARS-CoV-2 infection in
       primary schools in northern France: A retrospective cohort study in an area of high
       transmission." MedRxiv. doi:10.1101/2020.06.25.20140178

Friedson, A.I., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J., & Dave, D. (Forthcoming). "Shelter-In-Place Orders
       and Public Health: Evidence From California During the COVID-19 Pandemic." Journal
       of Policy Analysis and Management, doi:10.1002/pam.22267

Glaeser, E.L., Jin, G.Z., Leyden, B.T., & Luca, M. (2020). "Learning from Deregulation: The
       Asymmetric Impact of Lockdown and Reopening on Risky Behavior During COVID-
       19." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 27650.
       doi:10.3386/w27650

Goldhaber, D., Imberman, S., Strunk, K, Hopkins, B., Brown, N., Harbatkin, E., & Kilbride, T.
      (2021). "To What Extent Does In-Person Schooling Contribute to the Spread of COVID-
      19? Evidence from Michigan and Washington." American Institute for Research,
      working paper 247-2020-2.
      https://caldercenter.org/sites/default/files/CALDER%20WP%20247-1220-2.pdf

Goodman-Bacon, A. (Forthcoming). "Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment
     Timing." Journal of Econometrics.




                                                39
Green, D.A., Karimirad, A., Simard-Duplain, G., & Siu, H.E. (2020). "COVID and the
       Economic Importance of In-Person K-12 Schooling," National Bureau of Economic
       Research Working Paper Series, No. 28200. doi:10.3386/w28200

Gupta, S., Nguyen, T.D., Rojas, F.L., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., & Wing, C. (2020).
       "Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from
       State and Local Government Actions." National Bureau of Economic Research Working
       Paper Series, No. 27027. doi:10.3386/w27027

Harris, D., Ziedan, E., & Hassig, S. (2021). "The Effects of School Reopenings on COVID-19
        Hospitalization." National Center for Research on Education Access and Choice.
        Available at: The-Effects-of-School-Reopenings-on-COVID-19-Hospitalizations-
        REACH-January-2021.pdf

Hsiang, S., Allen, D., Annan-Phan, S. et al. (2020). "The effect of large-scale anti-contagion
       policies on the COVID-19 pandemic." Nature 584, 262­267. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-
       2404-8

Honein, M.A., Barrios, L.C., & Brooks, J.T. (2021) "Data and Policy to Guide Opening Schools
      Safely to Limit the Spread of SARS-CoV-2 Infection." JAMA. 325(9):823­824.
      doi:10.1001/jama.2021.0374

Hurt, S., Ball, A., & Wedell, K. (2020). "Children more at risk for abuse and neglect amid
       coronavirus pandemic, experts say." USA Today, March 21, Accessed on April 14, 2021
       at: https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/investigations/2020/03/21/coronavirus-
       pandemic-could-become-child-abuse-pandemic-experts-warn/2892923001/

Isphording, I.E., Lipfert, M., & Pestel, N. (2020). "School Re-Openings after Summer Breaks in
       Germany Did Not Increase SARS-CoV-2 Cases." IZA Institute of Labor Economics, IZA
       DP No. 13790. Retrieved from http://ftp.iza.org/dp13790.pdf

Kniesner, T.J., & Sullivan, R. (2020) "The forgotten numbers: A closer look at COVID-19 non-
      fatal valuations." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 61:155­176. doi:10.1007/s11166-020-
      09339-0

Kuhfeld, M., Soland, J., Tarasawa, B., Johnson, A., Ruzek, E., & Liu, J. (2020). "Projecting the
      potential impacts of COVID-19 school closures on academic achievement."
      (EdWorkingPaper: 20-226). Retrieved from Annenberg Institute at Brown University:
      https://doi.org/10.26300/cdrv-yw05

Kuhfeld, M., & Tarasawa, B. (2020). "The COVID-19 slide: What summer learning loss can tell
      us about the potential impact of school closures on student academic achievement." The
      Collaborative for Student Growth NWEA White Paper.

                                               40
       https://www.nwea.org/research/publication/the-covid-19-slide-what-summer-learning-
       loss-can-tell-us-about-the-potential-impact-of-school-closures-on-student-academic-
       achievement/

Ludvigsson, J.F. (2020). "Children are unlikely to be the main drivers of the COVID-19
      pandemic ­ A systematic review." Acta Paediatrica 109(8):1525­1530.
      doi:10.1111/apa.15371

Maldonado, J.E., & De Witte K. (2020) "The effect of school closure on standardized student
      test outcomes." Discussion paper series DPS20.17. Belgium: KU Leuven.

Milosh, M., Painter, M., Sonin, K., Van Dijcke, D., & Wright, A.L. (2020), "Unmasking
       Partisanship: How Polarization Influences Public Responses to Collective Risk",
       University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper (2020-
       102)

MIT Election Data and Science Lab, (2018), "County Presidential Election Returns 2000-2016",
      https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/VOQCHQ, Harvard Dataverse, V6,
      UNF:6:ZZe1xuZ5H2l4NUiSRcRf8Q== [fileUNF]

Schmidt, S. & Natanson H. (2020). "With kids stuck at home, ER doctors see more severe cases
      of child abuse." Washington Post. Accessed on February 20, 2021 at:
      https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2020/04/30/child-abuse-reports-coronavirus/

Simmons-Duffin, S.S. (2020). "14 States Make Contact Tracing Data Public. Here's What
     They're Learning." Available at https://www.npr.org/sections/health-
     shots/2020/08/14/902271822/13-states-make-contact-tracing-data-public-heres-what-
     they-re-learning

Simonov, A., Sacher, S. K., Dubé, J.P.H., & Biswas, S. (2020). "The Persuasive Effect of Fox
      News: Non-Compliance with Social Distancing During the Covid-19 Pandemic."
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 27237.
      doi:10.3386/w27237

Valant, J. (2020). "School reopening plans linked to politics rather than public health." Brown
       Center Chalkboard, Brookings Institution. Accessed at
       https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brown-center-chalkboard/2020/07/29/school-reopening-
       plans-linked-to-politics-rather-than-public-health/




                                              41
                Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations of Outcome Variables

                                                                    (1)                         (2)
COVID Outcomes                                                Pre-reopening               Post-reopening
New cases per 100,000 residents                                   147.73                      139.74
                                                                 (121.37)                    (171.99)
New deaths per 100,000 residents                                    3.51                         1.80
                                                                   (5.45)                       (3.72)
Observations                                                       2,024                        2,277

Mobility Outcomes                                             Pre-reopening               Post-reopening
Time Completely Home (%)                                          28.21                        26.62
                                                                  (5.94)                      (5.72)
Part-time Work (%)                                                  7.84                         9.00
                                                                   (2.25)                       (2.65)
Full-time Work (%)                                                  3.98                         4.93
                                                                   (1.35)                       (1.69)
Median non-home dwelling time (minutes)                           107.76                       128.25
                                                                  (56.42)                      (62.10)
Observations                                                      87,480                      102,060
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The COVID outcomes utilize public county-by-week-level data,
while the mobility outcomes are from census-block-group-by-week-level data from SafeGraph. Observations are
weighted by county (census-block-group) population for the COVID (mobility) variables. The pre-reopening
period refers to the eight (six) weeks prior to school reopenings for the COVID (mobility) variables. The post-
reopening period refers to the reopening week along with the eight (six) weeks following reopening for the
COVID (mobility) variables.




                                                      42
                               Table 2: Predictors of Reopening Week
                                                                                   Coefficient estimate
                                                                                    (standard error)
Standardized 2016 percent of votes for President Trump                                  -1.18***
                                                                                          (0.30)
Standardized percent Hispanic                                                               -0.19
                                                                                           (0.15)
Standardized percent Black                                                                  -0.15
                                                                                           (0.12)
Standardized population                                                                     0.18
                                                                                           (0.16)
Standardized percent who stayed at home for full day                                        0.07
                                                                                           (0.15)
Standardized new weekly cases per 100,000                                                 0.32***
                                                                                           (0.12)
Constant                                                                                 17.06***
                                                                                          (0.19)
Observations                                                                                 253
Notes: * p<0.1, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Results are from a cross-sectional county-level linear regression with
week number of reopening (ranging from 14 to 28, with 1 indicating the week of May 3) as the outcome variable.
The stay-at-home and new cases variables are pooled averages across the four weeks prior to the earliest school
reopening (week numbers 10 through 13).




                                                      43
Figure 1: Relative Start Date of School District Start Date in 2020-21 School Year Relative
                                to the 2019-20 School Year




Note: In some cases, we do not have the 2019-20 start date for school districts. In these cases, we substitute a prior
start date for any year we could find a record.




                                                          44
Figure 2. Weekly COVID-19 cases per 100,000 residents in Texas, Washington, Michigan,
and the U.S.




                                          45
Figure 3: Event-Study Regression Results for Effect of Reopening Schools on COVID-19
Cases per 100,000 Residents




                                          46
Figure 4: Event-Study Regression Results for Effect of Reopening Schools on COVID-19
Fatalities per 100,000 Residents




                                          47
Figure 5: Effects of school reopening on mobility - Baseline model (all CBGs, full-week)




                                          48
Figure 6a




   49
Figure 6b




   50
Figure 7a




   51
Figure 7b




   52
Appendix Figures (online only)


 Appendix Figure A1. Robustness checks: (a) Control for college reopenings; (b) Control for county-
 specific time trends; (c) Control for Trump vote share interacted with week fixed effects.




                                                 53
Appendix Figure A2: Robustness checks: Alternative Treatment definitions for school reopenings:
(a) 50% open; (b) 20% open; (c) First open




                                                54
Appendix Figure A3: Robustness checks: (a) Outcome: cumulative cases exponential growth rate; (b)
Outcome: the natural log of new case count.




                                               55
Appendix Figure A4: Robustness checks: (a) Drop testing variables; (b) Control for negative tests.




                                                 56
Appendix Figure A5: Robustness checks: (a) 6-week event-study window; (b) 4-week event-study
window.




                                              57
Appendix Figure A6: Robustness checks: (a) Drop El Paso County; (b) Drop six counties w/ > 1 mil
residents; (c) Unweighted.




                                               58
Appendix Figure A7: Robustness checks:
(a) Stacked regression




(b) Callaway and Sant' Anna method




                                         59
Appendix Figure A8: Robustness checks: (a) Control for college reopening; (b) Control for county-
specific time trends; (c) Control for Trump vote share interacted with week fixed effects.




                                                60
Appendix Figure A9. Alternative Treatment definitions for school reopenings: Robustness checks: (a)
50% open; (b) 20% open; (c) First open.




                                                61
Appendix Figure A10: Robustness checks: (a) Outcome: cumulative cases exponential growth rate;
(b) Outcome: the natural log of new case count.




                                               62
Appendix Figure A11: Robustness checks: (a) 6-week event-study window; (b) 4-week event-study
window.




                                              63
Appendix Figure A12: Robustness checks: (a) Drop El Paso County; (b) Drop six counties w/ > 1 mil
residents; (c) Unweighted.




                                               64
Appendix Figure A13: Robustness checks:
(a) Stacked regression




(b) Callaway and Sant' Anna method




                                          65
Appendix Figure A14: Specifications leaving-out each of the 6 largest counties in Texas one at a time
­ COVID-19 outcomes at week +8.




                                                 66
Appendix Figure A15 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - Control for county-specific time
                             trends (all CBGs, full-week sample)




                                               67
Appendix Figure A16 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - Control for weather variables (all
                                   CBGs, full-week sample)




                                                68
Appendix Figure A17 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - 4-week event-study window (all
                                   CBGs, full-week sample)




                                              69
Appendix Figure A18 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - Treatment defined when 50% of
                students attend reopened schools (all CBGs, full-week sample)




                                             70
Appendix Figure A19 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - Treatment defined when 20% of
                students attend reopened schools (all CBGs, full-week sample)




                                             71
Appendix Figure A20 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - Treatment defined when first
                  school district reopened (all CBGs, full-week sample)




                                             72
Appendix Figure A21 -- Effects of school reopening on mobility - Control for Trump vote share
              interacted with week fixed effects (all CBGs, full-week sample)




                                             73
Appendix Figure A22: Specifications leaving-out each of the 6 largest counties in Texas one at a time
­ mobility outcomes at week +6.




                                                 74
