                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          TRADE PROTECTION, STOCK-MARKET RETURNS, AND WELFARE

                                         Mary Amiti
                                       Sang Hoon Kong
                                       David Weinstein

                                      Working Paper 28758
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w28758


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2021




This paper supersedes an earlier unpublished paper, "The Effect of the U.S.-China Trade War on
U.S. Investment." We thank George Alessandria, Kirill Borusyak, Dave Donaldson, Ethan
Ilzetzki, Peter Neary, Peter Schott, Jon Vogel, and Michael Waugh for many useful comments.
We thank Richard Crump for sharing inflation expectations data and Daniel Lewis for sharing the
economic surprise data. We also thank Yingjie (Angela)Wu and Dongcheng Yang for providing
excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal
Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Mary Amiti, Sang Hoon Kong, and David Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Trade Protection, Stock-Market Returns, and Welfare
Mary Amiti, Sang Hoon Kong, and David Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 28758
May 2021
JEL No. F13,F14,F16

                                         ABSTRACT

We show that the specific factors model can be used to derive a rigorous link between
movements in stock prices and productivity, wages, employment, output, and welfare. We also
prove that the commonly used measure of the effective rate of protection equals the dual measure
of revenue TFP, providing a theoretical foundation for why many studies have found that trade
liberalization significantly increases firm-level productivity. Our method enables us to trace a
tariff announcement's effect on TFP through its impact on macro variables (e.g., exchange rates)
and through its effect on the relative prices of imports. We apply this framework to understanding
the implications of the U.S.-China trade war. Our results show that the trade-war announcements
caused large declines in U.S. stock prices, expected TFP, and expected inflation largely by
moving macro variables, but also by causing declines in the returns of firms trading with China.
We find that markets expect the trade war to lower U.S. welfare by 7.8 percentage points, which
is much larger than the predictions of static models but in line with those of dynamic models.


Mary Amiti                                      David Weinstein
Microeconomic Studies Function                  Columbia University
Federal Reserve Bank of New York                Department of Economics
33 Liberty St                                   420 W. 118th Street
New York, NY 10045                              MC 3308
and CEPR                                        New York, NY 10027
mary.amiti@gmail.com                            and NBER
                                                dew35@columbia.edu
Sang Hoon Kong
Columbia University
sanghoonkong@gmail.com




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28758
1    Introduction
Trade models differ sharply in their predictions about the gains from trade. Canonical
trade models typically have the property that the free-trade equilibrium is efficient, so
trade protection only has small, second-order effects on welfare. By contrast, dynamic
models often have the property that there are productivity spillovers across firms that
are not internalized, which means that protection can have large, first-order effects on
productivity and welfare in the long run. Testing which approach is more reasonable is
difficult because dynamic effects may take years to materialize, and it is difficult to know
whether any observed shift in productivity over a long time period is due to the change
in protection or some other policy change. In this paper, we show that stock price data
can be used to identify the effects of a policy measure on expected profits, productivity
and welfare under the assumption that stock price movements on the day of a new tar-
iff announcement are principally driven by the news of new protection. We apply this
framework to understanding the implications of the U.S.-China trade war. We find that
the large drop in U.S. equity prices on days with announcements of new trade protection
implies that market participants expected the trade war to lower U.S. welfare by 7.8 per-
cent, which we show is just under the value we obtain from calibrating Perla et al. (2021)'s
dynamic model.
    The structure we use to link movements in stock prices to expected movements in
productivity and welfare builds on two seminal papers in the literature. First, we use the
structure of Jones (1975)'s specific factors model, which proved that there is a theoretical
relationship between the effective rate of protection (ERP), wages, and the returns to a
specific factor. We demonstrate that one can invert Jones's model and write changes in
nominal variables (wages and the ERP) as a function of the returns to the specific fac-
tor. Second, we use an insight proven in Grossman and Levinsohn (1989) that shows
that stock price changes can be interpreted as expected movements in returns to firm-
specific factors. Taken together these two results mean that movements in stock prices
tell us about changes in expected returns to specific factors, wages, and ERP. Finally, we
also show that one can compute the welfare impact of a policy if one estimates two addi-
tional variables: the change in tariff revenue induced by the policy, and the movements
in expected consumer prices induced by the policy.
    Our method also provides a way to estimate the effects of a policy announcement on
expected productivity using the observed impact on stock prices. Our starting point is
the definition of the change in the ERP used in Corden (1966), Jones (1975), and Ethier
(1977): the "proportional change in value added per unit" [Ethier (1977) p. 238]. This
definition implies that if tariffs raise a firm's output price, the ERP will rise, and if tariffs
raise its input prices the ERP will fall. We then prove a simple relationship: under the
assumption that the share of total expenditures on intermediates in total costs is constant,
the percent change in the ERP equals the percent change in the firm's output price plus the
percent change in the firm's total factor productivity (TFP). The intuition is that holding
fixed the output price, higher TFP means the marginal cost of production must fall. Lower
marginal costs, however, imply that there must also be more money available for workers
and owners, which means that value added per unit output must also rise. In other
words, ERP is just revenue TFP.

                                               1
    This relationship between output prices, TFP, and factor prices is related to that in
Feenstra and Hanson (1999), who derive a similar, but different relationship. In their pa-
per, all factors receive identical returns, which requires them to introduce an error term
in order to satisfy the zero-profit condition empirically. In contrast, the zero-profit condi-
tion always holds in the specific factors model because price or TFP movements cause all
expenses other than those for labor and materials to accrue to the specific factor, obviat-
ing the need for an error term. Thus, in our dual approach, revenue TFP is the residual
needed to make the zero-profit condition hold, just as in the primal approach where rev-
enue TFP is the residual needed to make sales growth consistent with input growth. Un-
der the identifying assumption that stock-price movements on the day of the trade-war
announcements capture movements in the expected returns to specific factors, expected
movements in revenue TFP are uniquely determined without estimation.
    We also develop a method for exactly decomposing the effect of a trade-war announce-
ment on expected TFP and welfare into its effect on macro variables and treatment vari-
ables. For example, a tariff announcement might matter for the ERP of a firm because
some firms need to pay tariffs while others do not (the "treatment effect"), but also be-
cause a tariff announcement might change exchange rates, economic policy uncertainty,
or other macro variables (the "macro effect"). We show that we can identify both of these
channels by using a conventional factor model coupled with an event study. We identify
the macro effect by assuming that during a narrow event window, movements in the la-
tent macro variables (unexplainable by standard "economic surprise" variables) capture
the macro impact of the policy announcements in those windows. Similarly, we show
that the differential abnormal returns of importers, exporters, and firms selling in China
during event windows likely capture the treatment effects of protection. Since we prove
that revenue TFP is a linear function of stock-price movements, this decomposition of
stock returns also lets us linearly decompose estimated movements in revenue TFP as
well. Thus, we provide a rigorous approach to solving the problem of how to decompose
ERP first raised by Corden (1966).1
    We apply this methodology to the 2018-2019 U.S.-China trade war. One challenge with
using stock-price data to infer movements in the broader economy is that the sample of
listed firms over-weights large firms relative to the overall U.S. distribution of firms. We
deal with this problem by re-weighting the stock returns for firm-size and industry cells to
match those reported in national data and then assuming that within-cell average returns
in stock-market data match those in the U.S. national data. We identify U.S. and Chinese
tariff event dates as the earliest tariff announcement date in the media using Factiva and
Google search. We find that the U.S.-China trade-war announcements are associated with
large stock-price declines regardless of whether we look at impacts over one-day, three-
day, or five-day event windows. We find that during a three-day window around each
of the trade-war announcements, stock prices fell 12.9 percent in total: a $3.7 trillion loss
in market value. When we filter the data through our factor and event-study models,
    1
      In the words of Corden (1966), "An activity is only truly protected if the net result of the protective
structure combined with the appropriate exchange rate adjustment is to raise the value added of that ac-
tivity. This is the concept of total protection. The direction of change in output or value added depends not
only on protection relative to non-traded goods, but also on protection relative to other traded goods" [p.
226, emphasis in the original].

                                                     2
we find that 11.9 percentage points of this decline can be attributed to the trade war,
with 9.2 percentage points of the drop due to the announcement's impact on latent macro
variables.
    While our method doesn't provide guidance on which macro variables drove the mar-
ket, we do show that there were large movements in several macro variables that are
strongly correlated (in terms of magnitude and significance) with our latent macro vari-
ables. For example, our event study shows that tariff announcements drove one mea-
sure of uncertainty--the VIX--up by 114 percent. The announcements also caused a 3.3
percent appreciation in the dollar. In total, the impact of the announcement on the la-
tent macro variables was so large relative to usual movements in these variables that our
placebo test easily rejects the hypothesis that it arose from random movements in these
variables. Moreover, as in Huang et al. (2019), we find that direct exposure to importing,
exporting, and selling in China also have statistically and economically significant effects
on firm stock returns.
    In order to compute the impact of these announcements on U.S. welfare, we also need
an estimate of how the trade war affected tariff revenues and consumer prices. The first
variable can be computed by well-established methodologies such as those of Fajgelbaum
et al. (2020). Estimating how trade protection affects aggregate consumer prices, however,
is difficult to specify theoretically in standard trade models because they lack a theory of
the price level. Fortunately, we can overcome this limitation by using financial data. The
impact of a trade policy announcement on the price level over a 10-year horizon can be
estimated from changes in expected rates of inflation from Treasury inflation protected
securities (TIPS) around an announcement date following the methodology developed
by Abrahams et al. (2016). Our analysis of the impact of the tariff announcements on
inflationary expectations indicates that they caused a 1.3 percentage point drop in the
price level over a 10-year horizon. This decline in the price level is not something that is
predicted in standard trade models, which are only concerned with relative prices. How-
ever, it is consistent with work by Comin and Johnson (2020), who argue that increased
globalization is inflationary. With these estimates in hand, we obtain our estimates of the
impact of trade announcements on real wages and welfare.
    Our baseline results show that the drop in stock prices implies that market partic-
ipants expect TFP to fall by 9.5 percent and welfare to fall 7.8 percent. Decomposing
the welfare loss into the macro component--the way in which a policy affects all firms
through macro variables--and the more conventional treatment effect, we find the macro
effect matters the most, accounting for 7.2 percentage points of the welfare decline, and
only 0.6 percentage points is due to the differential impact on treated firms. The relation-
ship between ERP and TFP sheds light on what is underlying these large effects. Since
expected revenue TFP and returns to specific factors are two sides of the same equation
in the specific factors model, the model predicts that the observed declines in the returns
of firms could only have arisen from the trade war's adverse impact on expected firm-
level TFP. In our setup, the large drop in expected TFP drives down expected wages. This
drop in expected wages provides intuition for the decline in measured expected infla-
tion. Moreover, we show that the expected TFP changes exhibit a significant negative
relationship with trade exposure measures. This result is consistent with the findings of
empirical studies of the effect of liberalization on productivity, which have also found

                                             3
that protection has economically significant effects on TFP.2
    Our estimate of the decline in welfare is larger than that typically estimated using
static trade models. For example Amiti et al. (2019), estimate a welfare loss of 0.4 percent
of GDP due to the trade war.3 By contrast, Sampson (2016), Buera and Oberfield (2020),
and Perla et al. (2021) argue that one can obtain much larger estimated impacts of trade
if one allows for productivity spillovers that enable trade protection to have a first-order
effect on welfare. We explore this formally by calibrating the Perla et al. (2021) model
to show that it provides a mapping between trade induced movements in stock prices
and welfare. Seen through the lens of their model, the stock-price movements imply that
there will be a 9.0 percentage point drop in U.S. welfare: a number close to our baseline
estimate. This result suggests that markets anticipate welfare effects that are similar in
magnitude to those modeled by Perla et al. (2021).
Related Literature Our paper is related to the vast empirical trade literature over the
last two decades showing that trade liberalizations have big effects on per capita income
and productivity. These studies have shown that firm-level TFP is very sensitive to ERP
and protection more generally (c.f. Amiti and Konings (2007); Bloom et al. (2016); Brandt
et al. (2017, 2019); De Loecker (2011); Pavcnik (2002); Topalova and Khandelwal (2011);
Trefler (2004)). We also identify large impacts of trade policy on revenue TFP, but our
identification is based on using stock-price data filtered through a general equilibrium
model. Our paper is also related to the macro literature evaluating the impact of trade on
income that has also found evidence of large impacts of trade on productivity and income
(c.f., Frankel and Romer (1999); Alcalá and Ciccone (2004); Feyrer (2019)). These studies
find that the elasticity of per capita income with respect to trade ranges from 0.5 to 3 and
that most of the effect arises through trade's impact on productivity. Although our work
also finds large impacts of trade on productivity and welfare, an important difference
between our work and the macro work is that we build these estimates up from firm-
level data on stock prices and use a structural general equilibrium setup to obtain our
estimates.
    Our work is also closely related to the voluminous literature on stock-market event
studies that use trade data (Grossman and Levinsohn (1989), Hartigan et al. (1986), Brein-
lich (2014), Fisman et al. (2014), Moser and Rose (2014), Breinlich et al. (2018), Crowley
et al. (2019), Huang et al. (2019), and Greenland et al. (2020)). We differ in the use of a
general equilibrium model to interpret the data. Greenland et al. (2020) is particularly
relevant in that they show that positive firm abnormal returns in response to lower trade
uncertainty, through the granting of permanent normal trade relations in 2000, led to in-
creases in firm employment, sales, productivity and profits six years later. Our approach
yields a theoretical foundation for these regressions, and their regressions validate our
assumption that movements in share prices are tightly linked to movements in future
    2
       For example, Amiti and Konings (2007) estimate the elasticity of firm-level TFP with respect to input
tariffs to be -1.2 in Indonesia for firms that import their inputs. There were also gains to non-importers but
these were smaller, so the average elasticity across all firms was -0.44. Topalova and Khandelwal (2011)
estimate the elasticity to be -0.5 in Indian data, and Brandt et al. (2017) and Brandt et al. (2019) estimate the
elasticity to be -2.3 in Chinese data.
     3
       https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2019/05/new-china-tariffs-increase-costs-to-us-
households.html#more

                                                       4
accounting profits and other non-financial variables.
    The specific factors model, which forms the basis of our approach, has also been used
extensively in empirical estimation in recent years (c.f., Topalova (2010), Kovak (2013),
and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017)). These papers have shown that many of the large
effects of trade policy changes on wages often take a decade to be fully apparent in the
data. Our paper provides a complementary way of thinking about the long-term effects
of a policy change in terms of expected wages.
    We also contribute to the burgeoning literature on understanding the importance of
protection for the economy through macro or policy uncertainty channels (Baker et al.
(2016); Pierce and Schott (2016); Handley and Limão (2017); Caldara et al. (2019); Green-
land et al. (2020)). Like these papers, our paper also suggests that trade policy announce-
ments can have impacts that arise through uncertainty or changing the macro environ-
ment, but we differ in our use of financial data to identify the shocks and the use of a
general equilibrium model. Our paper is also related to work on the China shock. For ex-
ample, Autor et al. (2013) and Caliendo et al. (2019) show how trade with China affected
U.S. employment, wages, and welfare, but our work focuses on trade policy announce-
ments.
    Finally, our work is related to the literature documenting the impact of the trade war
on prices (c.f., Amiti et al. (2020); Fajgelbaum et al. (2020); Flaaen et al. (2020); Amiti
et al. (2019); Cavallo et al. (2021)). These papers have found that during the U.S.-China
trade war, tariff passthrough into firm input prices was close to complete, consistent with
our finding that higher U.S. tariffs negatively affected importers. Cavallo et al. (2021)
found that Chinese tariffs depressed U.S. exporter prices, also consistent with our find-
ings of negative abnormal returns for firms exporting to China following Chinese retalia-
tion events.

2     Theory
We develop the theory in two steps. The first involves developing a non-parametric map-
ping between movements in stock returns and wages, employment, output, and welfare.
The second explores the link between the ERP and TFP.
2.1   From Stock Prices to Wages, Real Economic Activity, and Welfare
We assume that there is a set of potential entrants into the market indexed by and that
labor is mobile, so if a potential entrant enters the market it will need to pay workers
a wage of w. Each potential entrant has production plan V (the specific factor) that en-
ables it to produce a product f at a given marginal cost of cf (w, r , q1 , ..., qn ), where the
arguments correspond to the wage (w), returns to firm 's specific factor r , and a set of
intermediate inputs, each produced at a price qi . Successful entrants will hire L workers
in order to produce y units of output. We assume that the amount of the specific factor
employed by each firm is fixed and that each production plan corresponds to a different
constant-returns-to-scale production function.
    We follow Bernard et al. (2003) and assume that each successful entrant is a Bertrand
competitor in its market. Before entry, all endowments of the specific factor (V ) and unit
cost functions (cf (w, r , q1 , ..., qn )) are known and potential entrants can choose whether


                                               5
or not to produce. If a potential entrant chooses not to enter it receives a return of
zero on its specific factor (i.e., its production plan is worthless). Since the amount of
each specific factor is fixed, a potential entrant will enter only if it can make a pos-
itive return on its specific factor, i.e., pf > cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ), and in this case it earns
r V = pf - cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ) y > 0 on its production plan. Since the entry condition
only depends on the common market price for the good (pf ) and cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ), with-
out loss of generality, we can rank the potential entrants by the unit cost of their produc-
tion plans, i.e.,

                          >      cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ) > cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ) .                   (1)
Entrants 2 and higher will not produce if p1                     2
                                                       f  cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ). Therefore, potential
entrant 1 will optimally produce at the limit price of p1               2
                                                                   f = cf (w, 0, q1 , ..., qn ), which means
it will be the sole producer of the good. Since potential entrant 1 will be the only producer
of good f , we will drop the notation and refer to firm 1 producing good f as "firm f ,"
its price as pf , and its unit cost as cf (w, rf , q1 , ..., qn ).
    As in Jones (1975), we impose the full-employment conditions on labor and each firm's
specific factor:
                                            aLf yf = L, and                                               (2)
                                            f

                                                aV f yf = Vf ,                                           (3)
where L  f Lf and the unit input requirements for labor and the specific factor are
given by aLf and aV f . Since aLf yf = Lf , the first full-employment condition (2) stipulates
that firm-level employment will adjust with firm-level production. In contrast, the sec-
ond full-employment condition (3) stipulates that the amount of the specific factor (Vf ) is
fixed, so the unit-input requirement of the specific factor (aV f ) is inversely proportional to
firm output (yf ). Similarly, we assume that the factor intensity of production (aV f /aLf ) is
determined by relative factor prices and the elasticity of substitution between the specific
factor and labor ( ):
                                   ^V f - a
                                   a      ^Lf =  (w   ^-r  ^f ) ,                            (4)
where rf is the return to the firm-specific factor and hats over variables indicate log
changes. We are now ready to prove our first proposition linking stock prices to wages.

Proposition 1. If the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital for all firms is constant,
the log change in wages equals the employment-share weighted average of firm stock returns, i.e.,
                                                          Lf
                                                ^=
                                                w            ^f ,
                                                             r
                                                     f    L
                                                                                   Lf
                                                     ^f =  r
and the log change in employment in each firm equals L     ^f -                f        ^f .
                                                                                        r
                                                                                    L

Proof. See Appendix A.2.1
   The intuition behind the first equation in Proposition 1 is that the full-employment
condition implies that changes in factor returns cannot yield an increase in the aggregate


                                                      6
demand for labor. However, the aggregate demand for labor will only remain constant
if the changes in relative wages (w       ^-r ^f ) are zero "on average," i.e., changes in wages
(w^ ) equal a firm-size weighted change in the average of the returns to the specific factor
       L
( f Lf r ^f ). The second line follows immediately from this equation and the fact that the
amount of the specific factor is fixed, so the left-hand side of equation (4) is just L ^f .
      Proposition 1 is based on the structure of Jones (1975) but differs in a number of
respects from his canonical model. First, Jones was concerned about mappings from
changes in the ERP into factor prices. Here, we invert the logic in Jones to show that
knowing the returns to specific factors pins down changes in wages and employment.
This property will prove useful when we turn to the empirics because measuring move-
ments in ERP due to a policy is extremely difficult, whereas it is straightforward to use
stock prices to measure movements in returns to specific factors (r      ^f ). Second, by assum-
ing that there is one elasticity of substitution between labor and capital, we simplify the
expressions in his canonical model and are able to construct a sufficient statistic for com-
puting wage and employment changes using only information on changes in the returns
to specific factors.4 Wages move one for one with the employment-weighted average of
share prices.5
      Cost minimization implies that the unit-input requirements can be written as aLf =
cf                 c               c
 w
     , and aV f = rf f
                       , and aif = qfi
                                       , so we have
                                     aLf w + aV f rf +         aif qi = pf ,                                 (5)
                                                           i

where pf is the firm price. It will also prove useful to define Lf , V f , and if as the
expenditures of firm f on labor, the specific factor, and input i expressed as a share of
total revenue. We can also obtain an expression for a mapping between relative stock-
price movements and output changes.

Proposition 2. If the share expenditures on intermediate inputs are a constant fraction of sales,
the impact of a trade policy change on firm output is given by
                                                                               
                                         Lf                          Lf
                                   ^f =
                                   y             ^f -
                                                 r                      ^f 
                                                                        r
                                        Lf + V f                 f
                                                                      L
where Lf and V f denote the payments to labor and specific factors as a share of revenue.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.2



    4
       By contrast, implementing the Jones approach would require us to know the full set of firm-level
elasticities. While the assumption of a single elasticity of substitution is more restrictive, other studies have
often adopted even more restrictive assumptions, e.g., assuming that  = 1 (c.f., Kovak 2013). Knoblach
and Stöckl (2020) conduct a meta-analysis of 49 studies and find that the value of  typically falls between
0.4 and 0.7.
     5
       At first, it may seem surprising that wages rise one for one with average returns to the specific factor,
however, this result is present in other models in which firms have positive operating profits. For example,
in Melitz (2003), both per worker welfare and average firm profits are monotonically rising in average
productivity.

                                                       7
    The assumption that intermediate input expenditures are a constant fraction of sales
will be satisfied if production is multiplicatively separable into a composite intermedi-
ate input and other factors of production. A Cobb-Douglas production function would
satisfy this, but one could also have richer production technologies in which there are
arbitrary elasticities of substitution between labor and capital and among intermediate
inputs, so long as the elasticity of substitution between labor and the composite interme-
diate (and between capital and the composite intermediate) is one.
    Finally, our theory also lets us compute the welfare effects. Income in this economy
consists of payments to factors plus tariff revenue (T R) (i.e., I = w f Lf + f rf Vf + T R).
Welfare therefore can be written as
                                                                              

                         ln W = ln w          Lf +               rf Vf + T R - ln P,                 (6)
                                         f               f


where P is the price index for consumption. Totally differentiating equation (6) yields

                       ^  d ln W = wL w
                       W              ^+
                                                             rf Vf
                                                                   ^f +
                                                                   r
                                                                        TR      ^.
                                                                           TR - P                    (7)
                                    I                f         I         I

2.2   ERP and Productivity
In this section, we provide the link between ERP and productivity, which enables us to
map stock-price movements into movements in revenue TFP. The starting point for de-
veloping a structural approach for mapping policy changes into stock-price movements
is to recall a result from Jones (1975), which proved that the movement in the returns to
each specific factor can be written as
                                        
                             1                  Lf
              ^f = f +
              r                           ^e
                                       f  p f -                           ^e
                                                                        f p f and w
                                                                                  ^=         ^e
                                                                                           f p f,    (8)
                            V f   f =f
                                                V f              f =f                  f

where
                                               Lf                  Lf
                                       f           /                V
                                                                      ,                              (9)
                                               V f           f
                                                                   f
Lf and V f are the wage bill and payments to the specific factor expressed as a share of
value added:
                              wLf                         rf Vf
                 Lf                     , and V f                    ,              (10)
                      pf yf (1 - i if )            pf yf (1 - i if )
    ^e
and p f is the firm's ERP, which is defined as

                                              ^f -
                                              p              i   if q^f i
                                       ^e
                                       p f                                .                         (11)
                                                1-               i if

  The first term in equation (8) captures the direct link between a firm's return and its
ERP. Intuitively, the return on a firm's specific factor will rise if its ERP rises and fall if the
ERPs of other firms rise. All else equal, if protection raises a firm's output price or lowers


                                                 8
its average input price, this will serve to raise the return of its specific factor. If other
firms have higher output prices or lower input prices on average, their marginal revenue
product of labor will rise, which will raise the economy-wide wage and lower the returns
to the firm's specific factor. Two important properties of the mapping between ERP and
factor prices, which we will use later, are that it is linear and homogeneous of degree 1,
which means that factor prices will not change if the ERP does not change. Moreover, if
we know how a policy affects the ERP, we can infer the implied movement in the return to
wages and the specific factor. The ERP is rising in the firm's output price (p   ^f ) and falling
in its average input price ( i if q^f i ).
    A major empirical challenge to implementing the Jones (1975) approach in our dataset
(and in many other datasets) is that it is impossible to use equation (11) to compute the
ERP directly because it requires observing firm-level output prices (p   ^f ), input prices (q ^i ),
and the full firm-level input-output matrix (if ). Fortunately, there is an easy workaround
to the problem. As we prove in the following proposition, movements in the returns to
the specific factor provide a sufficient statistic for the ERP.

                                                     ^e
Proposition 3. The log change in the ERP for a firm (p f ) in a specific factors model is given by

                                                           Lf
                                   ^e
                                   p f = V f r
                                             ^f + Lf          ^f
                                                              r                                (12)
                                                       f
                                                            L
and if the share of total expenditures on intermediate inputs is constant, then

                                  T F P Rf  p              ^e
                                            ^f + T F P f = p f,                                (13)

where T F P Rf is the log change in the firm's revenue total factor productivity.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.3
    Proposition 3 is key for understanding the difference between the prior literature's
approach to the problem and ours. Jones (1975) was concerned with how a researcher
who observed a change in the ERP (p    ^e
                                        f ) could infer the implications for factor prices (w
                                                                                            ^
and r^f ). A voluminous theoretical literature then developed showing that it was difficult
to rigorously link movements in tariffs to movements in the ERP without knowing the
passthrough of a vector of tariffs into every price in an economy as required by equation
(11). Empirical implementation of the Jones (1975) model therefore forced researchers
to make strong assumptions about input-output structures, tariff passthrough rates into
every price in the economy, and whether tariffs affect aggregate prices or just relative
prices. By contrast, we show that if we can observe movements in the returns to the
specific factors, we can use these data to form sufficient statistics that identify movements
in wages and ERP.
    The second part of the proposition provides a theoretical foundation for the robust
empirical finding that tariff-induced increases in the ERP are associated with increases
in TFP (c.f., Amiti and Konings (2007), Topalova and Khandelwal (2011), Brandt et al.
(2017), and Brandt et al. (2019)). Proposition 3 proves that the ERP is simply revenue



                                                 9
TFP.6 The intuition for this result stems from the zero profit condition, which implies that
^e
p f = V f r        ^ . The left-hand side will only be positive if aggregate payments to
           ^f + Lf w
factors rise, which can only happen if a firm's revenue is growing faster than its costs, i.e.,
TFPR is rising. This proposition also helps to situate our paper among a variety of other
studies. For example, Feenstra and Hanson (1999) use a Heckscher-Ohlin setup in which
changes in value-added prices and TFP are set equal to changes in returns to capital and
labor. Their specification requires an error term because they assume that the returns to
capital do not vary across industries (equivalent to assuming r       ^ in our setup).
                                                                 ^f = r

3       Empirical Implementation
We face a number of challenges in moving from the theory to the data. The first is that we
need a means of measuring the returns to specific factors. Second, the set of listed firms
is not representative, so we need a way to apply our estimates based on our sample of
listed firms to the broader economy. Finally, we need a means of assessing the impact of
a policy on the aggregate price level in order to compute the welfare impact. We address
each of these challenges in the next three sections.
3.1     Specific Factors and Stock Prices
Following Grossman and Levinsohn (1989), we use movements in stock prices as a means
of measuring how past firm-specific investments are expected to respond to policy an-
nouncements. Stock prices are well suited for this purpose because firm market value
equals the expected present value of future firm profits. Therefore, movements stock
prices tell us about changes in the expected future value of firm-specific capital (both tan-
gible and intangible). We incorporate this change by slightly modifying the model pre-
sented in the previous section. We assume that firms produce in two periods which we
denote by period subscripts s  {1, 2}. Each period has an identical entry and equilibrium
structure as the one we described in the previous section, but we also assume that the
amount of labor in the economy, the amount of each specific factor, and the cost functions
of each firm and potential entrant are unchanging across time periods. We also assume
that output is not storable, so production must equal consumption in each period. As be-
fore, wages are set to clear the labor market within each period. The firm's profits (returns
to the specific factor) in each period are given by rf s Vf = (pf s - cf (ws , 0, q1s , ..., qns )) yf s .
The L identical consumers (workers) in the economy are each endowed with a unit of
labor and own an equal share of each firm. Within each period, firms first observe output
and input prices, then produce, pay workers, and distribute profits as dividends. This
structure means that equations (2) and (3) will hold in each period, and we can use equa-
tion (4) as well as all of our propositions to determine changes in variables conditional on
observing movements in rf s .
    Next, we establish the link between changes in rf s and policy changes. Let  denote a
vector of policies that could be announced by the government between the end of period
1 and the start of period 2 that cause a movement in the ERP. After these policy announce-
ments are made, the economy is also buffeted by a series of idiosyncratic price shocks, so
    6
     Following Hsieh and Klenow (2009), we define TFPR as the change in value added net of changes in
labor and capital inputs.

                                                   10
that at the start of period 2, the change in the ERP for is given by

                                         ^e = p
                                         p    ^ e ( ) + p
                                                        ^I ,                                     (14)
where each element of p  ^ e is a vector whose elements are the log change in the ERP of each
firm (with each element given by p     ^e          e    e
                                        f  ln pf 2 /pf 1 ); p^ e ( ) is the vector of log changes in
ERP due to the policy shift; and p   ^ I is a vector of log changes in ERP due to idiosyncratic
information unrelated to the policy. We assume that movements in ERP due to idiosyn-
cratic information are mean zero, so E p       ^ I = 0. Similarly, in the absence of a change in
policy ( = 0), there will be no policy-induced price changes, so p            ^ e (0) = 0. Equation
(8) tells us that for any firm f there is a linear mapping between the change in the rate of
return for its specific factor r ^f  ln (rf 2 /rf 1 ) and the vector of price changes of all firms
   e
(p^ ), so we can write movements in the returns to the specific factor as

                                                ^ e ( )) + f ,
                                       ^f = rf (p
                                       r                                                         (15)
where rf (·) is the linear mapping between movements in ERP and returns to the specific
factor given in equation (8); and f  rf p   ^ I is the movement in returns to specific factors
due to idiosyncratic factors. Moreover, since the linear mapping is homogeneous of de-
gree 1 in the ERP, we also have rf (0) = 0, which follows from the fact that if all input and
output prices are unchanged, factor prices will also be unchanged. This result implies
that f must also be mean zero:
                                        ^ I = rf E p
                        E [ f ] = E r f p              ^ I = rf (0) = 0.                  (16)
This result in combination with equation (15) enables us to simplify notation by setting
                   ^ e ( ))]. We can also show that in the absence of a policy change there
   rf | ] = E [rf (p
E [^
will be no movement in the expected returns to the specific factors:

                                                           ^I
                                             ^ e (0)) + rf p
                               rf |0]  E rf (p
                            E [^                                    = 0,                         (17)
which means that expected prices will be identical in the two periods, so E [rf 2 |0] = rf 1 .
    We now examine how movements in stock prices are related to movements in the re-
turns to specific factors. Let E1 [·] denote the expectation at the end of period 1 (before
the policy and idiosyncratic shocks are revealed), and let E [·| ] be the expectation con-
ditional on observing the policy shocks but not the idiosyncratic shocks (f ). Since the
policies are not expected, E1 [ ] = 0 =  . The firm's value at the end of period 1 before
any shocks are revealed equals its expected dividend payment in period 2 multiplied by
the discount rate (): E [rf 2 Vf |E1 [ ]] = Vf E [rf 2 |0] = Vf rf 1 . Thus, the change in the
market value of the firm is given by


          MV     E [rf 2 Vf | ] - E [rf 2 Vf |E1 [ ]]   E [rf 2 | ] - rf 1   rf 2 - rf 1
        ^f
        r                                             =                    =             =r
                                                                                          ^f ,   (18)
                         E [rf 2 Vf |E1 [ ]]                   rf 1              rf 1

where we move to the equality by making the assumption that the log change equals the
percentage change. We now can use equation (15) to write
                               ^f
                               r MV
                                          ^ e ( )) + f 2 ,
                                    = rf (p                                      (19)

                                                 11
and
                                        MV
                                      ^f
                                    E r    | = E [^
                                                  rf | ] .                                  (20)
In other words, the movement in the market return of the firm before and after a pol-
icy announcement equals the expected change in the return of the specific factor due to
the policy plus a mean zero error term. Thus, as long as we can compute the expected
                                                      MV
change in the market return due to the policy (E r  ^f   | ), we know how much the mar-
                                                                   rf | ]).
ket thought the policy moved the return to the specific factor (E [^
    An important feature of this structure is that we can use an estimate of how much the
                                    MV
policy affected stock returns (E r^f   | ) along with the results in Section 2 to compute
how the policy affected expected wages, TFP, and welfare. Proposition 1 and equation
(20) imply
                                               Lf     MV
                               E [w^ | ] =          ^f
                                                  E r    | .                          (21)
                                           f   L
The zero profit condition in the Jones (1975) model requires that

                                      ^e
                                      p f = Lf w
                                               ^ + V f r
                                                       ^f .                                 (22)
Using the result from Proposition 3, equating ERP and TFPR, taking expectations and
substituting in equations (20) and (21) provides a link between movements in expected
TFPR and trade-war induced movements in stock prices:
                                              Lf     MV             MV
                   E TFPRf | = Lf                  ^f
                                                 E r    | + V f E r
                                                                  ^f   | .                  (23)
                                          f   L

3.2   Identifying Policy Impacts
We now turn to modeling the stochastic process determining stock returns. We know
from equations (15) and (19) that we can model stock returns as a linear function of shocks
to ERP (rf (p  ^ e ( ))) and an error term. We now make a functional form assumption for
    ^ e ( )). In particular, we assume that the stock returns on day t (r
rf (p                                                                   ^f t ) are additively log
separable into macro and treatment effects:

                                ^M ( (t , t ) , f ) + r
                         ^f t = r
                         r                            ^T (Zf , t ) + f t ,                  (24)
where  (t , t ) = (1t , ..., Kt ) is a K × 1 vector of macro variables (exchange rates, pol-
icy uncertainty, etc.) that may be affected by a vector of macro variables unrelated to
the event (t ) as well as policy announcements (t ) on day t; f is a vector of firm char-
acteristics that matter for how macro variables affect firms; Zf is another vector of firm
characteristics (which may or may not be different from f ) that affect how a policy af-
fects firms directly (e.g., an importer paying a tariff as opposed to having a tariff change
some macro variable); and f t is a mean-zero error term that captures time-varying, firm-
specific productivity shocks.
    Equation (24) can be thought of as a high-frequency version of equation (15) in which
the vector of ERP (p  ^ e ) moves each day as a result of policy variables ( ), other macro
                                                                       M
variables (t ) and idiosyncratic price shocks (f t ). In this setup, r
                                                                     ^f     ^M ( (t , t ) , f )
                                                                        t = r



                                                12
                                                                             T
captures how macro variables affect the returns to specific factors, and r  ^f     ^T (Zf , t )
                                                                               t = r
captures the movements in the returns that would normally be captured in an event study,
i.e., "treatment effects" of a policy announcement.. If there is a tariff announcement on
day j , we have j = 0, and the announcement will move firm returns by shifting macro
variables ( (t , t )) and/or differentially affecting the returns of firms. Differentiating
equation (24) gives us
                                         K   N     M             N    T
                                                 ^f
                                                 r  t k             ^f
                                                                    r  t
                               ^f t =
                               r                          dit +          dit .                           (25)
                                         k=1 i=1   k   it       i=1   it

The first term in this expression captures the policy's impact on the rate of return that
arises from its effect on macro variables, and the second term captures its impact through
other mechanisms (e.g., relative price movements not captured by exchange rates).
    We next model the components of r    ^f t . Since we do not know the set of macro vari-
ables that matter for understanding movements in stock returns, we assume that these
movements can be described by a set of latent macro variables (kt ):7
                                                                          K
                                   M
                                ^ ( (t , t ) , f ) = f +
                              E r                                              kf  kt                    (26)
                                                                         k=1

                                                                              ^M
                                                                              r
where f is a firm fixed effect, and kf is our estimate of fkt in equation (25) and tells us
the firm's sensitivity to latent variable k (its "loading"). Equation (26) is standard in the
asset pricing literature as it nests many common models. For example, the capital asset
pricing model (CAPM) is a restricted version of this model in which one of the kt equals
the market return. Thus, our choice of this structure enables us to nest many popular
methods of modeling asset price movements.
    In order to specify the functional form for the treatment effects, we need to estab-
lish some notation for the policy announcements. We define the set of U.S. events as
U , the set of Chinese events as C , and the combined set of U.S. and Chinese events as
U C = U C . We define Djt        w
                                   to be an indicator variable that is 1 if day t falls within
an announcement event window for event j and zero otherwise. During the event win-
dow, we assume that there is a set of treatment variables Zf i (i  {1, ..., N }) that specify
firm characteristics (relevant only during an event window) that might yield differential
returns, e.g., whether a firm is an importer from China, an exporter to China, or the share
of its revenues that accrues from China. We assume that the impact of a tariff change on
the expected differential return of a firm can be written as
                                                              N
                                            T                               w
                                    E     ^f
                                          r   |t   =               ij Zf i Djt ,                         (27)
                                                       j U C i=1

                                  r
                                  ^fD
                                     t
where ij is our estimate of       it
                                         during event window j .

    7
     In order to avoid confusion between the term "factor" as used in statistics and the term "factor" as
used in "specific factors model," we will continue to define a "factor" as a factor of production and refer to
the econometric term "factor" as a "latent variable."

                                                         13
    A key feature of equation (27) is that it is isomorphic to equation (26). In particular, we
               w
can think of Djt as latent variables that only matter during an event window, and ij Zif
as their loadings. This isomorphism means that we can use standard factor analysis to
identify the general latent variables and then use an event study based on the residuals
from the factor analysis to identify the event effects. To see this formally, note that if we
substitute equations (26) and (27) into equation (24), we obtain
                                                        K
                                       ^f t = f +
                                       r                     kf  kt +   f t,                              (28)
                                                       k=1

where
                                               N
                                                              w       w
                               ft                    ij Zf i Djt + t Djt +~f t ,                          (29)
                                       j U C   i=1

                                        w
                                f t  t Djt +~f t , and E [f t ] = 0.                                      (30)
Here, t is a parameter to be estimated, and       ~f t is an error that is mean zero on each day.
The reason we include t comes from our specification of the moment condition (30). Since
we assume that E [f t ] = 0, our estimation procedure will impose the moment condition
that F1T f t       ^f t = 0, where F denotes the number of firms, T denotes the number of
days, and    ^f t is our estimate of f t given in equation (30). However, this does not imply
      1                                                      1
that F     f ^f t = 0, so the value of t is given by t = F      f ^f t . In other words, t captures
the fact that even mean-zero errors need not sum to zero on any given day.
    We now make some identifying assumptions. Following the factor analysis and event
study literatures, we assume that E [ f t ] = E [f t ] = 0. We also assume that the latent
variables (kt ) matter for stock prices "in general," but the expected relative price effects
of tariff announcements only matter during some finite event window. Bai and Ng (2002)
show that this is tantamount to assuming that the latent variables have positive variances
in the limit as the sample size approaches infinity, i.e.,
                                                   T
                                          1
                                        lim            ( kt - k )2 > 0,                                   (31)
                                       T  T
                                                 t=1
               1                       w
where k        T   t kt .   Since the Djt are only non-zero during the event window and
                                                                               T                2
                                                                      1               w     w
the number of events is finite, we also know that lim                          t=1   Djt - Dj       = 0, where
                                                                   T  T
   w    1     w                               w
Dj    T    t Djt = 0. In other words, the Djt will not be identified as latent variables. We
therefore will correctly identify the number and values of latent variables as well as the
values of all of their parameters in equation (28), since the terms on the right-hand side
of equation (29) will appear in the error term of equation (28). This enables us to use the
residuals from this equation (^f t ) as the dependent variable in an event study to identify
the remaining parameters.
     Equation (27) gives us the expectation of the differential impact of a policy an-
nouncement, t , on a firm with characteristics Zf . Thus, as long as we know these
firm characteristics, we can construct the expected differential returns for firms in the
economy. In order to compute wage changes, though, we also need to know how the

                                                        14
announcement-induced macro movements affected firms. While we know from our es-
timation of equation (28) how to compute the impact of movements in macro factors on
returns (E r   ^M |t ), we need to isolate the impact from tariff announcements. In order
to do this, we assume that movements in macro factors (k (t , t )) can be decomposed
into movements due to economic surprise variables unrelated to the tariff announcement
(ES1t, ES2t , ..., ESN t ) and another component k (t ) that is due to movements in the pol-
icy:
                                            N
                                 kt = k +          ik ESit + k (t ) ,                              (32)
                                            i=1

where k and ik are parameters to be estimated, and N is the number of economic sur-
prises. We then can identify k (t ) by regressing kt on the economic surprise variables
and setting k (t ) equal to the error term.
    Now that we have identified all of the key parameters, we can compute the cumu-
lative impact of the announcements on expected firm returns (E [^   rf | ]). The expected
cumulative macro effect due to the policy change during a set of j events ( ) is given by

                                   M                                    w
                                 ^f
                               E r   | =                     kf k (t ) Djt ,                       (33)
                                            k       j    t

where we drop the t subscript on  when we want to indicate that we are computing the
effect of all policy announcements. Similarly, if we sum across all days within an event
window and across all events, we can use equation (27) to write
                                                                      N
                         T                  T                                       w
                       ^f
                     E r   |              ^f
                                        E r   |t =                         ij Zf i Djt ,           (34)
                                    t                        t j U C i=1

which gives us

                                                M         T
                                   rf | ] = E r
                                E [^          ^f  | + E r
                                                        ^f  | .                                    (35)
    Since we know how the announcement affected the expected returns of firms, we have
enough information to compute their expected impact on wages. If we substitute equa-
tions (33), (34), and (35) into equation (21), we obtain an expression that gives us expected
wage movements as a function of firm characteristics:

                                                                                           
                                                                 N
                               Lf     M                 Lf                              w
                 ^ | ] =
              E [w                  ^f
                                  E r   | +                                    ij Zf i Djt
                           f   L                f       L j U C i=1        t
                                                                                            
                                                   N
                               Lf     M                                  w            Lf
                      =             ^f
                                  E r   | +                          ij Djt              Zf i  ,   (36)
                           f   L            j U C i=1            t                f   L

                                                  T
where the term in the last square brackets is E r
                                                ^f  | . Here, E [w
                                                                 ^ | ] should be thought of
as the change in expected earnings of a worker with a unit endowment of labor after the
announcement of the tariff.

                                                    15
Sampling Issues Since the sample of firms that report stock prices is not representative
of the size distribution of U.S. firms, we need to re-weight the data before implementing
equation (36). We know the share of employment by firm size for the U.S. by bin b, so
Lb /L is the share of U.S. workers employed in firm-size bin b in the U.S. economy. In our
baseline specification, we set the expected rate of return for all U.S. firms in size bin b
    rb | , f  b ]) as equal to the average rate of return for publicly listed firms in the same
(E [^
bin:

                                      rb | ] = E [^
                                   E [^           rf | , f  b ] .                                      (37)
We also will explore alternative assumptions in Section 5.3. We use an identical proce-
                                                                         M
dure to compute the expected returns due to the macro shock by bin (E r ^b | ) and the
                               T
differential shock by bin (E r
                             ^b  | ). We then have

                                                         M         T
                                ^ | ] =
                             E [w                      ^b
                                                  wb E r   | + E r
                                                                 ^b  |         ,                       (38)
                                          b

where wb is the share of employees in bin b and b wb = 1.
    Similarly, we can also decompose movements in TFPR into the macro and treatment
effects:


                                    M         T                          M                   T
E TFPRb | = Lb                    ^b
                             wb E r   | + E r
                                            ^b  |              + V b E r
                                                                       ^b  |       + V b E r
                                                                                           ^b  |
                         b
                                M         T                          M             T
              = Lb            ^b
                         wb E r   | + E r
                                        ^b  |              + V b E r
                                                                   ^b  | + V b E r
                                                                                 ^b  |
                     b

                        M                                M                 T                          T
              = V b E r
                      ^b  | + Lb                       ^b
                                                  wb E r   |     + V b E r
                                                                         ^b  | + Lb                 ^b
                                                                                               wb E r   |     ,
                                              b                                            b
                                                                                                       (39)

where the first term captures the impact of a policy announcement on TFP that happens
through macro variables, and the second term captures the impact of the tariff through
relative price effects.
3.3   Measuring Welfare, Price, Real Wage, and TFP Effects
The estimation procedures described thus far enable us to measure all of the nominal
variables in the equilibrium, but we still need to address how to identify movements in
consumer prices and therefore real wages and welfare. We start with estimates of the 5-
and 10-year expected inflation rates from Abrahams et al. (2016), which are calculated
based on the differences in yields between nominal bonds and inflation indexed bonds
after making appropriate adjustments for liquidity, inflation risk, and real interest rate
                                                                                   Y
risk. We denote their Y -year estimate of annual expected inflation on day t as   ^t . The
implied change in the price level over Y years is therefore Y times the change in average
                              Y               Y     Y
annual inflation rates, or Y ^t . Similarly, ^t -  ^t -1 is the change in expected annual
                                                                Y   Y
inflation on day t based on the prices of Y -year bonds, and Y ^t -^t -1 is the associated



                                                      16
expected change in the price level over Y years. Therefore, the expected impact of a set
of policy announcements indexed by j on the price level (relative to its expectation the
previous day) is

                             ^ | =
                           E P                  Y  Y
                                                  ^t - Y
                                                      ^t -1
                                                                    w
                                                                   Djt .                  (40)
                                        j   t

The overall expected change in the price level due to the tariff announcements is then the
cumulative change revealed in the data as we sum across all days contained in any event
window.
   As with our estimates of    ^kt , we filter out the impact of economic surprises that are
unrelated to policy by first estimating
                                                     N
                              Y   Y      Y
                           Y ^t -^t -1 =  +                iY ESit +   
                                                                       t,                 (41)
                                                     i=1

and then run the following regression:

                                 ^    
                                  t =  +
                                                         w
                                                        Djt + t,                          (42)
                                                j U C

where  and j    
                  are parameters to be estimated. In this specification,   tells us the
average change in the expected price level Y years in the future during a day in one of
the event windows. Our estimate of the impact of the tariff announcement on all the
trade-war events on expected inflation is therefore

                                       ^ | = N w J  ,
                                     E P                                                  (43)
where N w is the number of days in the window; and J is the number of events.
    In order to compute the change in welfare (equation 7), we also need estimates of the
announcements on tariff revenues. We compute the change in tariff revenue (T R × T R)
due to the trade-war announcements by using the import demand elasticities estimated
in Fajgelbaum et al. (2020) to estimate import quantities (based on Census data) after the
levying of the tariffs and multiplying the implied import levels by the amount of the tariff
increase. We set T R equal to the total tariff revenues collected in 2017, and I equal to total
U.S. value added generated by the private sector as reported in the input-output tables
for the same year. In order to compute the implied tariff revenue generated by the tariffs,
we need to construct the counterfactual change in imports that would arise if the only
change were the tariffs: Importsh = Importsh,17 -  h Importsh,17 , where Importsh,17
is the value of imports in 2017 in the Harmonized Tariff System code h,  = 2.3 is the
elasticity of import demand estimated in Fajgelbaum et al. (2020), and h is the change
in U.S. tariffs. We then set T R = T R-1 h Importsh h .
    In order to compute welfare, we need to also make an adjustment for the fact that we
do not observe the returns of all firms. We do this by noting that the expected change in
welfare due to a policy announcement (E W      ^ | ) can be computed by taking expectations
of equation (7):


                                                17
                    ^ | = wL E [w
                  E W           ^ | ] +
                                                              rf Vf
                                                                       rf | ] +
                                                                    E [^
                                                                                TR        ^ | .
                                                                                   TR - E P                  (44)
                           I                            f       I                I
We next transform this from a firm-level expression to one based on firm-size binned data:
              E W^ | = wL E [w   ^ | ] +
                                           rb Vb
                                                    rb | ] +
                                                 E [^
                                                             TR        ^ | .
                                                                TR - E P              (45)
                          I              b   I                I
In this expression, we need a means of measuring rb Vb /I , which is not reported in BEA
data. Fortunately, we do know the value of total returns to capital in the U.S. economy
(RV U S ) and can compute the median return in each bin from the Compustat data (RV b ).8
We then write the payments to the specific factor in the U.S. as
                                  US     NbU RV b
                               RV b =        U
                                                    RV U S ,                          (46)
                                           Nb RV b
                                                            b

where     NbU   is the number of firms in bin b in the U.S. We then can write the welfare impact
as
                                                                  US
                    ^ | = wL E [w
                  E W           ^ | ] +
                                                            RV b
                                                                    rb | ] +
                                                                 E [^
                                                                             TR        ^ | .
                                                                                TR - E P                     (47)
                           I                           b      I               I
We can also use equations (35) and (38) to rewrite this equation into the welfare changes
due to macro and treatment effects:

                                                                              US
  ^ | = wL
E W                        wb E     ^b
                                    r M
                                        |   +E        ^b
                                                      r T
                                                          |      +
                                                                           RV b
                                                                                     ^b
                                                                                   E r M
                                                                                         | + E r
                                                                                               ^bT
                                                                                                   |   +
                                                                                                           TR
                                                                                                              TR
         I             b                                               b     I                              I
                                                                                         
                  wL                                        US
                                      M               RV    b        M       ^ |
                                                                                         
             =                      ^b
                               wb E r   | +                        ^b
                                                                 E r   | - E P                               (48)
                  I                                     I                                
                           b                      b
                                                                                      
                  wL                                        US
                                      T               RV b     T     TR   
             +                      ^b
                               wb E r   | +                  ^b
                                                           E r   | +    TR ,
                  I                                     I             I   
                           b                  b


where the first term in braces captures the macro effect of the announcement and the
second term captures the treatment effect. In this formula, we group together expected
                                                                      M
movements in returns to the specific factor due to macro factors (E r
                                                                    ^b  | ) with move-
ments in the expected consumer price index (E P ^ | ) because we tend to think that both
of these are driven by macro fundamentals. The second term, therefore, captures losses
                                                                        T
due to some firms' differential exposure to changes in trade costs (E r
                                                                      ^b  | ) as well as the
tariff revenues generated by the import tariffs (T R).
    We can also perform an analogous decomposition of real wages and TFP. If we subtract
the expected price changes from both sides of equation (36) and make the transition to
binned data as in equation (37), we obtain

   8
       We use the median to reduce the influence of outliers in the data.

                                                                 18
             E [w         ^ | =
                ^ | ] - E P                      ^b
                                            wb E r M       ^ |
                                                     | - E P          +                 ^b
                                                                                   wb E r T
                                                                                            | ,     (49)
                                        b                                      b

where the first term is the impact of the tariff announcement on real wages through the
macro factors and the second term is the impact of the tariff announcement on real wages
arising from the treatment effects of protection on importers and firms selling in China.
Lastly, we can neutralize the effect of secular movements in inflation on revenue TFP by
subtracting E P ^ | from the left- and right-hand sides.


                        ^ | = V b E r
E TFPb |  E TFPRb | - E P           ^bM
                                        | + Lb                                          ^b
                                                                                   wb E r M       ^ |
                                                                                            | - E P
                                                                           b

                                                        T                             T
                                              + V b E r
                                                      ^b  | + Lb                    ^b
                                                                               wb E r   |    .      (50)
                                                                       b

In this expression, the first term in parentheses is the macro effect on TFP and the second
term is the treatment effect.

4       Data
4.1     Data Sources and Variable Construction
Our analysis requires data on stock returns, inflationary expectations, exposure to China,
balance sheet items, and event dates. Our stock return data are from the Center for Re-
search in Security Prices (CRSP) provided by Wharton Research Data Services (WRDS),
for every trading day in 2016-2019. When we merge the Compustat data with the CRSP
data for a balanced panel of firms that report stock returns on every trading day, we ob-
tain a sample of 2,859 firms that cover all sectors. We set r
                                                            ^f t to be the log change in the
                   9
firm's stock price.
    A commonly used measure of inflation expectations is the difference in yields on a
Treasury security and a Treasury inflation-protected security, however in addition to in-
flation expectations this measure could contain inflation and liquidity risk. We obtained
our measures of inflationary expectations from Richard Crump, who updated the esti-
mates generated in Abrahams et al. (2016) using a methodology that isolates the inflation
expectations component.
    We also collected data on important macroeconomic or firm specific surprises that co-
incided with our event windows. Our 65 economic surprise variables encompass all ma-
jor price, monetary policy, and macroeconomic data releases used in economic forecasting
and were provided by Daniel Lewis (see the Appendix for details). These variables equal
the difference between a data release and the Bloomberg median of economists' forecast
on the previous day (see Lewis et al. (2019) for methodology). Additionally, for each firm
in our sample, we obtained the dates of its individual announcements that could have

    9
    When a company issues multiple classes of stocks, we combine their returns by taking their weighted
average, weighted by each stock's share of market capitalization within the firm.

                                                  19
influenced its abnormal returns from the Capital IQ Key Developments database.10 To
ensure that our results are not contaminated by these firm announcements, when we esti-
mate equation (29) we exclude the abnormal returns of firms that made an announcement
between one day before the start of an event window and one day after the event window
ended.
    We consider three ways in which firms are exposed to China: importing, exporting,
and foreign sales (either through exporting or subsidiaries). It is important to capture
indirect imports that are ultimately purchased by U.S. firms because many firms do not
import directly from China but instead obtain Chinese inputs through their subsidiaries
or the U.S. subsidiaries of foreign firms. For example, Apple Computer's exposure to
China can arise through direct imports, imports obtained by its subsidiary (Beats Elec-
tronics), or from the purchase of iPhones from the U.S. subsidiary of Foxconn. In order
to identify the supply chains, we use DUNS numbers from Dun & Bradstreet to merge
importers from Datamyne with a list of firms and their subsidiaries from Capital IQ. We
use a firm-name match to link firms, subsidiaries, and their suppliers that are reported
in Datamyne, Compustat, Bloomberg, and FactSet and identify which firms are trading
with China directly or indirectly through their network of suppliers. After matching firms
with identical names in two or more datasets, we manually compared firms with similar
names to identify whether they are matches. We define "China Revenue Share" to be the
share of a firm's revenues in 2018 (either obtained through sales of subsidiaries or ex-
ports) that arise from sales in China as reported in FactSet, and we discuss issues related
to the quality of the FactSet data in the Appendix.
    The Datamyne data used to identify U.S. firms that import from China or export to
China have a number of limitations. First, the product level reported is more aggregated
than that in the Harmonized Tariff System 8-digit level at which U.S. tariffs are set. While
some of the Datamyne data are at the Harmonized System (HS) 6-digit level, much of it
is at the far more aggregated HS2-digit level, making it impossible to know what share of
a firm's trade was affected by tariffs. We therefore opt to use a binary exposure measure.
Our "China Import" dummy is 1 if the firm or its supply network imported from China
in 2017 and zero otherwise. We also construct a "China Export" dummy analogously
for exports. Second, the Datamyne data only cover seaborne trade. The U.S. Census
data reveal that in 2017, 62 percent of all imports from China and 58 percent of exports to
China were conducted by sea. So although we capture over half of the value of U.S.-China
trade, the China import and export dummies are likely to miss some U.S. firms that trade
with China. On the export side, any exporters that are not reflected in the export dummy
are included in the China revenue share variable. To check for missing importers, we
also include a robustness check where we replace the importer dummy with a large firm
dummy equal to 1 for all firms with more than 1000 employees from Compustat.
    These data show that the supply chain information is critical in understanding firms'
exposure to international trade. From Table 1, we see that only 10 percent of the firms
in our sample import directly from China, and only 2 percent export directly to China.

   10
      These announcements include those that relate to buybacks (announcements, cancellations), dividends
(affirmations, increases, decreases), earnings calls, stock splits, mergers and acquisitions (announcements,
cancellations), and follow-on equity offerings.

                                                    20
                        Table 1: China Trade Exposure of Listed U.S. Firms


                                                                                                Mean
         Firm imports from China                                                                 0.10
         Firm or subsidiary imports from China                                                   0.24
         Firm, subsidiary, or supplier imports from China                                        0.29
         Firm exports to China                                                                   0.02
         Firm or subsidiary exports to China                                                     0.04
         Firm sells in China via exports or affiliates                                           0.43
         Average share of revenue from Chinese exports or affiliate sales                        0.04

         Firm exposed to China through imports, exports, or affiliate sales                      0.53
         Number of Firms: 2,859
Note: This table reports the means of indicator variables that are 1 if a firm satisfies the listed criterion, as
well as the mean of the continuous Chinese revenue share variable.


However, if we take subsidiaries into account, these numbers rise to 24 and 4 percent,
respectively. When we add imports by all firms in the supply chain, we see that 29 percent
of all listed firms in the U.S. import directly or indirectly from China. In the last row
of the table, we construct a variable, "Firm Exposed to China" if any firm in the firm's
network exported to or imported from China or if the firm had positive revenues from
China (possibly from affiliate sales). We see that 53 percent of all firms were exposed to
China through one or more of these channels.
    We obtained employment data from a number of sources. The firm-level employment
data for the listed firms in our sample are from Compustat. However, one potential is-
sue with using these data is that the reported employment is for the consolidated firm,
and thus for multinationals it covers employment in the U.S. and in foreign subsidiaries,
whereas our interest is in U.S. employment. We address this issue by supplementing
the Compustat data with employment data from the National Establishment Time Series
(NETS), which provides data on an establishment basis for U.S. firms. We merged the
NETS data with the Compustat data by DUNS number to obtain the domestic firm em-
ployment. Based on this procedure, our sample of Compustat firms employs 29.2 million
workers domestically or 22.7 percent of the number of people employed in the national
employment data provided by the Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB, U.S. Census Bu-
reau). See Appendix for details.
4.2    Trade-War Announcements
Over the course of the the trade war, the U.S. implemented tariffs in waves, which we plot
in Figure 1. The figure shows that the average rate of tariffs on all U.S. imports rose by
approximately 4 percentage points as tariffs on a wide range of Chinese imports reached
25 percent by the end of the period.
    For each of these new tariffs we identified the earliest announcement date in the me-
dia using Factiva and Google search. In addition, we also used the same method to iden-

                                                       21
                          Figure 1: Average U.S. Tariffs in the 2018-2019 Trade War

    Percent
      6.0

              Solar and   Steel and
               Washing        Alum.
              Machines        ($18)
      5.0         ($10)

                                      Steel and
                                          Alum.
                                        Canada,          China 2
      4.0                               Mexico,            ($16)
                                       EU ($22)

                                                                                                              China 4
      3.0                                                                                                      ($112)




                                                                                          Increase on
      2.0                                                                                     China 3
                                                                                               ($200)
                                              China 1          China 3
                                                ($34)           ($200)
      1.0




      0.0
            Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun            Jul   Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun    Jul   Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
                2018                                               Axis Title 2019

Note: Authors' calculations based on data from the U.S. Census Bureau, U.S. Trade Representative (USTR),
and U.S. International Trade Commission. Tariffs on the 10-digit Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HTS) product
code by country, weighted by 2017 annual import value. Dashed vertical lines indicate the implementation
of new tariffs during 2018-2019; tariffs implemented after the 15th of the month are counted in the subse-
quent month. Four tranches of tariffs were imposed on China, designated by 1, 2, 3, and 4. Numbers in
parentheses correspond to the value of imports covered by the new tariffs in billions.


tify the earliest announcement dates for each date that China imposed retaliatory tariffs
on U.S. exports. Our method identifies 11 trade-war announcement dates, comprising
six U.S. tariff events and five China retaliation events, summarized in Table 2. Our first
event is the January 22, 2018 announcement of U.S. tariffs on solar panels and washing
machines that were implemented on February 7, 2018 on China and, in this case, more
broadly on other countries too. The second event date, the announcement of steel and
aluminum tariffs on February 28, 2018, also more broadly applied, was imposed on March
3, 2018. All of the subsequent U.S. tariff events only apply to China. On May 29, 2018 the
U.S. announced a 25 percent tariff on $50 billion of Chinese imports. Although this was
implemented in two tranches on two separate dates ($34 billion on July 7, 2018 and $16
billion on August 23, 2018), we include this as only one event, since what is important for
our purposes is the first time it was announced. All 11 events are listed in Table 2 in date
order, with more details and links to the announcement of each event provided in the Ap-
pendix. Our approach to choosing event dates has the advantage of being comprehensive
and objective.
    The data reveal that there were large and persistent movements in stock prices and
inflationary expectations following these trade-war announcements. Table 2 presents the
stock-market return on each of these event dates. We see that the stock market fell on

                                                                         22
                                  Table 2: Stock Returns on Event Dates
                                    t+1
   Event    Event Date      Rt      t-1 Rt   Description
   Group                   (%)       (%)
    US        22Jan18      0.75      1.56    U.S. imposes tariffs on solar panels and washing machines
    US       28Feb18      -1.07     -3.56    U.S. will impose steel and aluminum tariffs
   CHN       22Mar18      -2.57     -4.77    Trade war escalates as China says it will impose tariffs on 128 U.S. exports
    US       29May18      -1.00      0.10    White House to impose 25% tariff on $50B worth of Chinese goods
   CHN       15Jun18      -0.10      0.08    China announces retaliation against U.S. tariffs on $50B of imports
    US       19Jun18      -0.41     -0.28    U.S. announces imposition of tariffs on $200B of Chinese goods
   CHN       02Aug18       0.59      0.83    China announces tariffs on $60B of U.S. goods
    US       06May19      -0.41     -1.00    U.S. to raise tariffs on $200B of Chinese goods up to 25%
   CHN       13May19      -2.58     -1.34    China to raise tariffs on $60B of U.S. goods starting June 1
    US       01Aug19      -1.00     -2.90    U.S. will impose a 10% tariff on another $300B of Chinese goods
   CHN       23Aug19      -2.64     -1.65    China retaliates with higher tariffs on soy and autos
  US+CHN        all      -10.43    -12.94
Note: This table shows market returns on and around trade-war events. "US" refers to events involving
an announcement of U.S. tariffs on China; "CHN" refers to events involving Chinese retaliatory tariffs. Rt
                                                                                   t+1
is the market return (in our sample of firms) on the day of the announcement. t-1 Rt is the cumulative
market return over a three-day window beginning on the trading day before the announcement and ex-
tending one trading day after. The total three-day return for the U.S. and Chinese events in this table does
not exactly equal the value in subsequent tables because we are presenting raw data in this table and double
count one day that appears in two event windows.


all of the event dates except one U.S. event date and one China event date, with a total
drop of 10.4 percent over all of the events, and 12.9 percent over the three-day windows
(beginning the day before the announcement and extending one day after). These drops
in the market imply substantial drops in expected profitability for U.S. firms--a factor
that Proposition 1 suggests will drive decreases in the expected wage.
    We explore the persistence of these stock-market movements in Figure 2, which plots
the cumulative log change in average stock prices starting six trading days before each
announcement against the number of days before or after each event. The data reveal
that in the five trading days before our events, stock-price movements were quite small.
Indeed, there is little evidence of anything out of the ordinary happening in the mar-
ket before the announcements. However, on the announcement days, just as in Table 2,
we see that there was a large decline of over 10 percent. Moreover, it is also quite striking
how persistent this decline is. Even if we track the market five trading days later (approx-
imately one week of calendar days), we see that the market did not recover. Thus, there
is little evidence that markets overreacted and bounced back from their initial negative
assessment of the trade war on expected returns.
    Finally, we also explore the impact that trade-war announcements have on other
macro variables. We choose three that we think are likely related to trade-policy changes:
changes in the expected price level, changes in exchange rates, and movements in uncer-
tainty (as measured by the VIX). In order to generate the price-change plot, for each day
t, we compute the change in expectation on day t of the price level 10 years in the future:
      ^ 10  10 ×    10
                       -  10
Et P               ^t    ^t -1 , where the definitions of these variables are given in Section
3.3. We then compute the total change (summing across all events) for each day within
a 10-day window around each event. Starting five days before the event, we report the
cumulative change in expected prices in the figure, so the point corresponding to -5 tells

                                                           23
us the expected price change (summing across all events) five days before an event rela-
tive to six days before an event; the point corresponding to -4 tells us the expected price
change four days before an event relative to six days before an event, and so on. We plot
the values in Figure 2 (See the Appendix for details and formulas). We see that in the five
days leading up to each announcement, the expected price level 10 years later was within
about 50 basis points of the level six days before the announcement. However, on the day
of the announcements, the price level fell sharply, falling close to 150 basis points from
the day before. Moreover, there appears to be no recovery in inflationary expectations. If
anything, the data suggest inflationary expectations fell as time went on, indicating that
just as we saw in the stock-price data, the announcements were associated with a sharp
and persistent decline in expected aggregate prices as well.
    The lower two panels in Figure 2 present analogous plots for movements in the trade-
weighted exchange rate and the VIX. The exchange rate index is measured in foreign
currency per dollar, so higher values correspond to dollar appreciation. As conventional
theory would predict, tariff announcements were associated with a 3.3 percent apprecia-
tion of the dollar. These trade announcements also caused a 115% increase in the value of
VIX (see Appendix for regression results), consistent with a rise in uncertainty. There is
also no evidence of speedy mean reversion as these changes persisted for at least 5 trad-
ing days after the events. Thus, tariff announcements had significant impacts on a variety
of macro variables related to prices and uncertainty.

5     Results
In this section, we first present the results from estimating our factor model and event
study. We then present our estimates of how these trade events affected wages and wel-
fare.
5.1   Event Study Results
Using daily stock returns for all trading days between January 1, 2016, and December
31, 2019, we first estimate the number of general latent variables (K ) and the resulting
factor model in equation (28). We use the procedure recommended in Bai and Ng (2008)
to choose the number of latent variables to minimize the following loss function when
errors may be cross-sectionally correlated:

                                              F +T
                    IC (K ) = ln(L(K )) + K            ln(min {F, T }),                (51)
                                               FT
where F is the number of firms; L (K ) is the log likelihood function based on the estima-
tion of equation (28); and T is the number of days. Each additional latent variable (kt )
adds 2,859 kf parameters (one for each firm). Based on this loss function, we use four
latent variables in our baseline.




                                            24
                        Figure 2: Impact of Trade-War Announcements




Note: Each chart shows the cumulative log change in average stock prices starting 6 trading days before
each announcement. Details on this procedure including the actual formulas used are provided in the text
and appendix. The exchange rate index is the Federal Reserve's Trade Weighted U.S. Dollar Index: Broad,
Goods and Services). The exchange rate index is measured in foreign currency per dollar, so higher values
correspond to dollar appreciation. Both the VIX and exchange-rate data were downloaded from FRED.

    As expected, each of these latent macro variables exhibits economically and statisti-
cally significant correlations with macro variables like exchange rate movements, changes
in expected inflation, and the VIX (see Appendix for details). This result is consistent with
our hypothesis that the forces that move our latent macro variables also move variables
that are often central to macro models. While it is not possible to precisely link each latent
variable with a particular measurable variable, as we show in Appendix A.8, the correla-
tion between the first factor and the overall market return is 0.84, so it likely captures the
sensitivity of firms to the forces that move the overall market (i.e., the forces that would
be captured by the CAPM). The other factors also exhibit significant correlations with
the macro variables portrayed in Figure 2, which is consistent with the notion that the
latent variables are capturing the heterogeneous effects that macro variables can have on
firms. The first latent variable accounts for 11.1 percent of the firm-level variance, but ad-
ditional factors account for much less, with the next three factors accounting for 1.7, 1.5,

                                                   25
and 0.9 percent of the variance, respectively. Thus, macro variables explain 15.2 percent
of the variation in firm returns over the sample period, and any single potentially omitted
macro factor can explain no more than 0.9 percent of the variance.

                    Figure 3: Dispersion in Returns (Three-Day Windows)

                            U.S. Tariff Events                                     Chinese Tariff Events
        .06




                                                                     .06
        .04




                                                                     .04
        .02




                                                                     .02
        0




                                                                     0



              -40   -20               0              20    40              -40   -20               0              20    40
                          Cumulative Abnormal Return                                   Cumulative Abnormal Return

                          Untreated              Treated                               Untreated              Treated



Note: This figure plots the kernel densities of cumulative abnormal returns of firms exposed to China (red)
and unexposed (black) during three-day windows around trade-war announcements. Exposed firms are
firms that export to, import from, or have positive revenues in China.

    Turning to the treatment effects, Figure 3 shows how the tariff announcements affected
the relative price component of firm returns depending on whether they were exposed or
unexposed (as defined in Table 1). We plot the kernel densities of the cumulative abnor-
mal returns given by the error terms in equation (28) using a three-day window around
each event j ( f j  100 × j   +1
                             t=j -1 f t ) for treated and untreated firms. We define the set of
treated firms to include firms that import from, export to, or have some positive revenues
in China. We see that the distribution of abnormal returns for firms exposed to China dur-
ing U.S. tariff announcement events is to the left of firms that were not directly exposed.
Similarly, we see that announcements of Chinese tariff retaliation produce a similar pat-
tern, with the distribution of abnormal returns for exposed firms lying to the left of the
distribution for unexposed firms. These patterns suggest that tariff announcements tend
to reduce the abnormal returns of treated firms relatively more.
    We identify the relative effects of tariffs on the abnormal returns of exposed firms by
estimating equation (28) using a three-day event window (N w = 3), where we regress the
abnormal return (multiplied by 100) on the firm exposure variables across all 11 events,
allowing separate coefficients for each firm type in each event. Table 3 presents the re-
sults for each of the six U.S. tariff events and Table 4 presents the estimated coefficients
from the same regression for the five Chinese tariff retaliation events. The estimated co-
efficients under each event date correspond to the      ^ij in equation (29), and we report the
average value of these estimated coefficients across all U.S. events and all China events

                                                                26
in the first column of each table. Thus, columns 2-7 of both tables are estimated jointly.
The coefficients should be interpreted as the average daily effect of the announcement on
the returns of exposed firms during the event window relative to unexposed firms. For
example, the coefficient of -0.18 on the China importer dummy in column 3 of Table 3
implies that during the three-day event window around the February 28, 2018 steel and
aluminum announcement, firms that imported from China experienced declines in their
abnormal returns that were on average 0.18 percentage points lower than other firms ev-
ery day within the three-day event window. Thus, their cumulative relative decline in stock
prices was -0.54 (= 3 × 0.18) percentage points. The numbers in column 1 provide our
estimate of the cumulative impact over all U.S. events and all days in the event windows
(3 j  ^ij ). For example, we can see from the first column of this table that the cumula-
tive impact of the U.S. announcements was to lower the returns of U.S. importers by 1.72
percentage points relative to firms that did not import from China. Similarly, the relative
returns of exporters was 2.46 percentage points lower than those of non-exporters, and
firm's selling in China saw their returns fall by 0.113 percentage point for every percent-
age point of revenue they obtained from China. The coefficient on China Revenue Share
implies that a firm with the average sales exposure to China corresponding to 4 percent
of revenue experienced an abnormal return of -0.4 percentage point across all of the U.S.
events.
               Table 3: Impact of U.S. Tariff Announcements on Stock Returns

                                    (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)     (7)
                             Cumulative 22Jan18 28Feb18 29May18 19Jun18 06May19 01Aug19
   China Importer               -1.72         -0.00     -0.18      -0.02      -0.10      -0.12    -0.14
                                  (0.56)     (0.07)      (0.07)   (0.06)     (0.07)      (0.07)  (0.09)
   China Exporter                -2.46         0.02       0.03   -0.23      -0.53         -0.11   -0.01
                                  (1.05)     (0.10)      (0.10)   (0.09)     (0.11)      (0.12)  (0.18)
   China Revenue Share         -11.32       -1.10         -0.20    -0.22    -0.69       -1.12    -0.44
                                  (1.84)     (0.22)      (0.22)   (0.28)     (0.24)      (0.24)  (0.26)
Note: This table presents the estimated coefficients on the U.S. events obtained from estimating equation
(29); the estimated coefficients for the Chinese events are presented in Table 4. Day fixed effects are not
reported. The dependent variable (^f t × 100) is the abnormal return obtained from estimating equation
(28) with four factors multiplied by 100. China Importer is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm or any of
its subsidiaries or suppliers import from China. China Exporter is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm or
its subsidiaries export to China. China Revenue Share is the share of the firm's revenue that comes from
sales in China reported in percentage points. Column 1 presents the cumulative of the coefficients on each
of the U.S. event days. Standard errors are in parentheses. Asterisks correspond to the following levels of
significance: *** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.1. The number of observations is 80,674.


    Table 3 suggests that in general U.S. tariff announcements had negative and significant
impacts on the abnormal returns of importers, exporters, and firms selling in China more
broadly. Although the effects are not precisely measured for every event and measure of
exposure, 13 of the 15 event-day coefficients are negative, which indicates that typically
firms exposed to China had negative abnormal returns relative to unexposed firms fol-
lowing U.S. tariff announcements. When we sum across all events, the cumulative effect
is negative and significant for each type of exposure. Interestingly, U.S. tariff announce-
ments caused negative abnormal returns not only for importing firms but also for firms

                                                    27
exporting or selling in China more generally. These negative coefficients on the exporter
or sales variables are likely due to four (not mutually exclusive) reasons. The first is that
higher U.S. tariffs cause exchange rate appreciation, which will reduce the profitability
of U.S. exporters and multinationals, as predicted by theory and we showed in Figure 2.
Second, exporters may have anticipated that U.S. tariffs would provoke Chinese retalia-
tory tariffs, thereby lowering the abnormal return of exporters. Third, market participants
may have anticipated that U.S. tariffs would also provoke Chinese retaliatory non-tariff
barriers that could lower revenues obtained either by exporting or multinational sales.
Fourth, it is also possible that U.S. tariffs weakened the Chinese economy, which could
lower expected profits for U.S. firms selling there.

             Table 4: Impact of Chinese Tariff Announcements on Stock Returns

                                   (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)
                              Cumulative       22Mar18      15Jun18     02Aug18      13May19      23Aug19
  China Importer                 -0.54            0.09          0.00       0.00        -0.16       -0.11
                                 (0.44)          (0.05)       (0.06)      (0.08)        (0.07)      (0.06)
  China Exporter                -1.60             0.02         -0.08      -0.23          -0.10     -0.15
                                 (0.70)          (0.09)       (0.07)      (0.13)        (0.09)      (0.08)
  China Revenue Share          -11.54           -0.69        -0.59       -1.12        -1.12          -0.33
                                 (1.91)          (0.23)       (0.25)      (0.30)        (0.22)      (0.42)
Note: This table presents the estimated coefficients on the Chinese events obtained from estimating equa-
tion (29); the estimated coefficients for the U.S. events are presented in Table 3. See the notes to Table 3 for
variable definitions and details.

    Turning to the Chinese announcements, column 1 of Table 4 shows that in general
Chinese retaliation did not have a significant impact on the abnormal returns of firms
importing from China, consistent with the idea that while U.S. tariff announcements pro-
voked Chinese retaliation, Chinese retaliation did not provoke new U.S. tariffs. However,
Chinese retaliation did produce negative returns for firms exporting to China on five out
of the six events and for firms selling in China on all six occasions, though these results
are not always statistically significant. Overall, Chinese retaliation announcements led
to a 1.6 percentage point drop in the abnormal returns of firms exporting to China and
another 0.115 percentage point drop for every percentage point increase in a firm's sales
in China. The results are economically significant as well. Since Bernard et al. (2007)
found that 79 percent of U.S. importers also export, it is worth considering the impact of
the trade war on a firm exposed to China through multiple dimensions. We estimate that
a firm that imported from and exported to China and obtained 4 percent of its revenue
from sales to China would have had an abnormal return that amounted to -7.2 percent
when we sum across all event days. The large magnitude of this result suggests that the
trade war had a sizable economic impact on exposed firms.
    We present a number of robustness tests in Table 5. Each of these specifications is
based on estimating equation (29) using a different set of controls. However, in order to
save space, we only report the cumulative results, so the columns in Table 5 are compara-
ble with the first columns of Tables 3 and 4. Our coverage of firms selling in China is likely
to be comprehensive because we can identify them either through the export dummy or

                                                      28
                                      Table 5: Robustness Tests

                           (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)       (8)
  China Importer                               -1.42     -1.15      -0.11    0.01    -3.05     -1.04
                                                (0.57)    (0.29)   (0.25)   (1.24)    (0.59)    (0.47)
  Large Company           -1.97        -0.39
                           (0.52)     (0.44)
  China Exporter          -2.62      -1.76     -2.50     -0.93     -0.67     0.23    -3.37       -1.87
                           (1.01)     (0.67)    (1.06)  (0.67)    (0.41)    (1.71)    (1.09)      (0.78)
  China Revenue Share    -11.29     -11.55   -10.07 -6.63 -5.65              0.73   -14.11 -12.31
                           (1.84)     (1.91)    (1.91)  (1.09)    (0.81)    (5.64)    (2.00)      (1.88)
  Industry Protected                             -0.36
                                                (1.28)
  N                        80,674    80,674    80,674   29,356    29,356    82,080    80,674     80,674
  Event                     U.S.     China       U.S.    U.S.     China Placebo        U.S.      China
  Window Size                 3         3          3       1         1         3         3          3
  Model                   4-factor 4-factor 4-factor 4-factor 4-factor 4-factor CAPM            CAPM
Note: This table presents the results from estimating equation (29) for all U.S.-China tariff events. The
dependent variable (^f t × 100) is the abnormal return obtained from estimating equation (28) with four
factors multiplied by 100 in columns 1-6, and we use the analogous abnormal return from the CAPM in
the last two columns. Large Company dummy equals 1 if a firm had more than 1000 employees in 2017.
China Importer is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm or any of its subsidiaries or suppliers import from
China. China Exporter is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm or its subsidiaries export to China. China
Revenue Share is the share of the firm's revenue that comes from sales in China reported in percentage
points. Industry Protected is a dummy that equals 1 if a U.S. tariff was announced in the firm's 6-digit
NAICS industry. Standard errors are in parentheses. The point estimates are the estimated cumulative
impact on all event days.


the China revenue share variable. However, since we can only identify importers if they
import goods by sea, our import variable is measured with error and potentially misses
some firms that import by air. Bernard et al. (2007) have documented that importers are
likely to be large firms. This is also true in our data where we find that 82 percent of im-
porters have a thousand or more employees. In columns 1 and 2, we replace our import
dummy with a dummy that is 1 for firms with a thousand or more employees.11 We find
qualitatively similar results, with the coefficient on the large dummy for the U.S. events
being negative and significant as in column 1 of Table 3, and smaller and insignificant for
the China events as in column 1 of Table 4.
    Next, we explore whether import tariffs provide protection to firms in that industry
by including a dummy equal to 1 if there was an announcement that a new tariff would
be levied on imports in that NAICS 6-digit industry level, which would lead to positive
abnormal returns for import-competing firms in those sectors. The insignificant negative
coefficient in column 3 suggests that this is not the case. This finding can be understood
by recalling the result of Amiti et al. (2019) showing that U.S. protection drove up do-
mestic output and input prices in treated sectors relative to untreated ones. In particular,
ERP could fall if the impact of the tariff on a firm's output price is less than the impact of
other tariffs on the pricing of the firm's domestic intermediate input suppliers. Appendix

   11
     We cannot obtain significant results with both import and large dummies because they are very highly
correlated.

                                                    29
Table A.8, which reports the individual event date coefficients on the Industry Protected
variable, highlights this mechanism in our data. It shows that while the only large, mul-
tilateral application of tariffs--the steel and aluminum tariffs--did cause the abnormal
returns of steel and aluminum producers to rise significantly, U.S. tariffs did not help
protected industries when they were only applied bilaterally against China. Thus, a natural
interpretation of this result is that purely bilateral tariffs levied on China raised the prices
of Chinese intermediate inputs but failed to afford firms with protection because they still
faced competition in their output markets from other foreign suppliers.
    Another potential challenge to our identification strategy arises from the possibility
that there may be omitted variables that are affecting firms trading with China during
our event windows. For example, while three-day windows allow us to take account of
possible information leaks the day before the event or related clarifications after the event,
they may also allow for confounding information releases around event days. While we
try to control for this by sweeping out movements in latent variables due to economic
surprises, it remains possible that we inadvertently missed some other announcements.
We deal with this challenge to identification in two ways. First, in columns 4 and 5 of
Table 5, we shorten our event windows to one day, so we only consider stock-price move-
ments on the day of the announcement. The results are, if anything, stronger than what
we observed using three-day windows. Second, it is also possible that our results are just
due to bad luck--perhaps, we just happened to pick days on which other, non-trade-war
related announcements caused the returns of firms exposed to China to fall abnormally.
We test the plausibility of this idea by running a placebo test in which we randomly se-
lect 11 events out of all trading dates in 2016 to 2019 (excluding our event dates) and
re-estimate our event study for each of these randomly chosen events. We repeated this
exercise 1,000 times and report the mean coefficients with their associated standard errors
in column 6 of Table 5. We find that all coefficients are insignificantly different from zero,
which provides another way of rejecting the possibility that our results are just due to
chance. Third, it also might be the case that stock prices bounced back after their initial
drops, so in the Appendix we also present results using five-day windows to show that
we obtain similar results with longer windows.
    Finally, we also explore the role played by the factor model in the last two columns
of Table 5. The CAPM setup is commonly used in event studies, but we eschewed its
use because we did not want to constrain the way that macro factors affect stock prices.
Nevertheless, we can see the role played by our factor model by replacing it with a CAPM
framework in which abnormal returns used in the event study are computed based on the
CAPM setup. We present these results in columns 7 and 8. The results indicate that using
a CAPM setup leads to larger relative effects of trade-war announcements on exposure
variables. This finding is consistent with Corden (1966)'s idea that tariff announcements
affect macro variables in ways other than through their impact on average market returns.
Thus, by including a richer set of macro controls, we tend to obtain smaller estimates of
the trade war's effect on treated firms relative to untreated firms.
5.2   Tariffs and the Price Level
The results presented thus far concern the impact of the trade war on stock prices.
Changes in inflationary expectations could move stock returns without having any im-

                                              30
pact on real returns. For example, if all final goods prices rose on a day, equation (5)
implies that it would also be an equilibrium if all factor and import prices rose by the
same amount. Thus, the absolute movement in stock returns for firms need not tell us
about real wage changes. In order to pin down the impact of the tariff announcements
on real wages, we need to identify the impact of the announcements on aggregate prices.
We do so by estimating equation (42) and then using equation (43) to estimate the impact
of the announcements on price level.

            Table 6: Impact of Trade-War Announcement on Inflation Expectations

                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)
                                                         5-year     5-year    10-year      10-year
      Event Dummy                                        -0.029    -0.076     -0.038      -0.092
                                                         (0.015)    (0.021)    (0.018)     (0.025)
      Event Dummy × China Event Dummy                              0.092                   0.105
                                                                    (0.030)                (0.035)
      N                                                   989         989        989         989
Note: The dependent variable is the change in inflation expectations 5 years out in columns 1 and 2, and 10
years out in columns 3 and 4. The coefficients reflect the average effect across all event days.

    We report the results of our estimates of the trade war's effect on the expected future
price level in Table 6. The estimates indicate that during each day in an announcement
window, trade-war announcements were associated with a 0.029 percentage point drop
in the expected price level five years later and a 0.038 percentage point drop ten years
later. Given that we have 11 events spanning three days each, our results imply that
the trade war lowered inflationary expectations so that prices were expected to be 0.96
percentage point lower 5 years later (= 33 × -0.029) and 1.3 percentage points lower 10
years later. In columns 2 and 4, we investigate whether it is U.S. or Chinese events that
led to the decline in the expected U.S. inflation by interacting the event dummy with a
dummy that is 1 if the announcement originated in China. We see that virtually all of
the deflationary impact of tariffs comes from U.S. announcements, with Chinese events
having no impact on expected U.S. inflation. These results are consistent with the work
of Comin and Johnson (2020) who argue that U.S. trade liberalization is inflationary.
5.3       Productivity, Wage, and Welfare Effects
We can use the estimates we obtained in the last two sections to compute the macro and
treatment effects on stock returns. We use equations (29) and (33) to compute the expected
impacts of the tariffs on firm returns operating through the macro and treatment effects,
and then follow the procedure described in the data section to compute the expected re-
turns of firms in each bin. Figure 4 plots the distribution of expected returns (E [^ rb | ]) due
                           M                                                                 T
to the macro effect (E r  ^b | ), and expected returns due to the treatment effect (E r    ^b  | )
by bin. The market-capitalization weighted average of the macro effect on stock prices
            M                                                                  T
( f wf E r ^f | ), is -9.2 percent and that of the treatment effect ( f wf E r
                                                                             ^f  | ) is -2.7 per-
cent, so the total decline in the market that we attribute to the trade war ( f wf E [^  rf | ]) is
11.9 percent. This is very close to the actual decline of 12.9 percent that we saw in Table 2 ,

                                                    31
which indicates that idiosyncratic firm-level shocks (f t ) do not matter much in aggregate
on these days.
     The figure also reveals that there were important differences in the impact of the trade-
war on firms of different size and by sector. As expected, the treatment effect is biggest for
firms producing goods and for firms employing a large number of workers. This reflects
the fact that large firms selling goods are more likely to be buying from or selling in
China. Interestingly, we observe a similar firm-size gradient for the macro effect, but we
do not observe much of a difference between the macro effects of the announcements on
producers of goods versus services for firms in a given size bin. This result is consistent
with the idea that large firms are more likely to be globally engaged, so general trade
policy uncertainty surrounding the world trading system is more likely to affect them.
The most striking feature in this figure is the relative magnitude and pervasiveness of
the macro effect. Consistent with the idea that the trade war created substantial policy
uncertainty that hurt firms regardless of their exposure to China, we see that all categories
of firms had substantial negative returns.

                                                                  Figure 4: Expected Return Due to Tariff by Firm Employment
        0
        -16 -15 -14 -13 -12 -11 -10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1


                                                                       10 100
                                                                       15 149
                                                                       20 199
                                                                       30 299
                                                                       40 399
                                                                       50 499

                                                                   1, 50 9
                                                                   1, 0-1 9
                                                                   2, -1 9
                                                                   2, -2 9
                                                                   5, -4 9
                                                                 10 000 999

                                                                        -1 99
                                                                       20 999

                                                                                +


                                                                                                       10 100
                                                                                                       15 149
                                                                                                       20 199
                                                                                                       30 299
                                                                                                       40 399
                                                                                                       50 499

                                                                                                   1, 50 9
                                                                                                   1, 0-1 9
                                                                                                   2, 1 9
                                                                                                   2, 0-2 9
                                                                                                   5, 0-4 9
                                                                                                 10 000 999

                                                                                                        -1 99
                                                                                                       20 999

                                                                                                                 +
                                                                       7 74
                                                                              9
                                                                              9
                                                                              9
                                                                              9




                                                                                                       7 74
                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                               9
                                                                             00




                                                                                                              00
                                                                     00 -9
                                                                     50 ,4
                                                                     00 ,9
                                                                     50 ,4


                                                                     00 ,9




                                                                                                     00 -9
                                                                                                     50 ,4
                                                                                                     00 ,9
                                                                                                     50 ,4


                                                                                                     00 ,9
                                                                           <
                                                                          0-
                                                                          0-
                                                                          0-
                                                                          0-
                                                                          0-
                                                                          0-




                                                                            ,


                                                                          9,




                                                                                                            <
                                                                                                           0-
                                                                                                           0-
                                                                                                           0-
                                                                                                           0-
                                                                                                           0-
                                                                                                           0-




                                                                                                             ,


                                                                                                            9,
                                                                          ,0




                                                                                                           ,0
                                                                   ,0 -9




                                                                                                   ,0 -9
                                                                                                          -
                                                                        0
                                                                        0
                                                                        0




                                                                                                        0




                                                                            Goods                            Services
                                                                                  Treatment Effect         Macro Effect


Note: The blue bars correspond to the predicted treatment effects in equation (34) with estimated coeffi-
cients from Tables 3 and 4, and the red bars correspond to the predicted macro effect from (33). Both are
in percent. These are reported at the sector/firm employment bin level. The weights are adjusted to reflect
the economy-wide distribution, with data on employment distribution by sector-size from the U.S. Census
Bureau. Goods sectors are defined as all 2-digit NAICS industries 11, 21-23, and 31-33.

    One concern with our estimate of the macro effect is that we may be capturing both

                                                                                               32
the effect of the trade-war announcements and some other announcement that coincided
with these days. As we explained in the discussion of equation (32), we have already
purged the estimates of the effect of any standard data release on stock prices. However,
one still may wonder how likely it is that we would have identified a macro effect of this
magnitude if we had just randomly picked 11 days between 2016 and 2019. In order to
estimate this, we removed each event day from our sample along with the two prior and
two subsequent days to create a sample of potential placebo event days in which no trade-
war announcement occurred. We then randomly selected 11 placebo event days and their
associated event windows, computed the macro effect, and repeated this procedure 1,000
times. We find that in contrast to the 9.2 percent decline in the market due to the macro
effect that we estimate for the trade-war announcements, the average macro effect for the
placebo event days was a 0.6 percent increase in stock prices. Moreover, out of the 1,000
placebo trials, less than 2 percent of the draws produced a macro effect of -9.2 percent or
less. Thus, we can reject the hypothesis that the macro effect that we identify could have
arisen by chance at conventional levels of significance.
    In order to explore the underlying channels driving these large negative effects, we
check whether greater protection lowers expected future firm TFP, which is our coun-
terpart to the productivity results in the micro literature and an important channel in
dynamic models such as Perla et al. (2021). We use equation (23) to compute the move-
ment in expected revenue TFP implied by the raw stock price movements during the
event windows. If we regress these movements in firm-level expected TFP directly on
our China exposure variables, we can interpret the coefficients as an estimate of how ex-
posure to the trade war affected the market's expectation of the change in revenue TFP.
Thus, we can see whether we observe the same links between protection and expected
TFP that past studies have identified using primal TFP.

                    Table 7: Impact of U.S. Tariff Announcements on TFPR

                                (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)         (7)
                           Cumulative 22Jan18 28Feb18 29May18 19Jun18 06May19 01Aug19
   China Importer            -0.52        -0.01     -0.04       0.01        -0.05      -0.06       -0.02
                              (0.04)       (0.00)    (0.01)      (0.00)      (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.01)
   China Exporter            -0.96         -0.01      -0.02     -0.08       -0.16      -0.04         -0.00
                              (0.13)       (0.01)    (0.02)      (0.01)      (0.02)     (0.01)      (0.02)
   China Revenue Share       -4.64       -0.30 -0.21              0.02      -0.34      -0.51      -0.21
                              (0.45)       (0.03)    (0.05)      (0.01)      (0.03)     (0.05)      (0.04)
Note: The dependent variable is calculated as in equation (23). This table presents the average coefficient on
each of the event days obtained from regressing TFPR as calculated in Proposition 3 on variables measuring
exposure to the trade war. China Importer is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm or any of its subsidiaries or
suppliers import from China. China Exporter is a dummy that equals 1 if the firm or its subsidiaries export
to China. China Revenue Share is the share of the firm's revenue that comes from sales in China. Standard
errors are in parentheses. The number of observations is 58,076.

    In Tables 7 and 8, we show that TFP is even more sensitive to trade-war announce-
ments than abnormal returns. As before, we continue to observe that protection has a
statistically significant effect overall, but now we identify significant impacts of protec-
tion on expected TFP (as opposed to abnormal returns) on virtually all event days. For

                                                     33
                  Table 8: Impact of Chinese Tariff Announcements on TFPR

                                   (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
                              Cumulative       22Mar18      15Jun18   02Aug18    13May19     23Aug19
  China Importer                -0.15             -0.01      0.01       0.02      -0.04       -0.04
                                 (0.05)          (0.01)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.01)
  China Exporter                -0.61             0.01      -0.04      -0.07       -0.02      -0.07
                                 (0.11)          (0.02)      (0.00)     (0.00)      (0.01)     (0.01)
  China Revenue Share           -4.44           -0.40       -0.13      -0.29      -0.46       -0.21
                                 (0.41)          (0.06)      (0.02)     (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.03)
See the note to Table 7 for variable definitions and details.


example, while our import exposure variable was generally not a significant driver of ab-
normal returns following five out of six tariff announcements (see Table 7), we see that
these announcements led to significant declines in expected TFP of exposed firms in all
but one case of U.S. protection. Similarly, Chinese retaliation announcements caused the
expected TFP of U.S. exporters to fall significantly in four out of five cases and always
had a significant negative impact on the expected TFP of firms selling in China. In order
to give some sense of the economic magnitudes of these effects, we again consider the cu-
mulative impact of these announcements on a firm that both imported from and exported
to China and had revenue of 4 percent coming from China (equal to the average). Such a
firm would have experienced a 2.6 percentage point drop in its expected TFP.
    We can also use the observed movements in stock prices to infer the impact that the
tariff announcements had on expected aggregate U.S. TFP based on equation (50). Figure
5 shows our estimates of the impact of the tariff announcements on the TFP of firms by
firm size. We find that the negative effects of trade-war announcements on expected TFP
are rising with firm size until firms achieve a size of around 400 employees and then the
impact of announcements on expected firm productivity levels off at around -10 percent.
The main driver of this estimate is the 11.9 stock market decline caused by the trade war
announcements, which amounted to a $3.3 trillion loss of firm value (equivalent to 16
percent of U.S. GDP in 2019). Seen through the lens of the specific factors model, the 12.9
percentage point decline in stock prices we observed was caused by a 9.5 percent decline
in expected TFP. Firms employing fewer than a hundred workers experienced expected
TFP declines that were typically 3 percentage points less than the declines for large firms.
The model suggests that there are two complementary reasons why tariff announcements
lowered the expected TFP of large firms by more. First, large manufacturers of goods
are more dependent on trade, so the treatment effect rises in magnitude with firm size.
Second, the macro effects--although similar for goods and services firms--also rise in
magnitude with firm size. This second story is consistent with the finding in Figure 4
that macro factors drove the share prices of large, global, firms down by relatively more
following trade-war announcements.
                                         M               T
    We can use these estimates of E r   ^b | and E r    ^b | to compute the impact of the
trade war on expected real wages by using equation (49). We find that the trade war
is expected to lower U.S. wages by 9.2 percent. These numbers are not out of line with



                                                      34
                  Figure 5: Expected TFP Due to Tariff by Firm Employment

         0
         -1
         -2
         -3
         -4
         -5
         -6
         -7
         -8
         -9
         -10
         -11


                     10 100
                     15 149
                     20 199
                     30 299
                     40 399
                     50 499

                 1, 50 9
                 1, 0-1 9
                 2, -1 9
                 2, -2 9
                 5, -4 9
               10 000 999

                      -1 99
                     20 999

                              +


                                                               10 100
                                                               15 149
                                                               20 199
                                                               30 299
                                                               40 399
                                                               50 499

                                                           1, 50 9
                                                           1, 0-1 9
                                                           2, 1 9
                                                           2, 0-2 9
                                                           5, 0-4 9
                                                         10 000 999

                                                                -1 99
                                                               20 999

                                                                         +
                     7 74
                            9
                            9
                            9
                            9




                                                               7 74
                                                                       9
                                                                       9
                                                                       9
                                                                       9
                           00




                                                                      00
                   00 -9
                   50 ,4
                   00 ,9
                   50 ,4


                   00 ,9




                                                             00 -9
                                                             50 ,4
                                                             00 ,9
                                                             50 ,4


                                                             00 ,9
                         <
                        0-
                        0-
                        0-
                        0-
                        0-
                        0-




                          ,


                        9,




                                                                    <
                                                                   0-
                                                                   0-
                                                                   0-
                                                                   0-
                                                                   0-
                                                                   0-




                                                                     ,


                                                                    9,
                        ,0




                                                                   ,0
                 ,0 -9




                                                           ,0 -9
                                                                  -
                      0
                      0
                      0




                                                                0
                               Goods                                       Services
                                       Treatment Effect                  Macro Effect


Note: This plot shows estimates of revenue TFP (net of aggregate price movements) calculated according
to equation (50) by firm size-sector bin. Both are reported in percent.


estimates obtained from other large movements in trade barriers.12 This economically
significant decline arises from two channels. First, the adverse impacts of the trade war on
productivity operating through the macro and treatment channels are expected to depress
nominal wages by 10.5 percentage points relative to a benchmark without the trade war.
However, this downward pressure on factor prices is also associated with an expected
drop in the U.S. price level over a 10-year horizon as we saw in Table 6, and this offsets
1.3 percentage points of the decline.
    We report the welfare implications of the trade war in Table 9. Using equation (48), we
find that expected U.S. welfare fell by 7.8 percentage points as a result of the trade war.
The macro effect accounts for about 7.2 percentage points of this drop, with the remaining
0.6 percent welfare loss due to the treatment effect. Taken together, these results imply

   12
      Given the stickiness of nominal wages, it might seem implausible that the trade war could reduce real
wages by this amount. However, it is important to remember that this should be thought of as a long-run
effect. For example, our estimates of the impact of the tariff announcements on the price level are based
on data that allow for the impact to have up to 10 years to have an effect, thus the effects in any given
year can still be small. Moreover, our point estimates are in line with estimates of the long-run impact of
tariffs obtained in other studies. Kovak (2013) and Dix-Carneiro and Kovak (2017) estimate the impact of a
Brazilian tariff liberalization on earnings and find that although there is little effect immediately afterwards,
the impact is comparable in magnitude to our estimates 10 years later.

                                                       35
                          Table 9: Welfare and Real Wage Effect

                                                      Welfare
 Description                                                              TFP    Real Wage
                                             Total   Macro   Treatment
 Size-Sector bins                            -7.8     -7.2       -0.6     -9.5      -9.2
 Bins based on size only                     -7.7     -6.9       -0.8     -9.6      -9.5
 Trade war has no impact on small firms      -5.0     -4.6       -0.4     -8.2      -7.8
 Trade war only matters for listed firms     -3.9     -3.6       -0.2     -4.7      -1.6


that the 7.8 percentage point decline in welfare arises mainly because the trade-war an-
nouncements induce adverse macro forces that serve to depress wages and firm returns.
At first glance, our estimates may seem high compared to conventional measures, but in
actuality the differences can largely be attributed to our ability to account for channels
that are not typically included. For example, only 0.6 percentage points of the 7.8 per-
centage point decline in expected welfare is due to the treatment effect: the losses arising
because some firms faced protection and others did not. This estimate is close to that of
Amiti et al. (2019), who used a standard trade model and found that the welfare loss due
the trade war was $79.1 billion, or 0.4 percent of GDP.
    Nevertheless, we explore a number of alternative specifications to see how different
assumptions affect our results. In order to see how allowing for sectoral heterogeneity af-
fects our results, we only use size bins to compute the welfare results instead of size-sector
bins and report the results in the second row of Table 9. These results are qualitatively
quite similar to our main specification. One of the biggest problems of using the Compu-
stat data to approximate returns in the U.S. economy is that small firms in the Compustat
data are likely to have significantly higher profitability than small firms in the U.S. econ-
omy. In order to ensure that these differences are not driving our results, we reran our
welfare analysis imposing the assumption that the trade war's impact on the returns for
firms employing fewer than 100 workers is zero. We report these results in the third row
of the table. Not surprisingly, this restriction does lead to a smaller estimate of the impact
of the trade war on U.S. welfare, but we still arrive at the conclusion that the trade war
lowered U.S. welfare by 5 percentage points. In the last row of the table, we consider
a conservative assumption: the trade war only affected listed firms. We implement this
approach by recomputing the estimated return in each cell after imposing the restriction
that the average return for U.S. firms in the cell that were not listed always equals zero.
We still find that the trade war drove down U.S. welfare by 3.9 percent, which is about
half of our baseline estimate. The reason we obtain large effects even when we assume
that virtually all firms were unaffected by the trade war is that listed firms constitute 22.7
percent of U.S. employment. As a result, when the expected profitability of listed firms
declines sharply, as happened during the trade war, this has significant implications for
the expected welfare of Americans.




                                             36
5.4   Calibrating the Welfare Gain
In this section, we examine the plausibility of our estimates by viewing the stock price
movements through the lens of a different model: Perla et al. (2021). Their model places
much more structure on how trade costs affect firms, but it is a useful point of compari-
son because it can easily be rewritten in a form that allows a researcher who knows how a
trade policy affected stock prices to compute the impact on growth and welfare (see Ap-
pendix (A.12) for details). In their setup, the free-trade equilibrium is inefficient because
firms do not internalize productivity spillovers and therefore underinvest in new tech-
nology. Protection exacerbates this inefficiency by protecting small, inefficient firms and
reducing their incentive to innovate. The reduction in (future) technological spillovers
reduces firms' incentives to innovate, and productivity slows due to a "macro" effect
common to all firms. An attractive feature of the Perla et al. (2021) model is that it has
the property that the impact of trade on the economy can be summarized by examining
movements in the ratio of the average profitability of firms relative to the minimum prof-
its of firms ( rat ). Thus, a researcher who knew how a trade shock moved relative profits
could use their model to assess the growth implications. We therefore use our estimates of
the impact of the trade war on the stock prices of firms to infer changes in firms' expected
profits and calibrate their model to estimate the effects of the trade war on growth and
welfare. These estimates imply that the trade-war announcements reduced the average
expected firm profit by about 6.2%, which lowers the profit ratio from 1.861 to 1.746 (i.e.,
d rat = -0.115). Using the same parameter values as in Perla et al. (2021), these num-
bers imply a reduction in the economic growth rate of 0.3 percentage points and a welfare
decline of 9.0%, which is close to our -7.8 percentage point decline.

6     Conclusion
This paper presents a methodology for using stock market data in order to compute the
impacts of a trade policy change on expected welfare, wages, TFP, employment and out-
put. Our method differs from standard methods of assessing a policy's impact on welfare
in that it does not use a model to assess how a policy will affect firm profitability, but
rather it is based on market expectations about how a policy change will affect future
profitability. To the extent that market participants can accurately assess the effects of a
policy on the future path of expected profits, an advantage of our method is that it does
not require a researcher to explicitly model how a trade policy affects the ERP and TFP.
     When we apply this methodology to understanding the impact of the U.S.-China trade
war on the U.S. economy, we identify large effects in comparison to those commonly iden-
tified in static models. Stock markets lost $3.3 trillion dollars in value on the days close
to the announcements, which could only happen in a specific factors model if there were
substantial movements in productivity. When we filter these losses through the specific
factors model, they imply losses of expected welfare of 7.8 percent, which is difficult to
understand through the lens of a canonical static model. Interestingly, these losses are
very similar in magnitude to those we obtain from calibrating the dynamic model of
Perla et al. (2021) to the observed movements in expected firm profits. This result es-
tablishes that the large welfare effects we estimate are not a unique feature of the specific
factors model but also appear in dynamic models that can be calibrated using stock-price

                                             37
data. The similarity in the estimates may arise from the fact that both approaches allow
for firm productivity to be affected by trade policy. Identifying the channels underlying
these large welfare effects is a subject of future research.

References
Abrahams, M., T. Adrian, R. K. Crump, E. Moench, and R. Yu (2016). Decomposing real
 and nominal yield curves. Journal of Monetary Economics 84, 182­200.
Alcalá, F. and A. Ciccone (2004).     Trade and productivity.     Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 119(2), 613­646.
Amiti, M. and J. Konings (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and produc-
 tivity: Evidence from indonesia. American Economic Review 97(5), 1611­1638.
Amiti, M., S. J. Redding, and D. E. Weinstein (2019). The impact of the 2018 tariffs on
 prices and welfare. Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(4), 187­210.
Amiti, M., S. J. Redding, and D. E. Weinstein (2020). Who's paying for the us tariffs? a
 longer-term perspective. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, Volume 110, pp. 541­46.
Autor, D. H., D. Dorn, and G. H. Hanson (2013, October). The china syndrome: Local
 labor market effects of import competition in the united states. American Economic Re-
 view 103(6), 2121­68.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2002). Determining the number of factors in approximate factor models.
  Econometrica 70(1), 191­221.
Bai, J. and S. Ng (2008). Large dimensional factor analysis. Now Publishers Inc.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4), 1593­1636.
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003). Plants and productivity in
  international trade. American economic review 93(4), 1268­1290.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007). Firms in international
  trade. Journal of Economic perspectives 21(3), 105­130.
Bloom, N., M. Draca, and J. Van Reenen (2016). Trade induced technical change? the
  impact of chinese imports on innovation, it and productivity. The review of economic
  studies 83(1), 87­117.
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, L. Wang, and Y. Zhang (2017). Wto accession and perfor-
  mance of chinese manufacturing firms. American Economic Review 107(9), 2784­2820.
Brandt, L., J. Van Biesebroeck, L. Wang, and Y. Zhang (2019). Wto accession and perfor-
  mance of chinese manufacturing firms: Corrigendum. American Economic Review 109(4),
  1616­21.
Breinlich, H. (2014). Heterogeneous firm-level responses to trade liberalization: A test
  using stock price reactions. Journal of International Economics 93(2), 270­285.
Breinlich, H., E. Leromain, D. Novy, T. Sampson, and A. Usman (2018). The economic


                                             38
  effects of brexit: Evidence from the stock market. Fiscal Studies 39(4), 581­623.
Buera, F. J. and E. Oberfield (2020). The global diffusion of ideas. Econometrica 88(1),
  83­114.
Caldara, D., M. Iacoviello, P. Molligo, A. Prestipino, and A. Raffo (2019). The economic
  effects of trade policy uncertainty. Journal of Monetary Economics forthcoming.
Caliendo, L., M. Dvorkin, and F. Parro (2019). Trade and labor market dynamics: General
  equilibrium analysis of the china trade shock. Econometrica 87(3), 741­835.
Cavallo, A., G. Gopinath, B. Neiman, and J. Tang (2021). Tariff pass-through at the border
  and at the store: Evidence from us trade policy. American Economic Review: Insights 3(1),
  19­34.
Comin, D. A. and R. C. Johnson (2020). Offshoring and inflation. Technical report, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research.
Corden, W. M. (1966). The structure of a tariff system and the effective protective rate.
 Journal of Political Economy 74(3), 221­237.
Crowley, M. A., N. Meng, and H. Song (2019). Policy shocks and stock market returns:
  Evidence from chinese solar panels. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 51,
  148­169.
De Loecker, J. (2011). Product differentiation, multiproduct firms, and estimating the
 impact of trade liberalization on productivity. Econometrica 79(5), 1407­1451.
Dix-Carneiro, R. and B. K. Kovak (2017). Trade liberalization and regional dynamics.
  American Economic Review 107(10), 2908­46.
Ethier, W. (1977). The theory of effective protection in general equilibrium: Effective-rate
  analogues of nominal rates. Canadian Journal of Economics, 233­245.
Fajgelbaum, P. D., P. K. Goldberg, P. J. Kennedy, and A. K. Khandelwal (2020). The return
  to protectionism. Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(1), 1­55.
Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson (1999). The impact of outsourcing and high-technology
  capital on wages: estimates for the united states, 1979­1990. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics 114(3), 907­940.
Feyrer, J. (2019). Trade and income-exploiting time series in geography. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 11(4), 1­35.
Fisman, R., Y. Hamao, and Y. Wang (2014). Nationalism and economic exchange: Ev-
  idence from shocks to Sino-Japanese relations. The Review of Financial Studies 27(9),
  2626­2660.
Flaaen, A., A. HortaÃ§su, and F. Tintelnot (2020, July). The production relocation and
  price effects of us trade policy: The case of washing machines. American Economic Re-
  view 110(7), 2103­27.
Frankel, J. A. and D. H. Romer (1999). Does trade cause growth?          American economic
  review 89(3), 379­399.


                                             39
Greenland, A., M. Ion, J. Lopresti, and P. Schott (2020). Using equity market reactions to
  infer exposure to trade liberalization. Available at SSRN.
Grossman, G. M. and J. A. Levinsohn (1989). Import competition and the stock-market
  return to capital. American Economic Review 79(5), 1065­1087.
Handley, K. and N. Limão (2017). Policy uncertainty, trade, and welfare: Theory and
 evidence for China and the United States. American Economic Review 107(9), 2731­2783.
Hartigan, J. C., P. R. Perry, and S. Kamma (1986). The value of administered protection: a
 capital market approach. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 610­617.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. J. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and
 india. Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4), 1403­1448.
Huang, Y., C. Lin, S. Liu, and H. Tang (2019). Trade linkages and firm value: Evidence
 from the 2018 US-China trade war. CEPR Discussion Paper DP14173.
Jones, R. W. (1975). Income distribution and effective protection in a multicommodity
  trade model. Journal of Economic Theory 11(1), 1­15.
Knoblach, M. and F. Stöckl (2020). What determines the elasticity of substitution between
 capital and labor? a literature review. Journal of Economic Surveys 34(4), 847­875.
Kovak, B. K. (2013). Regional effects of trade reform: What is the correct measure of
 liberalization? American Economic Review 103(5), 1960­76.
Lewis, D. J., C. Makridis, and K. Mertens (2019). Do monetary policy announcements
  shift household expectations? FRB of New York Staff Report (897).
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
 industry productivity. econometrica 71(6), 1695­1725.
Moser, C. and A. K. Rose (2014). Who benefits from regional trade agreements? the view
 from the stock market. European Economic Review 68, 31­47.
Pavcnik, N. (2002). Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence
  from chilean plants. The Review of Economic Studies 69(1), 245­276.
Perla, J., C. Tonetti, and M. E. Waugh (2021). Equilibrium technology diffusion, trade, and
  growth. American Economic Review 111(1), 73­128.
Pierce, J. R. and P. K. Schott (2016). The surprisingly swift decline of US manufacturing
  employment. American Economic Review 106(7), 1632­1662.
Sampson, T. (2016). Dynamic selection: an idea flows theory of entry, trade, and growth.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(1), 315­380.
Topalova, P. (2010). Factor immobility and regional impacts of trade liberalization: Evi-
  dence on poverty from india. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(4), 1­41.
Topalova, P. and A. Khandelwal (2011). Trade liberalization and firm productivity: The
  case of india. Review of economics and statistics 93(3), 995­1009.
Trefler, D. (2004). The long and short of the canada-us free trade agreement. American
  Economic Review 94(4), 870­895.

                                            40
