                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN GENETICS, EARLY-
                LIFE DISADVANTAGES, AND LATER-LIFE SES

                                       Silvia H. Barcellos
                                       Leandro Carvalho
                                         Patrick Turley

                                       Working Paper 28750
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w28750


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2021

Jiewen Luo and Andrew Yu provided excellent research assistance. This paper benefited from
discussions with Dan Benjamin, Pietro Biroli, Dalton Conley, David Cesarini, Ben Domingue,
Jason Fletcher, Rachel Griffith, Mireille Jacobson, Phil Koellinger, Adriana Lleras-Muney, Nick
Papageorge, Tuomas Pekkarinen, Lauren Schmitz, and from the feedback of seminar participants
at Boston University, Lehigh University, Stanford University, University of Rome Tor Vergata,
UCLA, USC and at the 2019 All-CA Labor Economics Conference at UCSC. We thank
Hyeokmoon Kweon and Phil Koellinger for help with the ASHE data and Alex Young for
providing the imputed polygenic indices of parents. Research reported in this publication was
supported through the Russell Sage Foundation grant 98-16-16, NIA grants K99-AG062787-01,
K01AG050811, R21AG060447, RF1AG055654, 3RF1AG055654-01A1S1, and R56AG058726,
Open Philanthropy grant 010623-00001, and by the USC Population Research Center. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the National Institutes of Health. This research has been conducted using the UK
Biobank Resource under Application Number 15666. The authors declare that they have no
relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2021 by Silvia H. Barcellos, Leandro Carvalho, and Patrick Turley. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Education on the Relationship between Genetics, Early-Life Disadvantages,
and Later-Life SES
Silvia H. Barcellos, Leandro Carvalho, and Patrick Turley
NBER Working Paper No. 28750
May 2021
JEL No. I24,I26,J31

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper investigates whether education weakens the relationship between early-life
disadvantages and later-life SES. We use three proxies for advantage that we show are
independently associated with SES in middle-age. Besides early, favorable family and
neighborhood conditions, we argue that the genes a child inherits also represent a source of
advantages. Using a regression discontinuity design and data for over 110,000 individuals, we
study a compulsory schooling reform in the UK that generated exogenous variation in schooling.
While the reform succeeded in reducing educational disparities, it did not weaken the relationship
between early-life disadvantages and wages. This implies that advantaged children had higher
returns to schooling. We exploit family-based random genetic variation and find no evidence that
these higher returns were driven by genetically-influenced individual characteristics such as
innate ability or skills.

Silvia H. Barcellos                             Patrick Turley
Center for Economic and Social Research         Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California               University of Southern California
635 Downey Way                                  635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089                           Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER                                        pturley@usc.edu
sbarcell@usc.edu

Leandro Carvalho
Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
leandro.carvalho@usc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w28750
"Education then, beyond all other devices of human origin, is a great equalizer of the conditions
of men ­ the balance wheel of the social machinery."
                                             Horace Mann, pioneering American educator, 1848

                                                        "In America, education is still the great equalizer."
                                                          Arne Duncan, U.S. Secretary of Education, 2011

    1. Introduction

    Children born to richer parents are more likely to achieve economic success in adulthood
(Jencks 1979; Solon 1999; Almond and Currie 2011). Education is considered by many to be the
"great equalizer" and education policy a tool to "level the playing field," ensuring that kids from
different backgrounds have similar opportunities for success. Others contend that, while education
may reduce poverty, it might be less effective in promoting mobility because children born to
richer parents or with higher ability have higher returns to schooling (Cameron and Heckman
2001) and consequently will choose to invest more in education.
    This paper investigates whether education weakens the relationship between early-life
advantages and later-life socioeconomic status (SES). We examine how these relationships were
affected by a compulsory schooling change that generated exogenous variation in schooling.
    We consider early-life environmental advantages at the family and at the neighborhood level:
being born in a smaller family 2 and in a neighborhood with higher average education 3. We also
consider the genes that one inherits as individual-level advantages. Using genetic data, we
construct a polygenic index (PGI) for educational attainment (EA), which has been shown to
predict a host of SES outcomes (Lee et al. 2018; Belsky et al. 2018). Because of Mendelian
inheritance, one's PGI is randomly assigned conditional on the PGI of the parents. We exploit this
variation to study a gene-by-environment interaction: how a compulsory schooling change can
modify how much of an advantage is conferred by one's luck in the "genetic lottery" (Kweon et
al. 2020).
    Consistent with the literature on the importance of initial endowments (e.g., Lee et al. 2018;
Black et al. 2005; Mogstad and Wiswall 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018a, 2018b), our three


2
  Following the large empirical literature on the trade-off between quantity and quality of children (e.g. Steelman et
al. 2002, Chan et al. 2019).
3
  More specifically, the fraction of the adult population in the respondent's birth town around her birth date who
stayed in school until at least age 15. Recent work shows that the quality of the neighborhood in which a child grows
up affects her later-life SES (e.g. Chetty et al. 2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018a, 2018b).

                                                          2
proxies for early-life advantages are good predictors of education and economic success in
adulthood. While each proxy is measured at a distinct level, it can capture in principle variation
from the other levels (e.g., since genes are inherited from one's parents, the PGI captures both
individual-level and family-level advantages). The predictive power of each are however
remarkably similar if we estimate a joint model where the three proxies are entered together,
indicating that each proxy captures an independent dimension of disadvantage.
       While these associations do not represent causal relationships (e.g., Kong et al. 2018; Angrist
et al. 2010), each proxy is fixed early in life, suggesting that they potentially capture some other
early-life, causal factors (Rietveld et al. 2013; Okbay et al. 2016; Harden et al. 2020). Indeed, we
exploit the random genetic variation mentioned before to show that the EA PGI itself has causal
effects on SES outcomes. 4
       The compulsory schooling change we study, the Raising of the School Leaving Age (ROSLA)
Order of 1972, increased the minimum age at which students in England, Scotland, and Wales
could drop out of school from 15 to 16 years (Oreopoulos 2006; Clark and Royer 2013; Barcellos,
Carvalho and Turley 2019). The reform only affected students born after September 1, 1957,
generating a discontinuity in the relationship between education and date of birth that can be
exploited using a regression discontinuity design. We use data from the UK Biobank (N = 110,000)
to study the effects on schooling, income, and occupational wages 34-38 years after the reform.
We estimate that an additional year of schooling increased occupational wages by 5% on average.
       The ROSLA was successful in reducing educational disparities. For example, years of
schooling increased by 0.39 years for those in the most disadvantaged tercile (hereafter, the bottom
tercile) of the distribution of the EA PGI and by 0.27 years for those in the most advantaged tercile
(hereafter, the top tercile) ­ this is also true for the other two proxies for advantages. We find
similar effects on education qualifications (namely the CSE and O-Level examinations, which are
taken at age 16) that are valued in the labor market. These results suggest that the ROSLA may
have effectively narrowed the gap in skills between children from different backgrounds.
       However, these educational gains did not translate into reductions in economic disparities.
While the ROSLA increased wages across the board, it did not close the wage gap. If anything,
the reform may have widened it. For example, the reduced-form estimates imply that the ROSLA
increased the wages of children in the top tercile of the EA PGI distribution by 1.6 percentage

4
    This has been shown in previous studies (e.g., Belsky et al. 2018; Lee et al. 2018; Kweon et al. 2020).

                                                            3
points more than it increased the wages of those in the bottom tercile, with similar patterns for
family size and neighborhood SES. Using two-stage least squares, we estimate that the return to
an additional year of schooling for those in the top terciles of the EA PGI, family size, and
neighborhood SES distributions was 6, 4, and 4 percentage points higher, respectively, than the
returns of those in the bottom terciles of these distributions.
    These results raise the question of why children from advantageous backgrounds benefited
more from the additional schooling. Some economists would argue differences in returns to
schooling may be justified if they reflect differences in innate ability, skills, or talent (Loury 1981).
Many may also contend it is unfair if children from advantageous backgrounds have higher returns
due to, for example, their parents' connections (Bénabou 2000).
    We exploit family-based random genetic inheritance to investigate whether the gradient in the
returns to schooling is driven by genetically-influenced individual characteristics. By conditioning
on the EA PGI of parents, we can estimate the causal effect of the child's EA PGI. 5 The results
suggest that a ceteris paribus increase in the child's EA PGI causes a reduction in the returns to
schooling. In contrast, having parents with higher EA PGIs is associated with higher returns to
schooling. These results do not support the hypothesis that genetically-influenced individual
characteristics, which could include innate ability or skills, are responsible for the gradient in
returns to schooling. They suggest instead that children from higher-SES backgrounds had higher
returns because of environmental advantages (e.g., having more educated parents, higher family
income, or growing up in a richer neighborhood) that confer unequal opportunities.
    Our paper makes a number of contributions. First, we bring together two distinct literatures: a
literature in economics on childhood circumstances and adulthood SES (Almond et al. 2018) and
a literature in social genomics on genotypes and later-life outcomes (Barth et al. 2020; Lee et al.
2018; Belsky et al. 2018). We document that inheriting certain genes, being born into a smaller
family, and in a higher-SES neighborhood capture independent dimensions of advantage. For
economists, the EA PGI has a number of appealing characteristics as a proxy for advantage. Not
only it is objectively measured, it is also determined at conception and invariant to environmental
conditions. While the EA PGI may be correlated with one's environment, we illustrate how it is



5
  In Figure 3 below, we show that once we condition on the EA PGI of parents, the EA PGI of children is orthogonal
to a number of predetermined variables. This "balance test" suggests that our method is successful in isolating
random genetic inheritance.

                                                        4
possible to decompose it into individual-level genetic variation and variation in environmental
conditions using the EA PGIs of parents (Domingue and Fletcher 2020; Young et al. 2020). More
importantly, this individual-level genetic variation is random, providing a source of exogenous
variation in early-life advantage.
    Second, we study how differences in the quantity of schooling and in the returns to schooling
separately contribute to intergenerational mobility. Previous work on the effects of education on
intergenerational mobility was unable to separate the two because the educational reforms studied
changed not only the quantity of education but also key elements of the educational system
(Meghir and Palme 2005; Pekkarinen et al. 2009; Aakvik et al. 2010; Andreoli et al. 2020). Our
results underlie the importance of making this distinction: advantaged children have substantially
higher returns to schooling, which may present a challenge to increasing mobility (Solon 2004).
    Finally, we are among the first papers to combine quasi-random variation in environment with
random genetic variation to study how genetics interacts with a key environmental factor ­
education ­ to shape economic success. Our findings speak to three distinct literatures in
economics: (a) on the importance of genetic inheritance for the intergenerational transmission of
SES (Bowles and Gintis 2002; Black et al. 2020; Sacerdote 2011; Fagereng et al. 2021); (b) on
gene-by-environment interactions (Papageorge and Thom 2020; Biroli and Zünd 2020) 6; and (c)
on heterogenous returns to schooling (Card 2001).
    We advance the first literature (a) by showing that educational policy has the potential to affect
the contribution of genetic inheritance for the intergenerational transmission of SES. Our work
builds on studies in the second literature (b) which have furthered our understanding of how genes
and environment interact by exploiting natural experiments (Schmitz and Conley 2016, 2017;
Barcellos et al. 2018; Biroli and Zwyssig 2021) or by using within-family designs (Domingue and
Fletcher 2020; Morris et al. 2020; Brumpton et al. 2020; D'onofrio et al. 2013). We give a step
forward by combining a natural experiment with a family design (Fletcher and Conley 2013). Our
contribution to the third literature (c) is to study how genes influence the returns to schooling. The
literature has tried to distinguish between heterogeneous returns by family SES (Altonji and Dunn
1996; Deschênes 2007) and heterogeneous returns by ability (Ashenfelter and Rouse 1998;
Heckman et al. 2006, Heckman et al. 2018). One challenge is that commonly-used measures of


6
 There is a large literature in social genetics on gene-by-environment interactions (e.g., Caspi et al. 2002; Caspi et
al. 2003; Shanahan et al. 2008). Most studies in this literature are correlational.

                                                           5
ability (e.g., AFQT) may reflect family SES. By using random genetic variation determined at
conception, we are able to disentangle genetically-influenced differences in returns to schooling
from differences in returns due to environmental advantages. To the extent that EA PGI captures
ability, we find no evidence that the advantaged children in our setting had higher returns to
schooling because they had greater innate ability.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we give more details about the data
and introduce our proxies for early disadvantages. Section 3 discusses the interpretation of the
genetic proxy (i.e., the EA PGI) and the method used to isolate the random genetic inheritance.
Section 4 examines how the compulsory schooling law affected the relationship between early-life
disadvantages and later-life SES. Robustness exercises are presented in Section 5. Section 6
concludes.


    2. Data and Proxies for Early-Life Advantages

    We use data from the UK Biobank, a large, population-based prospective study initiated by the
UK National Health Service (NHS) (Sudlow et al. 2015). More than half a million individuals ages
40 to 69 were assessed between 2006 and 2010 in 22 assessment centers distributed throughout
the UK (Allen et al. 2012) ­ see Appendix K. 7 The assessment included a self-completed
touchscreen questionnaire, an in-person interview, physical measurements, and the collection of
biological samples. The self-completed questionnaire collected data on, among other things,
country of birth and year of immigration; qualifications and school-leaving age; household
income; and family history. Information that was not collected via the self-completed touchscreen
questionnaire, such as occupation and residence at birth, was collected in a subsequent computer-
assisted personal interview (CAPI). Study participants were also genotyped using blood samples
collected at the end of the assessment visit.
    Our main outcomes of interest will be the participant's age at the time she left school; whether
she passed qualification exams that are taken at age 16 ­ namely the Certificate of Secondary
Education (CSE) and the General Certificate of Education (GCE) Ordinary Level (also known as
the O-level); annual household income (reported in five brackets); and wages imputed based on


7
 Although the UK Biobank is not nationally representative, our estimates have internal validity because there is no
differential selection on the two sides of the September 1, 1957 cutoff ­ see Appendix A.

                                                         6
one's occupation. During the interview, respondents answered a series of questions about their job
(or last job if respondent had retired recently), which the interviewer used to classify the
respondent's occupation among more than 400 detailed categories. We use the 2009 Annual
Survey of Hours and Earnings (ASHE) to match such categories to median wages for each
occupation (Kweon et al. 2020). 8 We view this measure of occupational wages as complementary
to our measure of household income: on one hand, income was reported in brackets and
occupational wages is a better measure of permanent individual income; on the other, household
income is available for a larger fraction of the sample. 9 We find that both measures yield
qualitatively similar results. Appendix C shows that the two measures are closely related.

                                     A. Proxies for Early-Life Advantages

         We use measures to proxy for early-life advantages at three levels: neighborhood, family,
and individual. A recent literature shows that children who grow up in higher SES neighborhoods
have better socioeconomic outcomes, including earnings and college attendance (Chetty and
Hendren 2018a, 2018b). As a proxy for neighborhood SES, we use a measure of average education
in the individual's birthplace. UKB participants reported the town or district where they first lived
when they were born. The coordinates of this locality were used to identify the local district (as of
1961) where the respondent resided at that time. The measure of neighborhood SES corresponds
to the fraction of adults in the local district who stayed in school until at least age 15 according to
the 1961 Census. 10,11,12 There are 1,436 different neighborhoods with an average population of
about 35,000 and a median population of about 18,000. 13
         We use family size as a proxy for family-level advantages, following the large empirical
literature on the trade-off between quantity and quality of children (e.g. Steelman et al. 2002; Chan
et al. 2019). Our measure of family size corresponds to the numbers of full brothers and full sisters

8
  We used gender-specific wages that were calculated among full-time employees and included all labor earnings
(such as bonus, tips, overtime, etc.).
9
  Occupational wage is missing for 26.8% of UKB respondents while household income is missing for 14.5%. The
Robustness section show we get qualitative similar results if we use income instead of wages. See also Appendix H.
10
   We chose the threshold of age 15 because it maximized the variation in neighborhood characteristics. Importantly,
this variable was chosen before assessing its association with our measures of SES and education. It captures a large
fraction of the potential neighborhood variation at this level of aggregation.
11
   These data were generously made available by Vision of Britain (www.visionofbritain.org.uk).
12
   For Scotland, these figures were calculated at the county level using data from the 1951 Census.
13
   Chetty and Hendren (2018a) use commuting zones (CZ) as a measure of neighborhood. There are 741 different
CZs in the United State with an average population of about 380,000 per CZ.

                                                         7
(i.e., excluding half-siblings, step-siblings, or adopted siblings) reported by the study participant,
including those who had already died. Because individuals with fewer siblings tend to have higher
SES later in life, we reverse code family size (smaller families have a higher proxy value) so it is
positively correlated with SES ­ as it is the case with the other proxies.
         As our measure of individual-level advantages, we use a polygenic index 14 (PGI) for
educational attainment (EA). A PGI is an individual-level predictor constructed from up to
millions of genetic markers. Below, we describe how we constructed the EA PGI and discuss its
interpretation.
         Human DNA is made up of twenty-three pairs of long molecules, called chromosomes.
While humans are all identical for 99.9% of their DNA, there are tens of millions of locations in
the genome where individuals differ by a single genetic marker. These locations are called Single
Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs). At the vast majority of SNPs, people can have one of two
possible genetic variants. The variant that a person has is called their allele. In genetic data, one of
the two possible alleles is arbitrarily chosen as the reference allele. Because individuals have two
copies of each chromosome, they will either have 0, 1, or 2 copies of the reference allele. The
number of reference alleles that an individual has at a SNP is called their genotype for that SNP.
         A PGI is constructed using estimates from a Genome Wide Association Study (GWAS). A
GWAS scans the entire genome and estimates associations between individual genotypes and an
outcome of interest. Specifically, a GWAS is a series of regressions of some outcome onto the
genotype of each SNP, one at a time, and a set of covariates which normally include sex, age, and
the first several principal components of the genetic data. 15
         A polygenic index (PGI) is a weighted sum of SNP genotypes:

                                           =    ,                                                                   (1)

where  is the polygenic index for individual  ;   {0,1,2} is individual  's genotype at SNP
; and  is the weight for SNP . 16 The weights in a PGI are derived from coefficients estimated




14
   Polygenic indexes are also often called "polygenic scores," "polygenic risk scores," or "genetic risk scores" in the
literature. All of these terms correspond to the same thing.
15
   These principle components are included to account for ancestry-related omitted variable bias (see Section 3.A).
16
   GWASs for educational attainment have shown that education is associated to a large number of genetic markers,
each with a small influence. PGIs are a way to aggregate these many influences and construct a genetic marker that
is sufficiently predictive to use in empirical applications.

                                                           8
in a GWAS. 17 In this paper, we use GWAS coefficients based on Lee et al. (2018), the largest
currently available GWAS for educational attainment (EA). 18 The PGI based on this GWAS can
explain 12-13% of the variation in EA (Lee et al., 2018). 19
     We note that each of our three measure of advantage may proxy for circumstances at other
levels. Also, with the exception of family size, the proxies are fixed at birth, which means they
could not have been affected by the compulsory schooling law that we will study. We show in
Appendix A that the reform did not affect family size.
     We keep in our sample individuals for whom at least one proxy is available. 20 About ninety
percent of them have data on all three proxies. In the regression results below, we include an
indicator (and interaction terms when relevant) for whether the individual is missing each proxy.
Our results are very similar if we restrict to only those with complete data. The proxy that is more
commonly missing is the EA PGI (7.3%). This is for two reasons. First, because genetic data is
not available for part of the sample (3.4%). Second, we do not calculate PGIs for those with non-
European ancestries (3.9%). 21 As a result, any analyses in this paper based on the PGI only
correspond to the European-ancestry sample, though other analyses correspond to the full sample,
regardless of ancestry. Family size and neighborhood SES are missing for 1.4% and 4.3% of our
sample, respectively. Appendix E shows that the fractions missing each proxy are orthogonal to
the schooling reform we study.




17
   There are several methods for producing PGI weights from GWAS coefficients, but each of them transforms the
GWAS coefficients in a way that is meant to account for the correlation structure that exists in the genome. We use
a Bayesian method called LDpred (Vilhjálmsson et al. 2015).
18
   We use a version of the GWAS coefficients from Lee et al. (2018) that omit the subset of individuals from the UK
Biobank that we use in our analyses. Specifically, we conduct a GWAS in the UK Biobank that exactly matches the
specification in Lee et al., except that we exclude individuals who were born within 10 years of September 1, 1957
and their family members. This is done to avoid overfitting.
19
   Because Lee et al. (2018) is a GWAS of level of EA, our EA PGI is calibrated to predict levels of EA. Johnson et
al. (2020) argue that for interaction studies such as ours, it may be more appropriate to use a GWAS of the
variability of the outcome rather than the level. Nevertheless, we use PGI based on levels because Lee et al. has a
much larger sample than any available GWAS on the variability of EA. Using a smaller sample would greatly
reduce the power of our study.
20
   Only 77 UKB participants lacked all three proxies.
21
   Samples in genetic research are nearly always restricted to individuals with similar genetic ancestries--defined as
a group with tightly clustered first and second principle components of their genetic data. Due to Euro-centric bias in
data collection, most currently published GWASs, including Lee et al. (2018), are based on samples with
"European" ancestries. These are the primary ancestries found in individuals who self-identify as "White." As a
result, PGIs based on currently available GWAS coefficients are substantially more predictive in European-ancestry
samples (Martin et al. 2019) and may not generalize to groups with African, Asian, Hispanic, or other non-European
ancestries. This is not a major issue in our context since over 96% of our UKB sample is of European Ancestry.

                                                          9
                       B. Proxies for Early-Life Advantages Predict Later-Life SES

   A large body of work shows that genetics, family size, and neighborhood characteristics are
associated with SES in adulthood (e.g., Lee et al. 2018; Black et al. 2005; Mogstad and Wiswall
2016; Chetty and Hendren 2018a, 2018b). We begin by documenting these associations in our
data. Figure 1 shows the associations of our proxies of disadvantage with different SES measures
before the reform. The black dots show the unconditional associations. The red circles show the
association of a given proxy conditional on the other two proxies. Both the SES measures and the
proxies were standardized.

   There are two main takeaways. The three proxies ­ each capturing a different spectrum of
disadvantages at the individual, family, and neighborhood levels ­ are strong predictors of the
different measures of long-term SES. They are also independently associated with SES: the
association of a given proxy with a SES measure changes very little when we condition on the
other two proxies. This suggests that they represent distinct sources of advantages. Notice how the
EA PGI is as predictive as the other two proxies.


                    Figure 1: (Pre-Reform) Differences in SES, by Background




       Notes: The figure shows coefficients of regressions of the dependent variables listed in the rows on the proxies

                                                             10
        for disadvantage (the regressions also include pe-reform birth cohort trends). The black circles display
        coefficients from regressions including just one of the three proxies. The red triangles display coefficients from
        regressions including all three proxies. Both the dependent variables and the proxies were normalized. The
        brackets show 95% confidence intervals. The sample is restricted to those born between September 1, 1947
        and August 31, 1957 (i.e. the cohorts unaffected by the ROSLA). Sample sizes vary between 63,172 and 78,764
        depending on the measure of SES.



     Again, these associations do not represent causal relationships between the proxies and later-
life SES (e.g., Kong et al. 2018; Angrist et al. 2010). A separate discussion about the interpretation
of the association between the EA PGI and SES is warranted.


     3. Interpreting the EA PGI and Its Relationship with Later-Life SES

     The interpretation of a PGI is subtle and complicated. For example, it is many people's instinct
to interpret the EA PGI as a measure of innate ability. Although a PGI can capture these types of
individual attributes, the PGI will also be correlated with other individual, familial, and community
characteristics. It is, therefore, incorrect to think of it solely as a measure of innate ability.

                                 A. The Association between the EA PGI and SES

     Consider a simple regression of an SES outcome on the PGI:

                                              = 0 + 1  +  .                                                                  (2)

There are at least two reasons why 1 will be a biased estimate of the causal effect of the PGI on
SES: population stratification and indirect genetic effects. Population stratification is a form of
omitted variable bias where specific genetic variants are more common in a particular group and
the average of the outcome of interest  is higher (or lower) among this group than in the rest of
the population. These genetic variants will predict the outcome of interest, but the relationship is
not causal. 22 Empirically, it has been shown that controlling for genetic principle components
removes much but not all of the bias due to population stratification (Price et al. 2006). We show




22
  The canonical example of population stratification is chopstick use (Price et al. 2006). Consider a GWAS of
whether an individual regularly uses chopsticks and a sample that includes individuals of Asian and non-Asian
backgrounds. This GWAS would find many SNPs that are associated with chopstick use, but each of these
associations would correspond to SNPs that have alleles that are more common in Asian populations rather than to
SNPs that represent any sort of genetic pathway between genes and chopstick use.

                                                               11
in the Robustness Section that our results are qualitatively the same when we control for the first
20 principal components of the participants' genetic matrix.
     Another omitted variable in regression (2) is parental genetics: parental genetics drive both a
child's own genetics (since the child inherits her genetic variants from her parents) and the child's
SES (through parental behaviors and characteristics, such as parental education). Since the parents'
and child's PGIs are correlated, when the analysis does not control for parental genotypes, as in
Figure 1, the effects of the parental genotypes are partly captured by the offspring's PGI.

                                     B. Controlling for the PGIs of Parents

     By using information on the PGIs of an individual's parents, we can however isolate variation
in the individual's PGI that is random and therefore orthogonal to her environment. This is possible
due to Mendelian inheritance: a biological phenomenon that causes PGIs to be randomly assigned
to children conditional on the sum of the PGIs of their parents (Kong et al. 2020). We estimate the
following model:

                                  = 0 + 1  + 2   +  .                                                              (3)

where   is the sum of the PGIs of individual  's parents.
     The coefficient on the PGI, 1 , estimates the "direct genetic effects." 23 Direct genetic effects
are defined as the causal effect of inheriting specific genetic variants holding constant one's
environment. 24 In contrast, 2 primarily picks up "indirect genetic effects" from one's parents.
These are the effects of genetic variants of the parents that were not inherited by the child but still
affect her because they influence her parents' behaviors (Kong et al. 2018). Notice that we do not
have exogenous variation in the parental PGI so it may also represent other environmental
advantages, such as indirect genetic effects from other relatives and population stratification.



23
   It is also possible to estimate direct genetic effects using a fixed-effect model. Using a fixed-effect model,
however, would require us to drop siblings with any missing data or who do not satisfy our sample restrictions. In
contrast, our specification only requires genetic data for parents, which can be imputed using only genetic data from
at least one other sibling or in some cases was observed because one parent was genotyped. This increases our
sample size. Also, our specification allows us to directly measure the association between the parental PGI and SES
and to measure the change in this association as a result of the 1972 ROSLA.
24
   Direct genetic effects are still a function of the environment, however; environmental factors can change the
impact of specific genetic variants. Indeed, an important result of this paper is that education can change the direct
effect of the EA PGI.

                                                         12
   It is important to stress that the direct genetic effects do not necessarily reflect "ability" or
"innate" individual characteristics that may influence productivity. Although the approach
identifies the causal effects of genetic variation on SES, we cannot pin down the channel(s) of
these effects. For example, suppose that height has a causal effect on wages because ceteris paribus
employers favor taller people (Persico et al. 2004; Case and Paxson 2008). Then any genetic
variant that causes an increase in height will also cause an increase in wages. EA and height have
been shown to be genetically correlated (Okbay et al. 2016), such that individuals with higher EA
PGIs will tend to be taller and to earn higher wages, but this relationship reflects a social
phenomenon. However, if some portion of the EA PGI represents "innate" characteristics, this
portion would be captured by the direct genetic effect and not the indirect/environmental effect.

                                   C. Imputing the PGIs of Parents

   While few study participants had one of their parents genotyped, it is possible to impute the
sum of the parental genotypes if at least one of the study participant's siblings were also genotyped
(Young et al. 2020). An illustration of this imputation procedure is found in Figure 2. Imagine we
would like to impute the sum of the genotypes of a participant's parents at some SNP. Because
people normally have two copies of each chromosome, we represent the genotype of Parent 1 and
Parent 2 at this SNP as (A + B) and (C + D), respectively, where A, B, C, and D are indicators of
whether a parent has a copy of a specified reference allele at the SNP on a certain copy of their
chromosome. The sum of the parental genotypes at this locus is therefore (A + B + C + D).


                      Figure 2: Illustration Imputation of Parental PGIs




                                                 13
Note: The figure illustrates the method used to impute the PGI of parents. In the "Zero Shared" case, both siblings inherited different
alleles from each parent, such that all four parental alleles are observed in the two siblings. In the second ("One Shared") case, both
siblings inherited the same allele from one parent and a different allele from the other, in which case only three parental alleles are
observed. Finally, in the "Two Shared" case, only two parental alleles are observed because both siblings inherited the same allele
from each parent. In the last two cases, we impute the unobserved genotypes using the mean genotype for a single allele at that
SNP. This mean genotype corresponds to the frequency at which the allele is found at that SNP on a single copy of a chromosome
drawn from the population.


     Say we observe two (full) siblings in our data. Each child randomly inherits one of the alleles
from Parent 1 (either A or B) and one allele from Parent 2 (either C or D). As Figure 2 illustrates,
there are three possible cases. In the first case ("Zero Shared"), both siblings inherited different
alleles from each parent, such that all four parental alleles are observed in the two siblings. In the
second ("One Shared"), both siblings inherited the same allele from one parent and a different
allele from the other, in which case only three parental alleles are observed. Finally, in the third
case ("Two Shared"), only two parental alleles are observed because both siblings inherited the
same allele from each parent.
     It is possible to determine which case we are in at a particular SNP. In the second and third
cases, we take the sum of the observed genotypes and impute the unobserved one using the mean
genotype for a single allele at that SNP. This mean genotype is sometimes called the allele
frequency in the population since it corresponds to the frequency at which the allele is found at
that SNP on a single copy of a chromosome drawn from the population. 25,26
     The imputation will lead to some error in the parental genotype measure, but it is not classical
measurement error. Specifically, under a classical measurement error model, it is assumed that the
variable is equal to the true value plus some amount of uninformative noise. In the case of our
imputed parental genotypes, our variable is equal to the true value minus some information--the
unobserved parental genotypes. Importantly, if the parental PGI is omitted, the portion of the
parental PGI that biases the coefficients of (2) are the shared genetic variants between the parents
and children. This is the portion of the PGI that we are able to impute without error. This means
that, by controlling for the imputed parental PGIs, we can estimate the direct effect, 1 , without


25
   We follow a similar procedure when one parent is genotyped but the other parent is unobserved. In these cases,
we always observe three of the four parental alleles, so the imputed parental sum is the sum of the three observed
genotypes plus a constant equal to the frequency of the missing genotype.
26
   This imputation of the unobserved allele is justified under an assumption that the observed alleles are uncorrelated
with the unobserved alleles. This assumption would hold if there were random mating in the population, which has
been shown to not be the case. However, it has been shown that the expected correlation between parental genotypes
would be on the order of 10-6 if parents were sorting at rates implied by the most extreme estimates. We therefore
believe that the zero-correlation assumption is a reasonable approximation in this case.

                                                                 14
bias. Furthermore, since all of the variation in the imputed parental PGI corresponds to actual
variation in the true parental PGI (as opposed to corresponding to uninformative noise), we can
likewise estimate the indirect genetic effect without bias. More details and proofs of these
properties can be found in Young et al. (2020).

                                        D.      Direct Genetic Effects

    The red triangles in Figure 3 show estimates of direct genetic effects. The black circles display
associations between the EA PGI and the outcomes of interest. The direct genetic effects are
obtained by estimating equation (3) and plotting 1 . The associations correspond to estimating

equation (2), which does not control for the parental PGI. For comparison, all outcome variables
were standardized. The PGI was also standardized. To maximize statistical power, this particular
analysis uses all 33,277 UKB participants of European ancestries for whom data on parental
genotypes are available. 27
    The top panel of the figure shows that, not only the EA PGI predicts several SES outcomes,
but that it also has a causal effect on all of them. An increase of one SD in the EA PGI causes an
increase of 0.15 SD in school-leaving age and an increase of 0.12 SD in log wages. In comparison,
an increase of one SD in the EA PGI is associated with a 0.31 SD increase in school-leaving age
and with a 0.22 SD increase in log wages. The bottom panel of the figure reports results for
variables that would have been fixed before or very soon after the genotype, and consequently the
PGI, was fixed. Therefore, one would expect no causal relationship between the EA PGI and these
variables. Even though the EA PGI is (unconditionally) associated with several of these variables,
we cannot reject that the direct genetic effect on any of them is different from zero. This can be
seen as a "balance test" that the parental PGI imputation described in Section 3.C jointly with
Mendelian inheritance worked as intended and that the conditional EA PGI is indeed random.




27
   Figures 1 and 3 were constructed using different samples (e.g., Figure 1's sample includes only those born in
England, Scotland, or Wales between September 1, 1947 and August 31, 1957 and who dropped out before age 19
while Figure 3 includes only study UK Biobank participants for whom parents' genotypes were available). That is
why the associations between the EA PGI and the SES outcomes (black circles on both figures) are slightly different
in the two figures.

                                                        15
                       Figure 3: Direct Genetic Effects vs. EA PGI Associations




       Notes: The red triangles shows estimates of the causal effect of the EA PGI. The black circles show associations with the EA
       PGI. The brackets show 95% confidence intervals. The EA PGI, the SES variables, and the predetermined variables were all
       normalized. The sample includes all UKB participants of European ancestries for whom the parental EA PGI was available.
       The number of observations ranges from 23,298 to 33,277 depending on the outcome.




   The associations with the SES outcomes are larger than the direct genetic effects partly because
of indirect genetic effects. The blue diamonds in Figure 4 display the coefficients on the parental
PGI when estimating equation (3), i.e., 2 . Having parents with higher EA PGIs is associated with

achieving higher success in adulthood (top panel). It is also associated with having fewer siblings
and with living in a higher-SES neighborhood (bottom panel). Because we do not have exogenous
variation in the parental PGI, these associations may also represent other environmental
advantages, such as indirect genetic effects from other relatives and population stratification.
   The direct genetic effects from Figure 3 are reproduced in Figure 4 for purposes of comparison.
The results suggest the indirect genetic effects may be as large as the direct genetic effects, which
is broadly consistent with previous findings (Kong et al. 2018; Howe et al. 2021; Lee et al. 2018;
Cheesman et al. 2020). We will use the same design in Section 4.D to distinguish between direct
genetic effects and indirect genetic effects and other environmental influences.


                                                                   16
                      Figure 4: Direct Genetic Effects vs. Environmental Factors




        Notes: The red triangles shows estimates of the causal effect of the EA PGI. The blue diamonds show associations with the
        parental EA PGI. The brackets show 95% confidence intervals. The EA PGI, the parental EA PGI, the SES variables, and
        the predetermined variables were all normalized. The sample includes all UKB participants of European ancestries for whom
        the parental EA PGI was available. The number of observations ranges from 23,298 to 33,277 depending on the outcome.




     4. Education and the Relationship between Early-Life Advantages and Later-Life SES

                                   A. The 1972 Raising of the School-Leaving Age

     If, as believed, education levels the playing field, then we would expect it to reduce the gaps
between children from disadvantaged and advantaged backgrounds. To investigate this hypothesis,
we study a well-known compulsory schooling reform and its effects on these disparities. The 1972
Raising of School Leaving Age (ROSLA) legislation increased the minimum school-leaving age
in England, Scotland, and Wales from 15 to 16 years of age. 28                                            These laws and their
implementation have been extensively documented before (see Clark and Royer 2010, 2013;
Grenet 2013; Davies et al. 2018) so we only include a brief summary of its main features here. The
change took effect in September 1, 1972, implying that those who were 15 or younger before that

28
  http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1972/444/pdfs/uksi_19720444_en.pdf
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1972/59/pdfs/uksi_19720059_en.pdf

                                                                  17
date (i.e., born on September 1, 1957 or later) had to stay in school until at least age 16 (hereafter,
we use the term "stayed in school until age 16" to refer to those who stayed in school until at least
age 16). Infrastructure investments, such as school building to absorb the additional students,
preceded the 1972 ROSLA but key elements of the school system did not change with the reform.
       Politically, there were a number of different justifications for the 1972 ROSLA including
addressing the British economy's failing competitiveness, raising England's level of education to
be on par with other countries, and reducing the number of young people seeking employment at
high unemployment times. Interestingly, a 1959 report by the ministry of education advising the
Government to increase compulsory schooling to age 16 highlighted the need to tap "all the
available supply of talent" and the social barriers to doing so. The Crowther Report documented
that "half of the National Service recruits to the Army who were rated in the two highest ability
groups had left school at age 15" and that among recruits "coming from families of manual workers
two-thirds of those in the two highest ability groups had left school at 15." 29
       In our analysis, we restrict the sample to participants born between September 1, 1947 and
August 31, 1967 who were either born in England, Scotland, or Wales or immigrated to the UK
before age 15. We also restrict the sample to individuals who left school at age 18 or younger to
increase the precision of our estimates (Banks and Mazzonna 2012; Banks et al. 2019). We confirm
previous results (e.g., Clark and Royer 2013) that the ROSLA did not induce students to stay in
school past age 18 (see Appendix L), such that this sample restriction does not bias our estimates.
Indeed, we show in the Robustness Section that that the results are qualitative the same if this
sample restriction is relaxed.
         Figure 5 illustrates some of the impacts of the ROSLA. It shows the fraction of study
participants who stayed in school until age 16 (black circles); age 17 (red Xs); and age 18 (blue
triangles) by year of birth. Year of birth runs from September 1 of a given a year to August 31 of
the following year. For example, those born in year 0 correspond to those born between September
1, 1957 and August 31, 1958, the first cohort affected by the ROSLA. The figure shows linear
trends for a 4-year bandwidth around September 1, 1957 and quadratic dates for a 10-year
bandwidth.




29
     See http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/crowther/crowther1959-1.html pages 131-132


                                                       18
        The figure shows that the ROSLA generated a discontinuity in the relationship between
staying in school until age 16 and date of birth. There is a sharp increase for those born after
September 1, 1957. The discontinuities at ages 17 and age 18 are much smaller but still significant.
        We estimate the ROLSA increased the fraction of those staying in school until age 16 by 25
percentage points--see Appendix Table B1. The fraction staying until ages 17 and 18 increased
by 3-4 and 2-3 percentage points. On average, the cohort affected by the ROSLA has
approximately a third of a year of schooling more than those who could drop out at age 15. 30 This
estimate is larger than estimates reported in other studies considering this same reform because we
restrict our data to those who report leaving school at or before age 18.


                                Figure 5: Educational Attainment by Year of Birth




Notes: The figure shows the fraction of study participants who stayed in school until age 16 (black circles), age 17 (red crosses), and age 18 (blue
triangles) by year of birth. Year of birth runs from September 1 of a given a year to August 31 of the following year. Those born in Year 0 were
born between September 1, 1957 and August 31, 1958. Cohorts born after Year 0 had to stay in school until age 16 while cohorts born before could
leave at age 15. The figure shows linear trends for a 4-year bandwidth and quadratic trends for a 10-year bandwidth. We use triangular kernel
weights that give greater weight to study participants born closer to September 1, 1957. N = 46,308 (4-year bandwidth) and 114,025 (10-year
bandwidth).



30
  Importantly, the F-stat on the effect of the ROSLA on school-leaving age is greater than 200 in all of
specifications, implying that the standard errors on our subsequent two-stage least squares estimates will be well
calibrated (Lee et al., 2020).

                                                                        19
      The increase in schooling generated by the ROSLA resulted in an increase in wages and
income. Appendix Figure B1 shows that those born after September 1, 1957, who, as a result of
the 1972 ROSLA, ended up with more schooling than their counterparts, earn higher wages and
have higher incomes. We estimate that an additional year of secondary education increased
middle-age wages by 5% ­ see Appendix Table B2. These are consistent with Grenet (2013) who
estimated a return of 6-7%. 31,32
      Appendix A shows that predetermined characteristics and our proxies for early-life
advantages are smooth around the September 1, 1957 cutoff. These results suggest that the
identifying assumption of the regression discontinuity design is satisfied and that we can stratify
the results by our advantage proxies.

            B. Did the 1972 Raising of the School-Leaving Age Reduce Educational Gaps?

     One of the rationales for the 1972 ROSLA was to reduce educational gaps between children
from different socioeconomic backgrounds and to allow high-ability, disadvantaged students to
fulfill their potential (Crowther Report 1959). To investigate whether the ROSLA was effective in
this regard, Figure 6 shows the average school-leaving age by year of birth for those in the top and
bottom terciles of the distributions of the EA PGI (top panel), family size (middle panel), and
neighborhood SES (bottom panel). Appendix D shows comparable figures for the fraction of
students who stayed in school until ages 16, 17, and 18 ­ Appendix Figure D1 is of particular
interest because age 16 was the margin targeted by the reform.
     Figure 6 indicates that the ROSLA was effective in reducing the educational disparities
between children from less and more advantaged backgrounds. While the average school-leaving
age of both the bottom and top terciles jump discontinuously after September 1, 1957, the jump is
larger for the bottom tercile (i.e., the children from more disadvantaged backgrounds), such that
the difference between the red and black lines diminishes noticeably. This is true for all three
different proxies of disadvantages: individual, family, or neighborhood. The gap in school-leaving
age decreased from 0.44 to 0.33 of a year of schooling between those in the top and the bottom
terciles of the EA PGI distribution; from 0.44 to 0.25 of a year of schooling between those in the

31
  Grenet (2013) studied the 1972 ROSLA using data from the Quarterly Labour Force Survey.
32
  The effects are robust to the alternative bandwidths. Interestingly, these 2SLS estimates are also consistent with
the OLS estimates (i.e., regressing log-wages directly onto the endogenous SLA variable), suggesting a limited role
for omitted variable bias in this context.

                                                         20
top and the bottom terciles of the family size distribution; and from 0.35 to 0.24 of a year of
schooling between those in the top and the bottom terciles of the neighborhood SES distribution.
These are large reductions considering that the ROSLA increased school-leaving age on average
by a third of a year of schooling--see Appendix Table B1.
     The trends shown in Figure 6 are obtained by estimating the following regressions:

                        = 0 + 1  +         
                                    2 +  ×  3 +  ( ) +  .                                                          (4)

     where  is individual  's school-leaving age;  is 1 if individual  was born on or after
September 1, 1957 (and 0 otherwise);  is a vector containing proxies for early-life advantages;
and  is individual  's date of birth. Date of birth is measured in days relative to the cutoff,
such that  = 0 for someone born on September 1, 1957. The function  () captures birth
cohort trends in educational attainment, which are allowed to differ on either side of the September
1, 1957 cutoff. We run two alternative specifications: (1) a 10-year bandwidth with quadratic
trends in date of birth and (2) a 4-year bandwidth with linear trends. 33 We use triangular kernel
weights that give greater weight to study participants born closer to the cutoff. 34
     We use a discrete specification in Figure 6, where  is a vector containing indicators for being
in the top and in the middle terciles of the distributions of EA PGI (top panel), family size (middle
panel), and neighborhood SES (bottom panel). Notice that the birth cohort trends ( ) are
assumed to be the same for individuals in the three different terciles of a given proxy distribution. 35




33
   To the best of our knowledge, methods for optimal bandwidth selection for interaction effects have yet to be
developed. We worry that the standard CCT optimal bandwidth is too conservative in the case of interactions which
is why we consider both a 4-year (the CCT optimal bandwidth) and a 10-year bandwidth. In the Robustness Section
we show that our results are robust to the choice of bandwidth.
34
   Even though previous work studying the 1972 ROSLA clustered standard errors by month-year of birth (e.g.,
Clark and Royer 2013; Davies et al. 2018), we do not need to cluster our standard errors because our data include
exact date of birth (Lee and Card 2008).
35
   Notably, this specification does not include any additional control variables, including principal components of the
genetic data. Principal components are normally included as covariates in studies that include PGIs to absorb
variation in the PGI and outcome variables related to ancestry differences. Since we do not includes principal
components in our models, the PGI may also capture at-birth advantages related to ancestry. In Section 5, we show
that including principal components has only a negligible effect on our results.

                                                          21
Figure 6: Effect of the 1972 ROSLA on School-Leaving Age,
     by EA PGI, Family Size, and Neighborhood SES




                           22
Notes: The figures show average school-leaving age by year of birth, separately for those in the bottom tercile (black circles) and in the top tercile
(red Xs) of the following distributions: EA PGI (top panel); family size (middle panel); and neighborhood SES (bottom panel). Year of birth runs
from September 1 of a given a year to August 31 of the following year. Those born in Year 0 were born between September 1, 1957 and August
31, 1958. Cohorts born after Year 0 had to stay in school until age 16 while cohorts born before could leave at age 15. The figure shows linear
cohort trends for a 4-year bandwidth and quadratic cohort trends for a 10-year bandwidth. For a given proxy, all three terciles share the same cohort
trends. We use triangular kernel weights that give greater weight to study participants born closer to September 1, 1957. N = 42,731 (EA PGI with
4-year bandwidth); 105,693 (EA PGI with 10-year bandwidth); 45,701 (family size with 4-year bandwidth); 112,395 (family size with 10-year
bandwidth); 44,043 (neighborhood SES with 4-year bandwidth); and 109,177 (neighborhood SES with 10-year bandwidth).




                          Table 1: Effect of the 1972 ROSLA on School-Leaving Age,
                               by EA PGI, Family Size, and Neighborhood SES




Notes: The dependent variable is school-leaving age. PGI is the polygenic index for educational attainment. Post is an indicator for
being born on or after September 1, 1957. In the top panel, Top and Mid are indicators for being in the top or middle terciles of the
distribution of a given proxy. In the bottom panel, PGI, Family, and Neighborhood are all standardized to have mean zero and
standard deviation of 1. The first four columns include linear trends in exact date of birth while the last four include quadratic
trends. In both cases, trends are allowed to be different before and after September 1, 1957. Robust standard errors between brackets.
In the top panel, we omit the coefficients on Top PGI, Top Family, Top Neighborhood, Mid PGI, Mid Family, and Mid
Neighborhood. In the bottom panel, we omit the coefficients on PGI, Family, and Neighborhood.



                                                                         23
Figure 7: Effect of the 1972 ROSLA on Qualifications,
   by EA PGI, Family Size, and Neighborhood SES




                         24
Notes: The figures show the fraction of study participants with some qualification by year of birth, separately for those in the bottom tercile (black
circles) and in the top tercile (red crosses) of the following distributions: EA PGI (top panel); family size (middle panel); and neighborhood SES
(bottom panel). Year of birth runs from September 1 of a given a year to August 31 of the following year. Those born in Year 0 were born between
September 1, 1957 and August 31, 1958. Cohorts born after Year 0 had to stay in school until age 16 while cohorts born before could leave at age
15. The figure shows linear cohort trends for a 4-year bandwidth and quadratic cohort trends for a 10-year bandwidth. For a given proxy, all three
terciles share the same cohort trends. We use triangular kernel weights that give greater weight to study participants born closer to September 1,
1957. N = 42,701 (EA PGI with 4-year bandwidth); 105,608 (EA PGI with 10-year bandwidth); 45,131 (family size with 4-year bandwidth);
110,909 (family size with 10-year bandwidth); 43,548 (neighborhood SES with 4-year bandwidth); and 107,842 (neighborhood SES with 10-year
bandwidth).


     The results from this discrete specification are shown in the top panel of Table 1. In the bottom
panel of Table 1 we report results from a continuous specification of equation (4), where  is a
vector containing continuous (standardized) measures of the EA PGI, family size, and/or
neighborhood SES. Because of space constraints, the estimated coefficients 0 and 2 are not
reported in the table.
     The results in Table 1 confirm that the 1972 ROSLA was somewhat successful at leveling the
playing field, at least in terms of schooling. The interactions of the indicator for being born after
September 1, 1957 with the EA PGI, family size, and with neighborhood SES are all negative and
statistically significant at the 1%.
     These reductions in educational differences may not be very meaningful if the students forced
to stay in school an extra year put in little effort and gained little with the additional schooling. In
such a case, the estimates in Table 1 could exaggerate the true reduction in educational disparities.
One potential concrete benefit of this additional year of education was the opportunity to sit for
and pass a set of qualification exams. We therefore also study the effects of the 1972 ROSLA on
qualifications obtained. By the 70's high schools offered a series of two-year courses that ran
through grades nine and ten. Students took exams at the end of grade ten (the grade they are
typically in by age 16) to obtain one of two education qualifications: Certificate of Secondary
Education (CSE) or a General Certificate of Education (GCE) Ordinary Level (also known as an
O-Level). By compelling students to stay in school until grade ten, the 1972 ROSLA gave students
an incentive to complete these courses and get these qualifications, which are valued in the labor
market (Dickson and Smith 2011).
     Figure 7 shows that the 1972 ROSLA led students to obtain more qualifications and that it had
a larger effect on those in the bottom terciles of the three distributions, reducing the disparities in
qualifications as a consequence. Estimates corresponding to these figures are found in Appendix
Table D4. The top-bottom differences in having a CSE or an O-Level qualification reduced from
15-16 percentage points (p.p.) to 7p.p. (depending on the bandwidth) for the EA PGI; from 18 p.p.

                                                                         25
to 11 p.p. for family size; and from 9-10 p.p. to 5 p.p. for neighborhood SES. This is consistent
with the estimated reduction in school-leaving age disparities due to the ROSLA and provides
suggestive evidence that the students compelled to stay in school for an additional year acquired
concrete benefits as a result.

                C. Did the 1972 Raising of the School-Leaving Age Reduce Wage Gaps?

     We documented in the previous section that the ROSLA was successful in reducing
educational disparities between children from different backgrounds. What would be the expected
impact of such reduction on wage disparities if the returns to schooling were the same for
everyone? At the eve of the program, the wage gap between the top and bottom terciles of each
proxy distribution was 0.066 (EA PGI), 0.055 (family size), and 0.040 log points (neighborhood
SES). Table 1 estimated the ROSLA reduced the top-bottom gap in school-leaving age by 0.113
(EA PGI), 0.192 (family size), and 0.108 years of schooling (neighborhood SES). If the return to
these additional years of schooling were 5% (see Appendix Table B2), we would expect the wage
gaps described above to decrease by 8.6% (EA PGI), 36 17.5% (family size), and 13.5%
(neighborhood SES).
     In practice, we find no evidence that there was a reduction in the wage disparities. On the
contrary, if anything, there was a widening of such gaps. Figure 8 shows the average log wage by
year of birth, separately for those in the bottom and in the top terciles of each proxy distribution.
The ROSLA increased wages for both the bottom and top terciles, but, different than expected, the
increase was not larger for those in the bottom terciles of the three distributions. For the EA PGI
in particular, the increase for the bottom tercile is visually smaller than the increase for the top
tercile. Appendix Table F1 confirms these results.
     Figure 9 summarizes the first-stage (Table 1) and reduced-form results (Appendix Table F1).
For any given proxy ­ EA PGI (black), family size (blue), or neighborhood SES (red), it reports
the difference between those in the top and bottom terciles of the proxy distribution on the eve of
the ROSLA (Xs) and immediately after (circles). The left y-axis and left panel show top-bottom
differences in the schooling-leaving age. The right y-axis and right panel show top-bottom
differences in log wages.

36
  0.086=(0.05)*(0.113)/0.066, where 0.05 is the return to schooling, 0.113 is the reduction in the educational gap,
and 0.066 is the original top-bottom difference by EA PGI.

                                                         26
Figure 8: Effect of the 1972 ROSLA on Log Wages,
 by EA PGI, Family Size, and Neighborhood SES




                      27
Notes: The figures show average log wages by year of birth, separately for those in the bottom tercile (black circles) and in the top tercile (red
crosses) of the following distributions: EA PGI (top panel); family size (middle panel); and neighborhood SES (bottom panel). Year of birth runs
from September 1 of a given a year to August 31 of the following year. Those born in Year 0 were born between September 1, 1957 and August
31, 1958.Cohorts born after Year 0 had to stay in school until age 16 while cohorts born before could leave at age 15. The figure shows linear
cohort trends for a 4-year bandwidth and quadratic cohort trends for a 10-year bandwidth. For a given proxy, all three terciles share the same cohort
trends. We use triangular kernel weights that give greater weight to study participants born closer to September 1, 1957. N = 42,731 (EA PGI with
4-year bandwidth); 105,693 (EA PGI with 10-year bandwidth); 45,701 (family size with 4-year bandwidth); 112,395 (family size with 10-year
bandwidth); 44,043 (neighborhood SES with 4-year bandwidth); and 109,177 (neighborhood SES with 10-year bandwidth).




     The left panel shows that the 1972 ROSLA was effective in reducing disparities in education.
The pre-ROSLA top-bottom differences in school-leaving age decreased by 26-43% across our
three proxies. The right panel shows that, contrary to what was expected, disparities in wages did
not reduce. The estimates suggest instead that the wage gap did not change and may have even
increased.

                        Figure 9: Summary of First-Stage and Reduced-Form Results




           Notes: The figure shows differences in average school-leaving age (left y-axis) and in average log wages (right
           y-axis) between the top and bottom terciles of the distributions of the EA PGI (black), family size (blue), and
           neighborhood SES (red) at the eve of the ROSLA (Xs) and immediately after (circles). The brackets report
           95% confidence intervals testing whether the post-reform difference is equal to the pre-reform difference.
           Estimates from specification with 10-year bandwidth and quadratic trends. N = 105,693 (EA PGI); 112,395
           (family size); 109,177 (neighborhood SES).




                                                                        28
     Our wage results are consistent with advantaged children having higher returns to their
additional schooling. To estimate how the returns to schooling vary with our proxies, we estimate
the following equation:

                           = 0 + 1  +         
                                       2 +  ×  3 +  ( ) +  ,                                                                    (5)

We estimate (5) through two stages least squares (2SLS), using the indicator for being born on or
after September 1, 1957 and its interactions with  to instrument for school-leaving age and its
interactions with  . The results are shown in Table 2.

                  Table 2: Effect of an Additional Year of Schooling on Log Wages,
                          by EA PGI, Family Size, and Neighborhood SES




Notes: The dependent variable is log wages. SLA is school-leaving age. PGI is the polygenic index for educational attainment. In
the top panel, Top and Mid are indicators for being in the top or middle terciles of the distribution of a given proxy. In the bottom
panel, PGI, Family, and Neighborhood are all standardized to have mean zero and standard deviation of 1. The first four columns

                                                                29
include linear trends in exact date of birth while the last four include quadratic trends. In both cases, trends are allowed to be
different before and after September 1, 1957. Robust standard errors between brackets. In the top panel, we omit the coefficients
on Top PGI, Top Family, Top Neighborhood, Mid PGI, Mid Family, and Mid Neighborhood. In the bottom panel, we omit the
coefficients on PGI, Family, and Neighborhood.

     We find larger returns to schooling for advantaged children, as measured by our proxies. The
return to an additional year of schooling for those in the top terciles of the EA PGI, family size
and neighborhood SES distributions was 6, 4, and 4 percentage points higher than the returns of
those in the bottom terciles of these distributions (top right panel of Table 2). Overall, an
improvement in one standard deviation unit in any of our proxies increases the returns to schooling
by approximately 2 percentage points (bottom panel of Table 2). Furthermore, the coefficients on
the interactions are very similar in the specifications that include all proxy variables at once
(columns 4 and 8). This suggests that the gradients in returns to schooling with respect to three
different proxies are independently important. We show in Section 5 that we find qualitatively
similar results if we use income instead of wages as the dependent variable.

                             D. Genetics, Environment, and the Returns to Schooling

     The results presented so far raise the question of why children from advantageous backgrounds
benefited more from the additional schooling. For example, did the compulsory schooling unlock
the individual, untapped potential of children who would have otherwise dropped out at age 15?
Or did it make it easier for children from advantaged families to leverage their resources and
connections to get further ahead? Some would consider the latter to represent unequal
opportunities but not the former. While many channels may underlie the gradient in returns to
schooling, we can use the random process of genetic inheritance to test whether the gradient is
caused by genetically-influenced individual characteristics such as innate ability or skills.


Econometric Model
     The effects of the ROSLA on the relationship between the PGI and wages were estimated in
Section 4.B using:

                          = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 ( ×  ) + ( ) +  .                                                                (4')

As discussed in Section 3.B, 2 and 3 capture not only direct genetic effects but also indirect
genetic effects and other environmental influences.

                                                               30
    We can however isolate the random variation in one's PGI by conditioning on the (sum of the)
PGIs of the individual's parents:

                         = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 ( ×  ) +

            + 4   + 5 (  ×  ) + ( ) +  .                                                            (6)

The coefficient on the PGI, 2 , estimates the direct genetic effects before the ROSLA. In contrast,
4 primarily picks up pre-reform "indirect genetic effects" from one's parents. As alluded before,
we do not have exogenous variation in the parental PGI so it may also represent other
environmental advantages, such as indirect genetic effects from other relatives and population
stratification. The coefficient on  ×  , 3 , represents how the direct genetic effects
changed with the ROSLA. Similarly, the coefficient on   ×  , 5 , represents
the change in the indirect genetic and other environmental effects caused by the ROSLA.
    As discussed in Section 3.C, while few study participants had one of their parents genotyped,
it is possible to impute the parental genotypes if at least one of the study participant's siblings were
also genotyped (Young et al. 2020). Measured or imputed data on parental PGIs are available for
about 10% of our sample.
    However, we show in Appendix I how it is possible to gain statistical power by using our entire
sample, including those participants for whom we do not have parental PGIs, to estimate the
parameters of equation (6). In particular, we estimate the following slightly modified model:

                         = 0 + 1  + 2  + 3 ( ×  ) +

 + 4 [(1 -  )  +   ] + 5 [(1 -  )  +   ] ×  +

                            + 6  + 7 ( ×  ) + ( ) +                                                 (6')

where  is an indicator for whether the parental PGI of participant  is missing. The approach
requires two assumptions: that there is no assortative matting and that the direct genetic effects
and the indirect genetic effects are the same for the participants for whom the parental PGI data
are missing and for the participants for whom they are not, both before and after the ROSLA. We
show in Appendix Table I3 that our point estimates are reasonably robust to alternative approaches,
namely (i) restricting the sample to those for whom parental PGIs are available and estimating

                                                  31
equation (6) and (ii) using the within-siblings variation in the PGI as an instrument for the PGI.
The latter approach has the advantage that it does not rely on the assumption of no assortative
mating.


   Results
   The (reduced-form) results from this analysis are presented in Figure 10. The black circles
display the (unconditional) reduced-form estimates of 3 in equation (4'), which is the change in
the association between the EA PGI and SES caused by the ROSLA. The red triangles and blue
diamonds plot the (conditional) reduced-form estimates of 3 and 5 in equation (6). The red
triangles show how the ROSLA changed the direct genetic effects of the PGI on SES. The blue
diamonds show how the ROSLA changed the association between the parental PGI and SES. We
report results for three SES outcomes: log wages, an indicator for having an annual household
income of £31,000 or higher, and an indicator for an annual household income of £52,000 or
higher. The left panel shows estimates using a 4-year bandwidth with linear trends. The right panel
shows estimates using a 10-year bandwidth and quadratic trends.
   Even with the strategy to account for missingness described above, the analyses in this section
are not as well-powered as the other analyses in the paper. This is for two primary reasons. First,
the main source of variation that identifies 3 and 5 (the red triangles and blue diamonds), is the
relationship between the children's PGI and the parental PGI, which is only available in about 10
percent of our sample. Second, the PGI and the parental PGI are highly correlated with a coefficient
of correlation of 0.84. As a consequence, the confidence intervals are wide and include some
estimates which may be implausibly large.
   The black circles in Figure 10 reproduce the results that the ROSLA did not reduce the power
of the PGI to predict wages and income. If anything, the policy seemed to have increased it. The
red triangles suggest this was not driven by an increase in the direct genetic effects. All point
estimates are actually negative, implying that the ROSLA reduced the direct genetic effects. This
illustrates well how direct genetic effects are in fact a function of the environment: environmental
factors like a change in compulsory schooling laws can change the causal effect of genetic variants.
The reduction in the direct genetic effects are statistically significant for the 4-year bandwidth but
not for the 10-year.



                                                 32
   It seems the ROSLA increased the predictive power of the EA PGI because it made the
environmental conditions under which a child grew more important for her chances of achieving
socioeconomic success in adulthood. The blue diamonds show that the policy strengthened the
association between the parental PGI and (the children's) wages and income.


           Figure 10: Effect of ROSLA on Relationship between Genetics and SES




       Notes: The figure shows the effect of the ROSLA on the associations with the EA PGI (black circles), on direct
       genetic effects (red triangles), and on the associations with the parental EA PGI (blue diamonds). The brackets
       show 95% confidence intervals. The left panel show estimates for the 4-year bandwidth while the right panel
       shows the 10-year bandwidth estimates. The EA PGI, the parental EA PGI, and the SES outcomes were all
       normalized. N = 46,308 for 4-year bandwidth and 114,025 for the 10-year bandwidth.


   In Table 3, we exploit the ROSLA to estimate how the returns to schooling vary with the EA
PGI. The first four columns shows 2SLS results for the 4-year bandwidth. The last four columns
shows 2SLS results for the 10-year bandwidth. Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) do not interact the
EA PGI with school-leaving age. The even columns control for the parental PGI while the odd
columns do not. The corresponding first-stage and reduced-form estimates are shown in Appendix
Table I1 and in Appendix Table I2.
   Columns (1) and (5) show that the EA PGI predicts wages even when we control for school-
leaving age. As expected, this predictive power falls considerably when the parental PGI is added

                                                            33
in columns (2) and (6). Nevertheless, the 10-year bandwidth estimate indicates that a one SD
increase in the EA PGI causes wages to increase by 1.5%. In other words, a SD increase in the EA
PGI is comparable to increasing education by approximately 0.3 years of schooling.


           Table 3: Differences in Returns to Schooling by Genetics and Environment




Notes: The table investigates how the returns to schooling vary with the EA PGI. All estimates are from 2SLS models. The 4-year
bandwidth estimates include linear trends. The 10-year bandwidth include quadratic trends. Robust standard errors.


    Columns (3) and (7) reproduce results from (the bottom panel of) Table 2, indicating that the
EA PGI is associated with higher returns to schooling. Once we condition on the parental PGI in
columns (4) and (8), however, the coefficient on the interaction of schooling-leaving age with the
PGI turns negative, implying that an exogenous increase in the PGI reduces the returns to
schooling. In contrast, the coefficient on the interaction of schooling-leaving age with the parental
PGI is positive, indicating that having parents with higher PGIs (holding the child's genotypes
constant) is associated with higher returns to schooling. The 2SLS estimates using a 4-year
bandwidth are implausibly large, but they also have wide confidence intervals that include lower
returns (in absolute terms). The linear specification with a 4-year bandwidth (column 4) implies
that a one SD increase in the EA PGI reduces the returns to schooling by at least 1.9 percentage
points.
    These results help us understand why advantaged children have higher returns to schooling.
Once we condition on the parental PGI, the individual's PGI captures only factors that are causally

                                                             34
influenced by that individual's genes. Because we estimate that a higher PGI (conditional on the
parental PGI) reduces the return to schooling, this suggests that genetically-influenced individual
characteristics--including innate abilities, skills, or talents--cannot explain why we observe that
advantaged children have higher returns. This reduction is consistent with innate skills and talents
being substitutes to education in the production of SES (Hause 1972; Welland 1978).
   If the positive gradient in returns to schooling cannot be explained by genetics, then it must be
due to environmental advantages. This is consistent with our estimate that the returns are higher
for children whose parents have higher EA PGIs. On average, parents with higher EA PGIs are
more educated and earn higher wages. Heckman and co-authors have argued that parents play a
crucial role in fostering non-cognitive and cognitive skills of their children (Heckman 2000; Cunha
et al. 2006), and that these skills increase the returns to schooling of their offspring (Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua 2006; Urzua 2006). We discuss in the concluding section some alternative
hypotheses for how environmental advantages may increase the returns to schooling.


   5. Robustness

   In this section, we report on a series of exercises to investigate the robustness of our results.
We show how the results (do not) change when we (a) Include in the sample those who stayed in
school past age 18; (b) Allow returns to schooling to vary with predetermined characteristics; (c)
Vary the regression discontinuity bandwidth; (d) Include controls; and (e) Use income or the
Townsend Deprivation Index as the SES outcome.
    We start by assessing the sensitivity to excluding individuals who stayed in school past age
18. Figure 11 shows results for our main sample, which excludes these individuals, and results for
the full sample. The top panel shows pre-reform (Xs) and post-reform (circles) differences in
school-leaving age (left y-axis) and in log wages (right y-axis) between the top and bottom terciles
of the EA PGI distribution. Similarly, the middle and bottom panels show differences between the
top and bottom terciles of the family size and the neighborhood SES distributions. Figure 11 shows
that the main conclusions are invariant to the sample restriction: while the ROSLA caused a
reduction in the differences in schooling, there is no evidence of a reduction in the wage gap across
students from different backgrounds.




                                                 35
Figure 11: Including UKB Participants who Stayed in School Past Age 18




                                 36
Notes: The figures assess the sensitivity to restricting the sample to UKB participants with a school-leaving age of 18 or less ("Excluding SLA >
18") or including in the sample those who stayed in school past age 18 ("Full Sample"). They show differences in average school-leaving age (left
y-axis) and in average log wages (right y-axis) between the top and bottom terciles of the distributions of the EA PGI (top panel), family size
(middle panel), and neighborhood SES (bottom panel) at the eve of the ROSLA (Xs) and immediately after (circles). The brackets report 95%
confidence intervals testing whether the post-reform difference is equal to the pre-reform difference. Estimates from specification with 10-year
bandwidth and quadratic trends. N = 105,693 (EA PGI excluding SLA > 18); 196,004 (EA PGI full sample); 112,395 (family size excluding SLA
> 18); 209,338 (family size full sample); 109,177 (neighborhood SES excluding SLA > 18); and 201,340 (neighborhood SES full sample).



     A common concern about studying heterogeneous treatment effects is that the effects may look
as if they vary with some characteristic  (e.g., the EA PGI) when in fact they vary with another
characteristic  (e.g., family size) which also differs between individuals with different s. Our
results are identified off compliers who stayed longer in school because of the ROLSA than they
would have otherwise. The issue is whether there is some other difference between disadvantaged
and advantaged compliers (e.g., those with low and high EA PGIs) that explains why ­ despite the
advantage they had (i.e., the higher EA PGI) ­ the latter would have dropped out at age 15 in the
absence of the ROSLA. In other words, there could be something else holding back the advantaged
compliers which would alternatively explain the heterogeneous treatment effects.
     We argue this particular concern is not driving our results. First, we showed that the
heterogeneous effects by a given proxy change very little when we condition on the other two
proxies (which could in principle pick up the "something else" holding back advantaged
compliers). For example, the variation in the returns to schooling by the EA PGI hardly changes
when we allow it to also vary by family size and by neighborhood SES (see Table 2). Second,
Appendix Table J1 and Appendix Table J2 allow the returns to schooling to vary not only with our
proxies for advantages but also with various other predetermined characteristics observed in the
data: gender, country of birth, a PGI for BMI, month of birth, leg length (a measure of childhood
health), and latitude and longitude coordinates of place of birth. The tables show that our main
results are not sensitive to these alternative specifications. Of course, these robustness analyses are
limited by the set of predetermined characteristics available and by measurement error in the
available variables.




                                                                      37
                                         Figure 12: Sensitivity to Bandwidth Choice




Notes: The figure investigates how the 2SLS estimates (from continuous specification) vary with the bandwidth size (in months). It shows the
coefficient on the interaction of school-leaving age with the EA PGI (top panel), family size (middle panel), and neighborhood SES (bottom panel).
Black Xs show estimates using linear trends. Red circles show estimates using quadratic trends. N varies from 17,783 (18-month bandwidth) to
114,025 (120-month bandwidth).


                                                                       38
                                                   Table 4: Robustness




Notes: The first six columns of the table assess the robustness to including controls. All columns except for columns 1 and 4 include
the following controls: male, age, age squared, male × age, male × age squared, and indicator variables for the calendar month of
birth. To address concerns about population stratification, columns 3 and 6 include in addition the first twenty principal components
(PCs) of the participant's genetic matrix and the interactions of these PCs with either the indicator for being born after September
1, 1957 or with school-leaving age. The dependent variable in columns 1-6 is log wages. To investigate concerns about missing
wages, columns 7 and 8 use as the dependent variable an indicator for having an annual household income of £31,000 or more and
the Townsend Deprivation Index (reverse coded). Robust standard errors between brackets.



     Next, we assess the sensitivity of the results to the choice of bandwidth. Figure 12 shows two-
stage least square estimates for different bandwidths (measured in months). The markers display
the coefficient on the interaction of one of the proxies with school-leaving age (i.e., 3 in the
continuous specification of equation (5)) with 95% confidence intervals around it. The black Xs
are estimated using linear trends. The red circles are estimated using quadratic trends. The figure
shows that the point estimates are remarkably similar across bandwidths and trend specifications.
They are not statistically different from zero at the 5% confidence level for narrower bandwidths,
but this is expected because the confidence intervals increase as the bandwidth shrinks. The
corresponding figures for the first-stage estimates and for the reduced-form estimates are shown
in Appendix G.


                                                                39
     We proceed then to investigate in Table 4 whether the results are robust to the inclusion of
controls. For conciseness, we only report results for the continuous specification using a 10-year
bandwidth with quadratic trends. The first column of Table 4 reproduces the first-stage benchmark
(which corresponds to the last column, bottom panel of Table 1) while the fourth column
reproduces the 2SLS benchmark (which corresponds to the last column, bottom panel of Table 2).
The second and fourth columns of Table 4 adds the following controls: male, age, age squared,
male × age, male × age squared, and indicator variables for the calendar month of birth. To address
concerns about population stratification (see Section 3.A), the third and sixth columns include,
besides the controls previously mentioned, the first twenty principal components (PCs) of the
participant's genetic matrix and the interactions of these PCs with either the indicator for being
born after September 1, 1957 (in the first-stage) or with school-leaving age (in the 2SLS). The
first-stage results in columns 2 and 3 are not sensitive to these inclusions. Nor are the 2SLS results
shown in columns 5 and 6 of Table 4. That said, there is evidence that some social stratification in
a PGI may remain between historically poorer and richer regions of the UK even after controlling
for principal components (Abdellaoui et al. 2019).
     Finally, we investigate the concern that data on wages are available only for those UKB
participants who reported an occupation. The last two columns of Table 4 report two-stage least
square estimates that use as dependent variables either an indicator for having an annual household
income of £31,000 or more or a Townsend Deprivation Index (reverse coded). While wages are
missing for 26.8% of our sample of 155,806 UKB participants, income is missing for 14.5% and
the Townsend Index for 0.1%. The Townsend Deprivation Index is a measure of the material
deprivation of the neighborhoods in which study participants lived. 37 Overall, we reach similar
conclusions irrespective of whether we use occupational wages, household income (see also
Appendix H), or the Townsend index. The exception is that, when we use these alternative
outcomes, the returns to schooling no longer vary with neighborhood SES. These results are
consistent with the evidence shown in the Appendix E that the fraction missing wages and the
fraction missing household income are smooth around the September 1, 1957 birthday cutoff.



37
  The Townsend Deprivation Index is constructed from four rates measured at the neighborhood level: (1)
unemployment, (2) non-car ownership, (3) non-home ownership, and (4) household overcrowding. Rates were
estimated for each output area using the 2001 Census. Participants were assigned the scores of the output areas
where their residential postcodes were located.

                                                         40
     6. Conclusion

     Many consider education to be the "great equalizer" that "levels the playing field," giving
children from different backgrounds similar opportunities of economic success. We investigated
whether education weakens the relationship between early-life advantages and later-life SES. In
particular, we examined whether the ROSLA, a 1972 compulsory schooling reform in the UK that
increased secondary education, reduced disparities between disadvantaged and advantaged
children. Besides early, favorable family and neighborhood circumstances, we argue that the genes
a child inherits also represent a source of individual-level advantages. We find that the ROSLA
was successful in reducing the differences in education between children from advantaged and
disadvantaged backgrounds. Meghir and Palme (2005) and Aakvik et al. (2010) find similar results
for reforms in Sweden and Norway.
     Our results indicate, however, that, when it comes to later-life SES, the UK reform was not a
"great equalizer." While the ROSLA increased wages for individuals from all backgrounds, it did
not reduce the wage gaps between them. This is consistent with the idea that education might be
more effective in reducing poverty than in promoting mobility (Cameron and Heckman 2001).
Our finding contrasts with the impacts of the Swedish reform and a similar reform in Finland. The
Swedish reform increased the wages of children of less-educated fathers and decreased the wages
of children of more-educated fathers (Meghir and Palme 2005) while the Finish reform reduced
the correlation between the earnings of fathers and sons (Pekkarinen et al. 2009).
     Different from the reforms in Sweden, Norway and Finland, the key elements of the British
school system did not change with the 1972 reform. This distinction enables us to estimate how
returns to schooling vary with children's background and to identify the role that such differences
may play in the intergenerational transmission of SES. We find that advantaged children had
higher returns to schooling which explains why, despite reducing educational disparities, the UK
reform did not weaken the relationship between early advantages and wages. In contrast, the
Swedish and Finish reforms shifted a large fraction of disadvantaged children from a vocational
stream with lower returns to schooling to a more academic stream with higher returns. 38 The



38
  Starting in seventh grade, students in Sweden who attended the old school system were tracked into an academic
or a vocational stream based on their grades. The reform abolished this selection, giving students the option to
choose between three different streams. In Finland, students could also choose between an academic and a
vocational track. The reform postponed this choice from age 11 to age 16.

                                                       41
contrast between these two types of reforms suggests that differences in the returns to schooling
may be an important challenge to increasing intergenerational mobility (Solon 2004).
   We then turn to the question of why advantaged children saw higher returns following the UK
reform. For example, did the compulsory schooling unlock the individual, untapped potential of
children who would have otherwise dropped out at age 15? Or did it make it easier for children
from advantaged families to leverage their resources and connections to get further ahead? We
exploit family-based random genetic variation to tackle this question. Our results reject the
hypothesis that individual-level, genetically-influenced characteristics (including abilities, skills,
or talents) explain why advantaged children had higher returns, suggesting instead that it reflects
environmental channels that might represent unequal opportunities.
   School quality is an example of such a potential channel. We found higher returns to schooling
for children born in more-educated neighborhoods, which may have, on average, higher-quality
schools than less-educated neighborhoods. In the US, returns to schooling are larger at regions
with higher-quality schools (Card and Krueger 1992; DeCicca and Krashinsky 2020). On the other
hand, the limited existing evidence for the UK suggests that the returns to schooling in England
and Wales do not vary with school quality (Campbell 2001). An alternative hypothesis is that more
educated neighborhoods have more economic activity. Due to frictions in migration, children born
in less educated neighborhoods may not benefit as much from additional education since there are
fewer high-paying jobs available where they live (Bergman et al. 2019). Finally, such
environmental advantages could play out at the family-level. Heckman and co-authors have argued
that parents play a crucial role in fostering non-cognitive and cognitive skills of their children
(Heckman 2000; Cunha et al. 2006), and that these skills increase the returns to schooling of their
offspring (Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzua 2006; Urzua 2006).
   More research is needed to understand which family- and neighborhood-advantages matter in
this case and, more generally, whether our results hold in other contexts and for other margins of
education. While compulsory schooling alone does not appear to decrease wage disparities and
promote intergenerational mobility, other types of policies instead of or in conjunction with
compulsory schooling may be more effective. Our results imply that policies designed to increase
intergenerational mobility should target environmental barriers that reduce the returns to schooling
of disadvantaged children.



                                                 42
                                            References


Aakvik, Arild, Kjell G. Salvanes, and Kjell Vaage. "Measuring heterogeneity in the returns to
education using an education reform." European Economic Review 54, no. 4 (2010): 483-500.
Abdellaoui, Abdel, David Hugh-Jones, Loic Yengo, Kathryn E. Kemper, Michel G. Nivard,
Laura Veul, Yan Holtz et al. "Genetic correlates of social stratification in Great Britain." Nature
human behaviour 3, no. 12 (2019): 1332-1342.
Allen, Naomi, Cathie Sudlow, Paul Downey, Tim Peakman, John Danesh, Paul Elliott, John
Gallacher et al. "UK Biobank: Current status and what it means for epidemiology." Health
Policy and Technology 1, no. 3 (2012): 123-126.
Almond, Douglas, Janet Currie, and Valentina Duque. "Childhood circumstances and adult
outcomes: Act II." Journal of Economic Literature 56, no. 4 (2018): 1360-1446.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Thomas A. Dunn. "Using siblings to estimate the effect of school quality
on wages." The Review of Economics and Statistics (1996): 665-671.
Andreoli, Francesco, Markus Jantti, and Arnaud Lefranc. "Does Comprehensive Compulsory
Schooling Equalize Opportunities? Evidence from the Swedish Compulsory Schooling Reform,"
2020.
Angrist, Joshua, Victor Lavy, and Analia Schlosser. "Multiple experiments for the causal link
between the quantity and quality of children." Journal of Labor Economics 28, no. 4 (2010):
773-824.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Cecilia Rouse. "Income, schooling, and ability: Evidence from a new
sample of identical twins." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, no. 1 (1998): 253-284.
Banks, James, and Fabrizio Mazzonna. "The effect of education on old age cognitive abilities:
evidence from a regression discontinuity design." The Economic Journal 122, no. 560 (2012):
418-448.
Banks, James, Leandro S. Carvalho, and Francisco Perez-Arce. "Education, decision making,
and economic rationality." Review of Economics and Statistics 101, no. 3 (2019): 428-441.
Barcellos, Silvia H., Leandro S. Carvalho, and Patrick Turley. "Education can reduce health
differences related to genetic risk of obesity." Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 115, no. 42 (2018): E9765-E9772.
Barcellos, Silvia H., Leandro S. Carvalho, and Patrick Turley. "Distributional effects of
education on health." Forthcoming at the Journal of Human Resources.
Barth, Daniel, Nicholas W. Papageorge, and Kevin Thom. "Genetic endowments and wealth
inequality." Journal of Political Economy 128, no. 4 (2020): 1474-1522.
Belsky, Daniel W., Benjamin W. Domingue, Robbee Wedow, Louise Arseneault, Jason D.
Boardman, Avshalom Caspi, Dalton Conley et al. "Genetic analysis of social-class mobility in
                                                43
five longitudinal studies." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, no. 31 (2018):
E7275-E7284.
Benabou, Roland. "Unequal societies: Income distribution and the social contract." American
Economic Review 90, no. 1 (2000): 96-129.
Bergman, Peter, Raj Chetty, Stefanie DeLuca, Nathaniel Hendren, Lawrence F. Katz, and
Christopher Palmer. Creating moves to opportunity: Experimental evidence on barriers to
neighborhood choice. No. w26164. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.
Biroli, Pietro, and Christian Lukas Zünd. "Genes, Pubs, and Drinks: Gene-environment interplay
and alcohol licensing policy in the UK." (2020).
Biroli, Pietro, and Laura Zwyssig. "Moral Hazard Heterogeneity: Genes and Health Insurance
Influence Smoking after a Health Shock." (2021).
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. "The more the merrier? The effect of
family size and birth order on children's education." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120,
no. 2 (2005): 669-700.
Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, Petter Lundborg, and Kaveh Majlesi. "Poor little rich kids?
The role of nature versus nurture in wealth and other economic outcomes and behaviours." The
Review of Economic Studies 87, no. 4 (2020): 1683-1725.

Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. "The inheritance of inequality." Journal of economic
Perspectives 16, no. 3 (2002): 3-30.

Brumpton, Ben, Eleanor Sanderson, Karl Heilbron, Fernando Pires Hartwig, Sean Harrison,
Gunnhild Åberge Vie, Yoonsu Cho et al. "Avoiding dynastic, assortative mating, and population
stratification biases in Mendelian randomization through within-family analyses." Nature
communications 11, no. 1 (2020): 1-13.

Cameron, Stephen V., and James J. Heckman. "The dynamics of educational attainment for
black, hispanic, and white males." Journal of political Economy 109, no. 3 (2001): 455-499.
Campbell, David. Rates of return to schooling and the quality of education in England and
Wales. No. 01, 15. Department of Economics Discussion Paper, 2001.
Card, David. "Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric
problems." Econometrica 69, no. 5 (2001): 1127-1160.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. "Does school quality matter? Returns to education and the
characteristics of public schools in the United States." Journal of political Economy 100, no. 1
(1992): 1-40.
Case, Anne, and Christina Paxson. "Stature and status: Height, ability, and labor market
outcomes." Journal of political Economy 116, no. 3 (2008): 499-532.




                                                44
Caspi, Avshalom, Joseph McClay, Terrie E. Moffitt, Jonathan Mill, Judy Martin, Ian W. Craig,
Alan Taylor, and Richie Poulton. "Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated
children." Science 297, no. 5582 (2002): 851-854.
Caspi, Avshalom, Karen Sugden, Terrie E. Moffitt, Alan Taylor, Ian W. Craig, HonaLee
Harrington, Joseph McClay et al. "Influence of life stress on depression: moderation by a
polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene." Science 301, no. 5631 (2003): 386-389.
Chan, Tak Wing, Morag Henderson, and Rachel Stuchbury. "Family size and educational
attainment in England and Wales." Population studies 73, no. 2 (2019): 165-178.
Cheesman, Rosa, Avina Hunjan, Jonathan RI Coleman, Yasmin Ahmadzadeh, Robert Plomin,
Tom A. McAdams, Thalia C. Eley, and Gerome Breen. "Comparison of adopted and nonadopted
individuals reveals gene­environment interplay for education in the UK Biobank." Psychological
science 31, no. 5 (2020): 582-591.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. "The effects of exposure to better
neighborhoods on children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity
experiment." American Economic Review 106, no. 4 (2016): 855-902.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational
mobility I: Childhood exposure effects." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, no. 3
(2018a): 1107-1162.
Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. "The impacts of neighborhoods on intergenerational
mobility II: County-level estimates." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133, no. 3 (2018b):
1163-1228.
Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer. The effect of education on adult health and mortality:
Evidence from Britain. No. w16013. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2010.
Clark, Damon, and Heather Royer. "The effect of education on adult mortality and health:
Evidence from Britain." American Economic Review 103, no. 6 (2013): 2087-2120.
Crowther, G. "The Crowther report, 15 to 18: A report of the Central Advisory Council for
Education (England)." (1959).
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, Lance Lochner, and Dimitriy V. Masterov. "Interpreting the
evidence on life cycle skill formation." Handbook of the Economics of Education 1 (2006): 697-
812.
Currie, Janet, and Douglas Almond. "Human capital development before age five." In Handbook
of labor economics, vol. 4, pp. 1315-1486. Elsevier, 2011.
D'onofrio, Brian M., Benjamin B. Lahey, Eric Turkheimer, and Paul Lichtenstein. "Critical need
for family-based, quasi-experimental designs in integrating genetic and social science
research." American journal of public health 103, no. S1 (2013): S46-S55.



                                               45
Davies, Neil M., Matt Dickson, George Davey Smith, Gerard J. Van Den Berg, and Frank
Windmeijer. "The causal effects of education on health outcomes in the UK Biobank." Nature
human behaviour 2, no. 2 (2018): 117-125.
DeCicca, Philip, and Harry Krashinsky. Do Differences in School Quality Generate
Heterogeneity in the Causal Returns to Education?. No. w27089. National Bureau of Economic
Research, 2020.
Deschênes, Olivier. "Estimating the effects of family background on the return to
schooling." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 25, no. 3 (2007): 265-277.
Dickson, Matt, and Sarah Smith. "What determines the return to education: an extra year or a
hurdle cleared?." Economics of education review 30, no. 6 (2011): 1167-1176.
Domingue, Benjamin W., and Jason Fletcher. "Separating measured genetic and environmental
effects: Evidence linking parental genotype and adopted child outcomes." Behavior genetics 50,
no. 5 (2020): 301-309.
Fagereng, Andreas, Magne Mogstad, and Marte Rønning. "Why do wealthy parents have
wealthy children?." Journal of Political Economy 129, no. 3 (2021): 703-756.
Fletcher, Jason M., and Dalton Conley. "The challenge of causal inference in gene­environment
interaction research: Leveraging research designs from the social sciences." American journal of
public health 103, no. S1 (2013): S42-S45.
Fletcher, Jason, Yuchang Wu, Zijie Zhao, and Qiongshi Lu. "The production of within-family
inequality: Insights and implications of integrating genetic data." BioRxiv (2020).
Grenet, Julien. "Is extending compulsory schooling alone enough to raise earnings? Evidence
from French and British compulsory schooling laws." The Scandinavian Journal of
Economics 115, no. 1 (2013): 176-210.
Harden, K. Paige, Benjamin W. Domingue, Daniel W. Belsky, Jason D. Boardman, Robert
Crosnoe, Margherita Malanchini, Michel Nivard, Elliot M. Tucker-Drob, and Kathleen Mullan
Harris. "Genetic associations with mathematics tracking and persistence in secondary
school." NPJ science of learning 5, no. 1 (2020): 1-8.
Hause, John C. "Earnings profile: Ability and schooling." Journal of political economy 80, no. 3,
Part 2 (1972): S108-S138.
Heckman, James. "Policies to foster human capital." Educational Studies 3 (2011): 73-137.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. "The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior." Journal of Labor economics 24, no. 3
(2006): 411-482.
Heckman, James J., John Eric Humphries, and Gregory Veramendi. "Returns to education: The
causal effects of education on earnings, health, and smoking." Journal of Political Economy 126,
no. S1 (2018): S197-S246.


                                               46
Howe, Laurence, David Evans, Gibran Hemani, George Davey Smith, and Neil Davies.
"Evaluating indirect genetic effects of siblings using singletons." (2021).
Jencks, Christopher. "Who gets ahead? The determinants of economic success in America."
(1979).
Johnson, Rebecca A., Ramina Sotoudeh, and Dalton Conley. "Polygenic scores for plasticity: A
new tool for studying gene-environment interplay." bioRxiv (2020).
Kong, Augustine, Gudmar Thorleifsson, Michael L. Frigge, Bjarni J. Vilhjalmsson, Alexander I.
Young, Thorgeir E. Thorgeirsson, Stefania Benonisdottir et al. "The nature of nurture: Effects of
parental genotypes." Science 359, no. 6374 (2018): 424-428.
Kong, Augustine, Stefania Benonisdottir, and Alexander I. Young. "Family analysis with
Mendelian imputations." BioRxiv(2020).
Kweon, Hyeokmoon, Casper Burik, Richard Karlsson Linnér, Ronald De Vlaming, Aysu Okbay,
Daphne Martschenko, Kathryn Harden Harden, Thomas A. DiPrete, and Philipp Koellinger.
"Genetic Fortune: Winning or Losing Education, Income, and Health." (2020).
Lee, David S., and David Card. "Regression discontinuity inference with specification
error." Journal of Econometrics 142, no. 2 (2008): 655-674.
Lee, James J., Robbee Wedow, Aysu Okbay, Edward Kong, Omeed Maghzian, Meghan Zacher,
Tuan Anh Nguyen-Viet et al. "Gene discovery and polygenic prediction from a genome-wide
association study of educational attainment in 1.1 million individuals." Nature genetics 50, no. 8
(2018): 1112-1121.
Lee, David L., Justin McCrary, Marcelo J. Moreira, and Jack Porter. "Valid t-ratio Inference for
IV." arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05058 (2020).
Loury, Glenn C. "Intergenerational transfers and the distribution of earnings." Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society (1981): 843-867.
Martin, Alicia R., Masahiro Kanai, Yoichiro Kamatani, Yukinori Okada, Benjamin M. Neale,
and Mark J. Daly. "Clinical use of current polygenic risk scores may exacerbate health
disparities." Nature genetics 51, no. 4 (2019): 584-591.
Meghir, Costas, and Mårten Palme. "Educational reform, ability, and family
background." American Economic Review 95, no. 1 (2005): 414-424.
Mogstad, Magne, and Matthew Wiswall. "Testing the quantity­quality model of fertility:
Estimation using unrestricted family size models." Quantitative Economics 7, no. 1 (2016): 157-
192.
Morris, Tim T., Neil M. Davies, Gibran Hemani, and George Davey Smith. "Population
phenomena inflate genetic associations of complex social traits." Science Advances 6, no. 16
(2020): eaay0328.




                                                47
Okbay, Aysu, Jonathan P. Beauchamp, Mark Alan Fontana, James J. Lee, Tune H. Pers,
Cornelius A. Rietveld, Patrick Turley et al. "Genome-wide association study identifies 74 loci
associated with educational attainment." Nature 533, no. 7604 (2016): 539-542.
Oreopoulos, Philip. "Estimating average and local average treatment effects of education when
compulsory schooling laws really matter." American Economic Review 96, no. 1 (2006): 152-
175.
Papageorge, Nicholas W., and Kevin Thom. "Genes, education, and labor market outcomes:
evidence from the health and retirement study." Journal of the European Economic
Association 18, no. 3 (2020): 1351-1399.
Pekkarinen, Tuomas, Roope Uusitalo, and Sari Kerr. "School tracking and intergenerational
income mobility: Evidence from the Finnish comprehensive school reform." Journal of Public
Economics 93, no. 7-8 (2009): 965-973.
Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman. "The effect of adolescent experience
on labor market outcomes: The case of height." Journal of Political Economy 112, no. 5 (2004):
1019-1053.
Price, Alkes L., Nick J. Patterson, Robert M. Plenge, Michael E. Weinblatt, Nancy A. Shadick,
and David Reich. "Principal components analysis corrects for stratification in genome-wide
association studies." Nature genetics 38, no. 8 (2006): 904-909.
Rietveld, Cornelius A., Sarah E. Medland, Jaime Derringer, Jian Yang, Tõnu Esko, Nicolas W.
Martin, Harm-Jan Westra et al. "GWAS of 126,559 individuals identifies genetic variants
associated with educational attainment." science 340, no. 6139 (2013): 1467-1471.
Sacerdote, Bruce. "Nature and Nurture Effects on Children's Outcomes: What Have We Learned
from Studies of Twins and Adoptees?." In Handbook of social economics, vol. 1, pp. 1-30.
North-Holland, 2011.
Schmitz, Lauren, and Dalton Conley. "The long-term consequences of Vietnam-era conscription
and genotype on smoking behavior and health." Behavior genetics 46, no. 1 (2016): 43-58.
Schmitz, Lauren, and Dalton Conley. "Modeling geneenvironment interactions with quasi
natural experiments." Journal of personality 85, no. 1 (2017): 10-21.
Shanahan, Michael J., Stephen Vaisey, Lance D. Erickson, and Andrew Smolen. "Environmental
contingencies and genetic propensities: Social capital, educational continuation, and dopamine
receptor gene DRD2." American Journal of Sociology 114, no. S1 (2008): S260-S286.
Solon, Gary. "Intergenerational mobility in the labor market." In Handbook of labor economics,
vol. 3, pp. 1761-1800. Elsevier, 1999.
Solon, Gary. "A model of intergenerational mobility variation over time and
place." Generational income mobility in North America and Europe 2 (2004): 38-47.




                                               48
Steelman, Lala Carr, Brian Powell, Regina Werum, and Scott Carter. "Reconsidering the effects
of sibling configuration: Recent advances and challenges." Annual review of sociology 28, no. 1
(2002): 243-269.
Sudlow, Cathie, John Gallacher, Naomi Allen, Valerie Beral, Paul Burton, John Danesh, Paul
Downey et al. "UK biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range
of complex diseases of middle and old age." Plos med 12, no. 3 (2015): e1001779.
Urzua, Sergio. "The effects of cognitive and noncognitive skills on racial and ethnic wage
gaps." Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, University of Chicago (2006).
Vilhjálmsson, Bjarni J., Jian Yang, Hilary K. Finucane, Alexander Gusev, Sara Lindström,
Stephan Ripke, Giulio Genovese et al. "Modeling linkage disequilibrium increases accuracy of
polygenic risk scores." The american journal of human genetics 97, no. 4 (2015): 576-592.
Welland, Jon D. "Cognitive abilities, schooling and earnings: the question of functional
form." The Review of Economics and Statistics (1978): 622-627.
Young, Alexander I., Seyed Moeen Nehzati, Chanwook Lee, Stefania Benonisdottir, David
Cesarini, Daniel J. Benjamin, Patrick Turley, and Augustine Kong. "Mendelian imputation of
parental genotypes for genome-wide estimation of direct and indirect genetic
effects." BioRxiv (2020).




                                               49
